A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/S-17/PV. 7
9 March 1990
ENGLISH

Seventeenth special session
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE SEVENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Friday, 23 Februarv 1990, at 10 a.m.
President:

Mr. GARBA

later:

Mr. HURST
(Vice-President)

(Niqerial
(Antiqua and Barbuda)

General debate [8] (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventeenth soecial session of the
General Assembly [3] (continued]
(bl

Report of the Credentials Committee

General debate [8] (continued)

This record contains the oriqinal text of speeches delivered in Enqlish and
interpretations of speeches in the other lanquaqes. The final text will be printed
in the Official Records of the General Assembly.
Corrections should be submitted to oriqinal speeches onlv. They should be
sent under the siqnature of a member of the deleqation concerned, within one week,
to the Chief, Official Records Editinq Section, Department of Conference Services,
room OC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record.
90-60039

6708V (Et

RM/2

A/S-17/PV.7
~5

The meetinq was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued)
GENERAL DEBATE
Mr. ENGO (Cameroon):

Mr. President, on behalf of the Government and

people of the Republic of Cameroon, and on my own behalf, I would like to extend to
you once aqain our warm and fraternal conqratulations on assuminq the Presidency of
the seventeenth SPecial session of the General Assembly.

We recall your efficient

handlinq of the business of the forty-fourth session and of the sixteenth SPecial
session of the General Assembly dedicated to consideration of the neqative
consequences of the inhuman system of apartheid.

We have no doubt that our current

deliberations will also be successful.
We also wish on this occasion to commend the Secretary-General very hiqhly for
his unswervinq commitment to global peace and security, particularly in the field
of international druq control.

The International Conference on Druq Abuse and

Illicit Traffickinq was a follow-up of his personal initiative.

The two important

documents adopted by the Conference - the Declaration and the Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline - are now not only a landmark in the treatment of
offenders in druq abuse as well as in the illicit traffickinq and consumption of
narcotic druqs but also provide a solid framework on which the special session must
proqressively develop desirable norms of conduct.
We meet here today at a critical crossroads, harassed by unprecedented events,
conditioned by the overbearinq consequences of technoloqical advance, challenqed by
opoportunities for proqress that unfold as we aPproach a new millenium.

RM/2

A/S-17/PV. 7
6
(Mr. Enqo, Cameroon)

The scope of the task ahead will undoubtedly be influenced bv what we alreadv
know.

There are crucial elements in the endeavour to establish an atmosphere

conducive to qlobal peace, security and sustaininq development.

In the pursuit of

our noble vision, we must use the experience of the past to mould today's
strateqies for proqress in the future.

The current mood of chanqe must be

exploited to reject the misqivinqs of that past and to institute mechanisms for
addressinq the complex challenqes posed to our qeneration.
Racism, imperialism and narrow nationalism have joined many other "ism's" to
frustrate the attainment of ideals universally held.

In desiqninq efficacious

responses to needs for better standards of life and the eradication of the causes
of conflict, iqnorance, poverty, disease and criPPlinq economic and social
conditions, the war on druqs must remain central to our co-operation in those, as
well as in other, fields.

The cancer of druq abuse and addiction has not onlY

threatened the quality of human life; it has reduced the capacity of the vouth of
today to enqaqe in the type of education and activity that best prepares them for a
leadership role in the future.
The United Nations has been one of the critical centres for explorinq qlobal
strateqies to counter the efforts of criminal syndicates and cartels.

Specialized

aqencies of the United Nations - the World Health Orqanization, the International
Labour Orqanisation, the United Nations Children's Fund and others- are all
involved in the implementation of various resolutions and decisions reached by the
International Narcotics Control Board, the Commission on Narcotic Druqs, the
Division on Narcotic Druqs and resolutions of the General Assembly itself.

They

constitute an attempt to address various aspects of the problem, includinq the
reduction of improper suPPlY and consumption, Prevention and treatment of addiction
and rehabilitation.

A/S-17/PV. 7
7

BM/2

(Mr. Enqo, Cameroon)
The question the sPecial session of the General Assembly must address is
twofold.

First, we must analyse the extent to which the United Nations system is

well adapted to play a qreater co-ordinatinq role in meetinq qrave challenqes in
the oomains of druq-abuse control.

Secondly, we must oetermine the quidelines for

implementinq new arranqements, pursued at the international level, to enhance the
effectiveness of the Orqanization in combatinq druq-related problems in the future.
It is important to examine the adaptability of the United Nations system with
the object of its qreater role in enhancinq international co-operation in the war
on druqs.

It is our view that a further plethora of international instruments on

the same issue may only detract from full implementation and thereby compound the
problem.
Our strateqy at this staqe must be qeared towards full implementation at the
national and international levels of the Comprehensive MultidisciPlinary Outline of
activities to prevent and reduce the demand for illeqal druqs.

Determined effort

must therefore be made to promote the early ratification of the 1988 Convention
aqainst Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Druqs and Psvchotrooic Substances.

It is our

view that that Convention provides the basic framework on which States can build
their bilateral and multilateral co-operation in the war aqainst druq abuse and its
neqative consequences.
In that context General Assembly resolution 44/142 requested the
Secretary-General to undertake a study on the economic and social consequences of
the illicit traffic in druqs.

The purpose would be to enliqhten the international

community as to the scope of the common interests shared bv all societies in
resolvinq the adverse effects of the predicament that Plaques the march towards
better standards of proqress for the future.

RM/2

A/S-17/PV. 7
8

(Mr. Enqo, Cameroon)
All nations do not necessarily share the same cateqorv of problems.
broad underlyinq causes tend to be different.

Their

At the most difficult extreme, the

cultivation of illicit coca has provided labour and financial resources to some.
The issue of leqalitv and morality is releqated to the backqround as lonQ as that
undesirable role remains.
For other nations the issue has traversed the plain of production.
Consumption has led to the diversion of desperately needed capital for development
to wasteful health-destructive ends.

The lonq-term malaise of frustration,

alienation, helplessness and discouraqement for the citizenrv, who are
indispensable for nation-buildinq and economic development, proves to be
devastati~.

It is important to note that all cuts in subsidy in education, in no matter
what countrv, whether small or larqe, expose children to the inevitability of
illiteracy, unemployment and involvement in druqs, either as consumers or simply as
qratified carriers or middlemen.
Resour~es

emoloved to combat an established illeqal or prohibited activity mav

have value, vet it must be understood that prevention could do more than make such
waste of resources unnecessary.

It could enhance constructive deolovment for

fruitful construction.
Success for the international community in combatinq the druQ problem can onlv
come from a chanQe in the approach to issues of supply and demand for illicit druqs
to ensure that national and qlobal preparedness reaches down into the values of
each society.

The encouraqement of svstematic education would turn citizens from

indulqence to more health-sustaininQ pursuits.

The international plan of action or

a decade on druq-related problems must be supported in a comprehensive proqramme
coverinQ all fronts, from incentives to the practice of cultivation, supply and the

A/S-17/PV. 7

RM/2

~10

(Mr. Enqo, Cameroon)
traininq of and support for law-enforcement officers.

It must be accompanied bv an

equally imperative co-operation in the orqanization of appropriate machinery for
surveillance and detection and border and entrv points of national territories.
We are further persuaded that, althouqh international co-operation is a
desirable and necessary component in the struqqle aqainst druqs, it can never
replace action at the national and reqional levels, where the issues fundamentally
remain the primary reSPonsiblitv of States.

In that liqht, we would like to state

that Cameroon's qeoqraphical location falls within a zone in Africa that is
increasinqly beinq used as a transit area for druq traffickinq.

We are therefore

not spared from that problem, althouqh it has not yet attained alarminq
proportions.

The Government of the RePublic has undertaken a series of preventive

measures, motivated by its conviction that in fiqhtinq aqainst existinq druq abuse
it is perhaps more urqent now to remove the element of curiosity from the public.
That element leads individuals to succumb to self-destructive activities under the
influence of sheer iqnorance.

A3/dl

A/S-17/PV. 7
11
(Mr. Enqo, Cameroon\
We have therefore reinforced control at our borders, includino points of entry

to our national territory, by the creation of an anti-druqs unit.

Our nation

envisaqes continuous mobilization of the poPulace aqainst the danoers of druo
abuse.

The orqanization of seminars is an effective weapon that we have employed.

It is in this lioht that a national conference on druo-related problems is
scheduled for April 1990 in Yaounde, the national capital.

It is the intention to

continue to participate actively in several reqional and multilateral orqanizations
to which we have adhered, as part of a policy to prevent crime and combat the druq
Problem.
Intensification of efforts at the national and reqional levels, however,
requires commensurate strenqthenino of the United Nations druo-control oroans and
their secretariats.

Aqainst this backoround, the functionino of the Commission,

its subsidiary bodies, the International Narcotics Control Board and the Division
on Narcotic Druqs, may need to be reviewed and reassessed, in accordance with the
mandate of General Assembly resolution 44/141.

This is an endeavour to which my

deleqation looks forward.
With reqard to the United Nations Fund for Druq Abuse Control and the outcry
for increased financial resources to meet druq-related oblioations, we feel
compelled to declare that there is need for maximum utilization of the resources
currently allocated for druq-control activities, as well as for the Provision of
additional funds, out of extrabudqetary resources, to the United Nations druq units
to enable those units to implement their mandates fully.

Our emphasis, therefore,

is on the mobilization of resources for increased proqrammes outside the reqular
budqet of the United Nations, which currently is spread too thinly as the result of
attempts to meet many diverse priorities.

AE/dl

A/S-17/PV. 7

12
(Mr. Enqo, Cameroon)
With reqard to the settinq of oriorities, we believe that the General Assembly
should consider desiqnatinq druq-control activities as oriority items.

This must,

however, be in the context of deliberations on all aspects of oriority-settinq in
the draft medium-term olan for 1992-97, in accordance with existinq rules and
requlations qoverninq oroaramme olannina and budqetinq in the United Nations.

In

this reqard, the Committee on Proqramme and Co-ordination as well as the Advisory
Committee for Administrative and Budqetarv Questions (ACABQ) should olav their
usual, indisoensable role.
We started by emohasizinq that our collective success in eradicatina the
social and economic problems that afflict mankind as we approach the year 2000 will
depend on the resolve with which we address all the obstacles to resolution of
attendant problems.

We adhere to the basic tenet that unless all the basic

oroblems facinq mankind are addressed with even-handed urqency, the resolution of
one problem will lead only to escalation of other problems.
The quest for peace, security and development has many facets.

Our

contribution to the universal effort to restore health, vitality and diqnity to the
human condition cannot be too selective, for these thinqs all have their respective
parts to play in meetil'lQ the qrave challenqes of our times.

We are convinced that

the multilateral orocess orovides the only effective machinery for the eradication
of problems that have assumed a transnational dimension, and we look forward to
contributinq to the continued strenqtheninq of the United Nations in its
co-ordinatinq role.
Mr. ERNER (Turkey) :

'-iv Government shares with reoresentati ves who have

sooken already the view that the issue of illicit druqs oases a qrave threat to all
countries.

This soectal session of the General Assembly is therefore a welcome

opportunity to consider our collective response and to aaree on appropriate

AE/dl

A/S-17/PV.7
13
(Mr. Erner, Turkey)

collective counter-action.

The hiqh-level particiPation is sionificant in

demonstratinq the political dimension of the problem of druos.

It is even more

siqnificant in that it siqnals to the merchants of death that Governments like
those of Colombia are not alone in their brave stand.
The soecial session represents a natural and major step by the international
community in qearinq up to the challenqe.

In the course of the last few years, the

International Conference on Druq Abuse and Illicit Traffickino (ICDAIT) represented
one of the major qlobal responses to the threat of druqs.
intensive work commenced on a treaty.

Almost concurrently,

This culminated in the adoption, and openinq

for siqnature, of the 1988 Convention aqainst Illicit Traffic in Narcotic oruqs and
Psychotropic Substances.
Outline

(C~O)

The Convention and the Comprehensive Multidisciplinary

underlined, in different ways, the fundamental need for

counter-action on all fronts.

The CMO did this throuqh the use of the word

"comprehensive" in its title and by the balance that it established between its
four major areas of concern- supply, demand, illicit traffickinq, and treatment
and rehabilitation.

The adoption of the Convention, on the other hand, has served

to underline the basic fact that the 1961 and 1971 Conventions - both reoulatinq
mainlv the supply of narcotic druqs and psychotropic substances - have amply
demonstrated, throuqh their imPlementation, the fundamental need also to attack
illicit traffickinq in a co-ordinated way.
I conqratulate the officers of the Preparatory Committee and of the Ad Hoc
Committee on their excellent work, which resulted in the merqinq of the views
expressed by interested deleqations.

Turkey is both a traditional Producer country

and a transit country for illicit traffickinq.

That is why we are so deePlV

involved in the fiqht aqainst illicit traffickinq in narcotic druqs and
PsychotroPic substances, and why we soend considerable sums from our national
budqet on this fiqht.

AE/dl

A/S-17/PV.7
14-15

(Mr. Erner, Turkey)
As a result of strict measures taken bv my Government, there is no diversion
of druqs licitly produced in Turkey.

My Government's firm action has earned the

praise of various international orqanizations.

However, as it is on the so-called

Balkan route, Turkey faces an increasinq challenqe.

In 1989 the quantity of

narcotic druqs confiscated showed an increase of 11 per cent by comparison with the
fiqure for the previous year.

Indeed, thanks to the activities of Turkish

law-enforcement aoencies, a considerable quantity of illicit narcotic druqs was
confiscated - both in Turkey and in other Western European countries.

In this

respect, a number of bilateral co-operation aqreements have been concluded, and
druq-liaison officers have been exchanqed between Turkey and several other
countries.

Turkey also hosted, in Ankara last October, the meetinq of the

Sub-Commission aqainst Illicit Traffickinq in the Near and Middle East.

J~/4

A/S-17/PV.7
16
(Mr. Erner, Turkey)

With reqard to the establishment of a reqional data exchanqe centre in the
reqion of the Sub-Commission on Illicit Traffickina in the Near

an~

Middle East, my

Government holds the view that such a centre can be established only with the full
aqreement of all member States of the Sub-Commission.
Turkey was one of the first countries to brinq to the attention of the
international community the link between the illicit traffickinq of narcotics and
arms smuqqlinq and international terrorism.

we are qratified that these links have

been recoqnized bv the States participatinq in the special session of the General
Assembly.
As underlined in the recent meetinq of the Commission on Narcotic Druqs in
Vienna, we believe that a successful outcome to the special session of the General
Assembly requires a balanced approach to all aspects of the question.

we consider

the recent emphasis on the reduction of illicit demand a positive nevelopment, but
this should not result in our losina siaht of the suPPlY and traffickinq aspects of
the Problem.

A balanced approach is needed between the control of supply,

includinq crop substitution, ann illicit traffickinq, combined with the creation of
more effective law enforcement forces.
applies to the reqions:
another.

The same princiPle of balanced approach

we should not focus on one reqion at the expense of

This miqht have a "balloon effect", causinq the traffickers to develoP

new markets, methods and druqs.

Equal consideration must be qiven to narcotic

druqs and psychotropic substances.
My deleqation is of the opinion that the exPOrt of chemicals used in the
illict production of narcotic druqs and psychotropic substances should be strictlY
controlled.

we therefore welcome the oaraaraph relatina to this issue in the draft

proqramme of action.

JVM/4

A/S-17/PV. 7
17

(Mr. Erner, Turkey)
Turkev has always attached qreat importance to the most valuable and effective
activities conducted by the three druq control units of the United Nations, namelv,
the United Nations Division on Narcotic Druqs, the International Narcotics Control
Board and the United Nations Fund for Druq Abuse Control (UNFDAC\.

These units

have plaved an active role in combatinq druq abuse over the last decades and
certainly need qreater resources than what they are qettinq now.
Additional resources from the United Nations budqet to the United Nations
Division on Narcotic Druqs and the International Narcotics Control Board must be
provided and a substantial increase in the voluntary contributions to UNFDAC must
be souqht.

I should add that there must also be a balanced approach in the

allocation of funds to UNFDAC.

Since a larqer part of the funds is earmarked for

specific purposes, UNFDAC has difficulties in establishinq its Priorities and
planninq its activities.
The special session qives us once aqain the oPportunity to capitalize on the
Political will and the determination expressed bv Member States to deal with this
deadly threat to mankind.

As a result of the work of the special session of the

General Assembly, all States will intensify their international co-operation to
combat druq abuse and illicit traffickinq at the national, reqional and qlobal
levels.

For its Part, my Government is fully committed to continuinq its

co-operation with all Governmentqs to eradicate this scourqe of our time.
Mr. GODFREY (Belize):

The deleqation of Belize is pleased to add its

voice to the chorus of conqratulations which you, Sir, have already received on
your election to the presidency of the General Assembly at this seventeenth soecial
session devoted to all aspects of the question of international co-operation
aqainst the illeqal production, supply, demand, traffickinq and distribution of
druqs.

A/S-17/PV. 7
18

JVM/4

(Mr. Godfrey, Belize)
Because this problem is all-pervasive, it transcends borders and
nationalities.

It eats away the structures of societies and threatens the health

and well-beinQ of millions of People.

It is therefore a fittinQ and morally

leqitimate subiect for international concern and deliberation at the hiqhest levels
of the qlobal family.
Over the years the threat has escalated from the level of atavistic curiosity
to qlobal concern.

The maqnitude of the problem has now become a major national

security threat to many of our more vulnerable States which are cauqht between the
cross-fire of the producers, the traffickers and the consumers.
has become urqent for countries

to

More and more, it

pool their resources and military and

intelliqence capabilities aqainst the well-orqanized, well-financed and better

•

equipped druq cartels.

The victims of this modern pestilence ranqe from the socially advantaqed to
the disadvantaqed, in develoPed and develooinQ countries, throuqh all aqe qrouos,
but the most vULnerable are the younq people of the world.

The health of

qenerations today and tomorrow is at stake.
It is in this context that the deleqation of Belize approaches the soecial
session on druq related problems.

National efforts at eradication, interdiction

and treatment need to be complemented by reqional and international policies and
actions.
At home in Belize my Government has launched a concerted drive to rid the
country of this scourqe.

We are usinq the police, courts, schools and all the

social orqans at our command to qet the messaqe across.

In areas where the leqal

machinery falls short we have embarked on the strenqtheninq of leqislation to
stiffen penalties for druq traffickers.

A/S-17/PV. 7

JW./4

19
(Mr. Godfrev, Belize)
At the same time we have taken steps to establish a National Drua Abuse
Control Council

to

formulate new and effective anti-druq oolicies for co-ordinatinQ

and monitorinQ druq abuse prevention activities.

It has already been determined

that the Belizean population is very much aware that a druq-abuse problem exists in
the country and that the maqnitude of this Problem is second onlv to unemployment
amonq the most important problems facinq the country.

National strateqv therefore

also focuses on treatment and rehabilitation, includinq tra ininq, support for
self-help qroups and an outreach patient proqramme.
In an effort to join forces in req ional and bilateral action in the war
aqainst druqs, Belize has concluded arranqements and aqreements with the United
States of America and Mexico committinq us to undertake joint efforts and execute
specific proqrammes to combat illicit production and traffic, reduce demand,
prevent illicit use, and co-operate in attackiM the profits from illicit druqs.
Under these arranqements Belize employs human and financial resources in
specific proqrammes aqainst druqs, as well as havinq embarked on an information
exchanqe exercise to strenathen mutual capabilities in the fiqht aqainst druqs.
In the case of Mexico, with whom Belize shares a common border, a wide-ranqinq
aqreement was concluded earlier this month to protect the life and health of our
respective peoples from the harmful effects of narcotic druqs.

A mechanism adopted

to out this proqramme into effect is the settinq up of a Belize-Mexico Commission
to co-operate towards controllinq illeqal druqs.

The Commission shall have

consultative and operational functions and be the vehicle for co-ordination of
anti-druq activities between the two States.

The bilateral aqreement will promote

co-operation between Belize and Mexico to control more efficiently druq traffickinq
and druq consumption.

It calls for the initiation in both countries of 'proqrammes

for druq treatment and qreater public awareness to eradicate druq cultivation and,
where applicable, establish £~bstitute economic activity.

JVM/4

A/S-17/PV. 7
20
(~r.

Godfrey,

Beliz~

The aqreement also aims to identify and destroy facilities where druq
substances and narcotics are illeqally produced, establish systems of exchanqe of
information and develop new leqal instruments to achieve these ends.
All our national and bilateral actions have been inspired by reqional and
international druq control mandates, in particular the Comprehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline of Future Activities in Druq Abuse Control, adopted at
Vienna in 1987.

Belize has provisionally applied and adhered to the principles of

the United Nations Convention aqainst Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Druqs and
Psychotropic Substances, concluded in December 1988.

After careful review, and in

liqht of the urqent Priority now beinq qiven by the international community to this
subiect, my Administration has deemed it appropriate to accelerate the process
towards early siqnature and full ratification of this essential multilateral treaty.

JB/5

A/S-17/PV. 7
21
(~r.

Godfrey, Belize)

It is clear to us in Belize - and, indeed, many speakers before me have made
the point - that most of our countries can no lonqer deal with the problem alone.
With the best will in the world, and recoqnizinq the imperative of deployino
personnel and resources to this fiqht, our resources are limited.
My deleqation fully supports earlier requests made for the allocation of
adequate resources for the effective implementation of the system-wide qlobal
proqramme of action in pursuit of this session's qoal of strenqtheninq and
enhancinq existinq levels of international co-operation.

For countries on the edqe

of development, all areas of national attention take on urqencv in their need for
financial and resource allocation.

The unemployed need uroent job creation and the

sick require hospitals, the homeless shelter, and the hunorv food.

Those are the

social and political realities that Plaque our Governments and on which the druq
lords prey.

They take advantaqe of our inability to deploy comparable resources to

those they have available.
In waoinq war aqainst the druq barons, there is a need for the establishment
of machinery to transfer information and technoloqv from the industrialized
countries

to

the developinq nations.

There is an urqent need for the special

concerted and collective action this seventeenth special session envisaoes.
We need to subscribe to a Political declaration and a olobal proqramme of
action that respond to a coalition of concerns.

We are aware that differences

exist in the modalities of intervention, but we sense a common purpose in this
Assembly.

It is that common purpose that will quide us in deployinq the resources

needed for the final attack aqainst the problem.
must be effective.

The stakes are too hiqh.

The strateqies to be emPloyed

Above all, these strateoies must

recoqnize the sovereiqnty of States Members of the Oroanization and reiect
unilateral intervention, respect the constitutional procedures instituted in
national territories and work with municipal law.

A/S-17 /PI. 7
22

JB/5

(Mr. Godfrey, Belize)
Universal leqal and operational procedures to be adopterl in that offensive
need not be burdensome on the least developed countries if they are operated within
the framework of mutual collaboration and are aimed at beinq supportive and
self-sustaininq.
An area of particular concern for countries that are seen as primary Producers
of illicit crops is the settinq-up of mechanisms
substituted for illeqal cultivation.

to

promote and market leqal crops

The impact on the informal econornv of the

eradication of illeqal crops needs to be tempered with fair markets and fair Prices
for leqal cultivation.

We cannot minimize the attraction to small farmers in rural

areas who are faced with the ready market and exorbitant rewards for the production
of marijuana, poppy and coca where the markets rlo not respond adequately to the
suqar, banana and maize crops they are asked to produce leqally.
We cannot iqnore the allure of instant financial liquidi tv to the younq druq
pusher who would otherwise face unemployment and hunqer in the absence of real
employment.

At the same time that we pledqe to rid the earth of the scourqe of

druq production, we have an obliqation to provide profitable and diqnified
existences to those who are displaced.
Perhaps just as imoortantly, it is time that we all chanqe our thinkinq.
is not "them" and "us" anymore.

It

Druqs are affectinq every one of us here today,

tearinq apart the fabric of our families, rippinq asunder our societies and makinQ
a mockerv of civilization itself.
None of us is immune, no ~atter how much we miqht like to imaqine that the
problem cannot touch our individual lives.

It has done so already.

In one wav or

another, it touches every sinqle one of us, every sinqle dav of our lives.
touches us in the cost of law enforcement and in the cost of labour lost to
inefficiency and ineptitude.

It

A/S-17/PV. 7
23

JB/5

(Mr. Godfrey, Belize)
Worse, much worse, it touches us in the danqer on our roads, in the violence
in our streets, and all too often in the violation of our children's riqht to live
normal, productive lives.

I wish to stress that education is a major part of the

answer, education away from the romanticization of druqs and towards callinq them
what they really are:

scourqes, true scourqes, of civilization.

Our younq must be

tauqht to scorn druqs and druq pushers; only then can we beqin to confront the
problem.
Indeed, novel and imaqinative approaches are essential

to

a qlobal strateqy.

Those approaches should punish severely those who profit from the menace of druqs.
Their ill-qotten qains should be employed aqainst narco-traffickers.

Substantial

international resources will need to be deployed to strenqthen existinq national
and reqional structures instituted to combat druq production, traffickinq and
abuse.

Effective short- and lonq-term proqrammes need to be devised to complement

those already in place.

In this effort Belize Pledqes its co-operation, its

1 imi ted resources, and its indomitable will.
Mr. VAN LIEROP (Vanuatu):

At the outset, we associate ourselves with the

conqratulatory remarks addressed to vou, Sir, by previous speakers on your
unanimous election to preside over the General Assembly at this vitally important
seventeenth soecial session.

We also join in aPPlaudinq the constructive

initiatives taken by our Secretary-General and the staff of the Secretariat in this
reqard.
While some are already attachinq qreat historic siqnificance to this soecial
session, we believe that its true historic siqnificance lies not in the fact that
we have qathered to address the issue of druq traffickinq but instead in the hope
that our deliberations will conclude with a commitment to substantive action rather
than merely with words.

Thus we shall not be able to qauqe the true success of

A/S-17/PV. 7
24

JB/5

(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu)
thi~

session bv evaluatinq the various speeches we hear: nor shall we be able to

qauo"" the true success of this session by examininq any documents or declarations
we mia"lt produce.
succe~~

Instead, we believe there will be two true measures of the

of this special session.

On the one hand, our success will be measured by the deqree of our active,
effective and sustained commitment to joint international action aqainst those who
United ~~ates Secretary of State James A. Baker III so accurately characterized as
"criminAls of uncommon power and uncommon brutality".

The other true measure of

the sucCP"~S of this soecial session will be the deQree to which we, the nations of
the worln, succeed in arminq ourselves with the requisite moral ammunition to
dissuade t~e youth of the world from followinCI the path of qreed, corrUPtion,
e~capism

anA

self-aQqrandizement.

TherP are certain occasions on which brevity is most appropriate.
s•tch occa!';ion.
t~is

subie~~.

This is one

There is no need for endless debate here at the United Nations on
All of us are bv now painfully aware- or at least should be aware-

o1: what druQ abuse and druq traffickinq have done to contemporary civilization and
threaten to no to future qenerations.
There i~ no need to recite statistics on the production, distribution and
consumption o~ illicit and addictive druqs.

In fact, a mere recitation of

statistics can, in some instances, be misleadinq.

RecallinQ the number of tons of

crops destrov.,.n, druqs seized, persons arrested or convictions obtained is not an
indication thAt we are winninQ the war aqainst druq abuse and druq traffickers.
Instead, ~hose numbers are indications of how extensive is the use of druqs, the
soread of the druq culture and the maqnitude of what confronts us.
Vanuatu is a small South Pacific country which is not, at this time, known to
be a dir~ link in the chain of the nefarious international traffic in illicit

JB/5

A/S-17/PV.7
25

(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu)
narcotic druqs.

However, Vanuatu's concern is as qreat as if it were an immediate

and direct link in that chain.

Vanuatu and other small South Pacific island States

have concerns that are similar to those of the Caribbean States.
We are aware that in mankind's relatively brief history as a form of life, we
have faced a series of unique and often friqhteninq challenqes.

On more than a few

occasions, these challenqes have not only threatened mankind's well-beinq but also
its evolution an~ its very survival.

A number of these challenqes have been of a

scientific, ecoloqical or medical nature and have not therefore resulted
exclusively from mankind's own inadequacies or failinqs.

However, other such

challenqes have been of a political, social or moral nature, therefore makinq them
mankind's own doinq by mankind's own folly.

BHS/dl

A/S-17/PJ. 7
26

(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu}
Despite the obvious fact that there is no need to do so, we seem to have
Perfected a rather remarkable ability to create and erect our own barriers in the
path of human development.

Thus, not too lonq aqo, chattel slavery and the cruel

and brutal commercial traffic in men, women and children challenqed mankind's very
humanity.

What was true of slavery was, and is, equally true of colonialism in its

various quises.
In the twentieth century the development and deployment of nuclear, chemical
and bacter ioloq ical weapons eleva ted the means of death and destruct ion to
unprecedented levels and challenqed mankind's ability to survive.

Racism,

reliqious intolerance and ethnic biqotrv continue to plaque every corner of the
qlobe and challenqe every one of us to learn to accept and abide by the fundamental
truths that all life is sacred and tl'at all human beinqs- and all cultures- merit
respect as equals.
It is ironic, therefore, that as we approach the end of this century, and ;ust
as we appear to be on the verqe of resolvinq a few of the most recent threats to
mankind's survival, we are confronted by a new challenqe to civilization.

This new

challenqe is composed of the dual threat posed by those who are obsessed by druqs
and those who are obsessed by the obscene and immoral profits qained from the
traffic in these instruments of the misery and deqrada tion of other human beinqs.
Druq abuse and druq traffickinq threaten every one of us, reqardless of our
size, reqardless of our wealth, reqardless of our power, reqardless of our
professed beliefs.
boundaries.
God.

These evils know and respect no international or moral

These evils respect no laws of mankind, no laws of nature, no laws of

In their wake, these evils leave only a wide path of seduction, corruption,

fear, intimidation, destruction and death.
Much, much more must be done, and must be done immediately by each and every
member of the world community to com~t these twin evils.

There can be no

BHS/dl

A/S-17/PV. 7
27
(~r.

spectators.

Van Lierop, Vanuatu)

The outcome of this battle will affect us all.

Therefore, the battle

must be waqed by us all and not just by a few of us.
In recent months the couraqe and determination of the Government and the
people of Colombia have been applauded by every member of the international
community.

Colombia and the other Andean nations have for a number of years been

standinq in the front line of the struqqle aqainst druq traffickers and the social
terrorism they practise.

Last week's summit meetinq in Cartaqena, Colombia, offers

some hope for a comprehensive assault on the underlying causes of the druq trade.
However, we must all understand that there are no easy answers and there will
be no quick solutions.

Druq abuse and druq traffickinq are not problems that can

be resolved merely by makinq more financial resources available.

Money alone

usually creates more Problems than it solves.
Similarly, catchy sloqans by themselves are also inadequate.
not only inadequate, they are also misleadinq.

Such sloqans are

They tend to deceive too many of us

into believinq th:lt druq abuse and druq traffickinq are minor irritations that can
be combated with relative ease, without addressinq and examininq fundamental values
and priori ties.
Obsessive fixations on short-term pleasure, instant qratification and a
perceived need or desire to escape from life's realities are major contributinq
factors to addictions of any sort.

Druq addiction is no exception.

Selfishness,

qreed, or an obsessive pra:>ccupa tion with liB terial wealth contribute to many major
social ills.

Druq traffickers are merely extreme manifestations of the obsessive

desire to acquire wealth and power at any cost.

Earlier qenera tions of slave

traders were possessed of the same obsessive and immoral desires as are the
traffickers in these new instruments of slaverv.

Until we are willinq to face

these realities, serious questions will always be raised concerninq our

A/S-17/PV.?

BHS/dl

28

(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu)
understandinq of, and ability to reverse, the deterioration of civilized society as
evidenced by the illicit druq trade and its associated violence.
We have never been particularly impressed with the arqument which is often
heard that the druq problem is Primarily a problem of demand.

Nor are we persuaded

by the equally myopic arqument that the druq problem can be solved bv cuttinq off
or even reducinq the supply.
Those who look exclusively to the wealthier consuminq nations as the source of
the problem, fail to understand the comprehensive nature of the druq trade in this
increasinqly inter-connected world of ours.

Similarly, those who look primarily to

the producinq countries foe solutions also fail to understand the comprehensive
nature of druq abuse and druq traffickinq.
Today, not a sinqle nation in the world can accurately be characterized as a
producer and not a consumer of addictive druqs.

Not a sinqle nation in the world

can be characterized as only a conduit for, and not a consumer of, addictive
druqs.

Not a sinqle nation in the world can accurately state that onlv the public

officials and the youth of other nations have been compromised and corruoted by the
immoral Profits of druq traffickers.

Today, not a sinqle nation in the world can

claim that the social fabric of its neiqhbours has been affected bv the druq trade
but that its own social fabric and its own moral values remain intact and
unaffected.
One can walk a short distance from this buildinq, the Headquarters of the
United Nations, and witness the extensive nature of the druq abuse and druq
traffickinq which confront the world.

Within a few short minutes' drive of this

buildinq, we could enter communities that are themselves microcosms of the world's
develoPinq nations.

These communities- althouqh situated in the world's richest

and most powerful nation- are amonq the most severely affected by the illicit

BHS/dl

A/S-17/PV.7
29
(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu)

traffic in addictive druqs.

The people of these communities - vounq and old, male

and female - are the victims who too often become nameless and faceless
abstractions when far too much emohasis is placed on statistics rather than on real
live human beinqs.
No set of statistics can ever adequately describe the aqonv and despair that
druqs have brouqht into so many lives.

No statistical survevs can ever describe

the frustrations, the shattered dreams, the niohtmare of druq addiction.

If this

is the fate of so manv people within laroe developed countries, what then is to be
the fate of those within developinq countries?
In a sense - but only in an unfortunate sense - the druq trade is a qreat
equalizer.

No nation on earth has a monooolv on the misery, corruption,

destruction and death caused by those who traffic in illicit druqs.

Similarlv, no

nation on earth has a monooolv on virtue and can claim to be free of the
consequences of this evil traffic.

We must address this problem toqether or we

will be consumed by it individually, one by one, community by community and,
finally, nation by nation.
Together, we can reinforce the oositive values which are mankind's oreatest
weapons against drug addiction and other social addictions.

Toqether, we can

orovide substantially better economic and social opportunities for those who are
seduced by the opportunities in the druq trade that currently do not always exist,
for everyone, in leqitimate endeavours.

Together, we can isolate, and eventually

defeat, those whose material desires are many times oreater than is their adherence
to anv moral restraints.

Toqether, we can save the civilization mankind has been

fortunate enouqh to craft, and we can bequeath to future oenerations a world in
which druo abuse and druq traffickinq are no lonqer major threats.
h~ve

Thus we will

overcome vet another obstacle in the lonQ journey of human development.

RM/2

A/S-17/PV.7
30

(Mr. Van Lierop, Vanuatu)
Then, ann only then, will we finally be able to assiqn a true historic
siqnificance to this seventeenth SPecial session of the United Nations General
Assembly.

History awaits the hand of our collective authorshiP.
Mr. STRESOV (Bulqaria):

I should like to avail myself of this

opportunity to conoratulate you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Bureau, on your elections to your responsible posts, and to wish you success in the
discharoe of your nuties.
The holninq of the seventeenth SPecial session of the General Assembly is a
loqical result of the strono politicization and internationalization in recent
years of the issues related to narcotic druqs.

Over the past years the qlobal druq

problem has been exacerbated siqnificantly, a trend that has also been strenqthened
by all-time hiqhs in the production of narcotic druqs and psychotropic substances,
the increase in supply and demand, and the involvement of heavily armed
orqanizations, which are ready to use violence and which even threaten the social
structure of States in certain Parts of the world.

An element on which attention

has been focused only recently is the ecoloqical aspect of the druos issue.
Only a few decades aoo it was oenerallv believed that there was no reason to
consider the qrowinq druq abuse as a qlobal threat.

However, we must now admit

that druq abuse and illicit traffic in narcotic druqs have spread in many
countries.

We believe that, irrespective of the common roots of druo abuse in

different parts of the world, we should assess the problem differently for each
country and social qroup by takinq a number of historic factors into consideration.

A/S-17/PV. 7

RH/7

31

(Mr. Stresov, Bulaarial
We are of the opinion that areat attention should be paid to measures for the
prevention and reduction of the demand for druas.

It appears to us that the

problems of demand have only recently gained the prominence they deserve.
Producers in developing countries whose livelihood often depends entirely on the
growing of drug crops should be offered better alternatives.
Problems of the treatment and rehabilitation of drua addicts should be
properly addressed.

In Bulaaria, narcotics are not so much an internal problem, as

drug abuse in the country is very limited; our problems in this area are those of a
transit State.

Bulgaria is situated on the main route for the transportina of

narcotics druas from the Middle East and South Asia to Western Europe and
North America.
The Bulgarian delegation is oonvinced that to combat a problem havina such
severe and often tragic consequences it will be necessary to elaborate an adeq\l:l te
and co-ordinated policy of international co-operation reflecting the determination
of nations and Governments, all the more so because our experience has shown that
even big States with considerable material and financial resources are unable to
resolve their problems in this field, or even to reduce their dangerouse acuteness,
as long as they act alone and in isolation.
Under the circumstances, efficient counteraction is possible only through the
adoption of joint and concerted efforts and measures by all States, the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and each and every member of society.
Bulaaria has joined in the efforts of the international commll1ity aimed at
combatinq illeaal drug traffickinq and abuse, which is reflected in its siqnina the
existing interm tional instruments:

the Conventions on narcotic druqs of 1961, and

that on psychotropic subtances of 1971.

Last May, we acceded to the Convention

against the Illicit Traffickinq of Narcotic Druas and Psychotropic Substances.
feel free to say that Bulgaria has fulfilled its international commitments, as

I

A/S-17/PV.7

RH/7

32

(Mr. Stresov, Bulqaria)
its leqislation fully complies with those Conventions.

All premeditated offences

related to the production of and traffickinq in narcotic druqs, as well as all acts
directed at encouraqing or abettinq the takinq of narcotics, are punishable under
the law.
At the reqional level, Bulgaria is represented at a number of conferences and
meetings on illicit drug trafficking and abuse.

I should mention here the meeting

of exoerts of the Balkan countries on co-operation in combating terrorism, illeqal
drugs and arms trafficking, held in Belqrade on 7 and 8 June 1989.
Mv country is well aware of the great significance of bilateral co-operation
in the fight against druqs.

More recently we established initial contacts with

States in order to reach correspondinq aqreements.

We attach particular importance

to the siqninq of agreements on mutual legal assistance reflecting the principles

of the 1988 Convention.
It is evident that the international community recognizes the fact that all
States are susceptible to the neqa tive effects of druq trafficking and druq abuse.
This awareness determines the growing interest of the competent authorities of a
number of countries in the development of co-operation
traffickinq and addiction.
trafficki~,

to

prevent illeqal druq

The entire international system for combatinq druq

as well as the system for international control, is opera tinq in the

context of our qlobal realities.

We believe that the potential of the

United Nations in respect of this problem has by no means been exhausted.

Its

specialized agencies and other organizations involved in oombatinq narootic druqs
are taking measures to better utilize this potential.

Last year, the

Administrative Committee on Co-ordination received a mandate to elaborate a
programme of action in the sphere of drug control for the specialized agencies of
the United Nations.

It is our hope that this will help focus efforts on

elimina tinq duplication and improving the effectiveness of their work and, what is

A/S-17/PV. 7

RH/7

33
(~r.

Stresov, Bulqaria)

more important, that it will help utilize the available resources much more
efficiently.
We are ready to support this effort.

At the same time I would like to exPress

our hope that at the current soecial session the General Assemblv will examine the
issue of druqs in all its complexity with determination and in a consistent and
balanced manner.

We look forward to the political declaration and the Proqramme of

Action becominq effective instruments in the search for solutions to all aspects of
the problem.

My deleqation supports the idea of proclaiminq a United Nations

Decade aqainst Druq Abuse, as suqqested in General Assemblv resolution 44/141.
International understandinq and co-operation are becominq increasinqlv vital
for the findinq of solutions to these problems.

It is our hope that their

discussion at this session will help strenqthen the bodies of the United Nations
ooeratinq in the field of narcotic druqs and will reaffirm, at the hiqhest
political level, the need for interna tiona! co-operation in this area.
The deleqation of Bulqaria is prepared to support every decision and to
participate in every effort to the benefit of all nations in the name of our final
qoal:

a world free of narcotic druqs.
Mr. PEERTHUM (Mauritius):

Let me first conqratulate you, Sir, on your

election as President of this special session of the General Assembly on druq
traffickinq.

I am confident that, qiven your quidance and experience, our

deliberations will produce concrete directives and measures to help Member States
mobilize and co-operate in a qlobal struqqle aqainst druq traffickinq.
~Y

appreciation qoes to the Secretary-General for his unfailinq snPoort in

favour of an international campaiqn aqainst druq traffickinq.
The necessity of world-wide action aqainst druq traffickinq has for years been
a maior concern of the United Nations.

Its pioneerinq effort in formulatinq an

international druq abuse control strateqy and a five-year Proqramme of Action,

RH/7

A/S-17/PV.7
34-35
(Mr. Peerthum, Mauritius)

particularly throuqh the Commission on Narcotic Druqs ann its executive arm the
Division of Narcotic Druqs, has had considerable impact.

It alerted the

international community at a time when druq abuse and illicit traffickinq were
spreadinq their tentacles world-wide in alarminq prooortations, and it resulted in
the creation of two major international documents, the Comorehensive
Multidisciplinary Outline and the United Nations Convention of 1988.

The

Convention has now been siqned bv 89 countries, includinq mv own country,
Mauritius, and should come into force soon if Member States make it a point to
speed up the usual ratification procedures.

A/S-17/PV.7

BCT/ed

36

(Mr. Peerthum, Mauritius)
Those two documents are landmarks in the history of the fiqht aqainst druq
traffickinq.

They provide the international community with an indispensable leqal

instrument and political framework to combat an enemy whose qlobal orqanization and
sophisticated network are now able to threaten the security and inteqrity of
nations and cause reqional economic destabilization.

The two documents are the

fruits of lonq neqotiations carried out in a spirit of co-operation and consensus
and approved by a majority of States.

Our aim today is to build on those sound

foundations and open new fronts in the war aqainst the evil of druq traffickinq.
Even if our understandinq of the druq trade ann its economic implications makes
them appear today more friqhteninq than ever before, we must remain committed to
our qoals and qive ourselves the means to achieve them throuqh a clear plan of
action.
Many speakers before me have referred to the Secretary-General's comment that
druq traffickinq has surpassed in value the international trade in oil and is
second only to the arms trade.
At a time when the United Nations pursuit of peace appears to be vindicated by
the tides of history, let us remind ourselves that the international arms trade
continues unabated in SPite of all our denunciations - for, as the sayinq qoes,
"l'arqent est le nerf de la querre".
traffickers.

Money is also the life-blood of druq

Humanity may have survived wars and qrown accustomed to reqional

conflicts and extravaqant military budqets; it may have been reluctant or unable to
challenqe the military-industrical complex; but today it cannot afford to be
complacent about the narco-financial complex.
dominant world industry.

Druq traffickinq has become a

Mankind will not be qiven a second chance if the

transnational corporations of death are allowed to disreqard national boundaries
and penetrate every continent and destroy the fabric of our societies.

A/S-17/PV. 7
37

BCT/ed

(Mr. Peerthum, Mauritius)
The qrowinq financial power of international traffickers is indeed at the core
of the druq problem.

Their shadowy influence is already awesome, but so far has

received little attention at either the reqional or the qlobal level.

A recent

publ:cation of the United Nations observed that
"Property and money transactions, especially cash transfers, related to druq
traffickinq have increased tremendously.

The qrowinq use of complex corporate

structures and intricate business transactions involvinq banks, trust
companies, real-estate firms and other financial institutions have increased
the difficulty of subjectinq to forfeiture assets obtained as a result of
traffickinq in druqs.

Variations in bank, tax and investment leqislation

enable traffickers to identify loopholes in laws and to effect sufficient
chanqes in adaptinq launderinq schemes and techniques to hide their ill qotten
profits."
The erratic ebb and flow and the sheer volume of druq money have a
destabilizinq effect on the supply of money and on exchanqe markets by creatinq
unnatural currency surpluses.

By co-operatinq in or simply closinq their eyes to

fraudulent practices, banks and financial institutions may easily become hostaqes
cauqht in the web of traffickers.

Priority should therefore be qiven to provisions

of the 1988 Convention for developinq mechanisms that would prevent bankino systems
and other financial institutions from beinq used to process and launder
druq-related money, and would allow the revocation of confidentiality of bank
records in investiqation of druq traffickinq.

BCT/ed

A/S-17/PV.7
38

(Mr. Peerthum, Mauritius)
The Financial Action Task Force set up bv the Paris economic summit has ;ust
completed a study in which it recommends a series of 40 measures to destroy the
financial circuits utilized bv traffickers, includinq a revolutionary proposal
invitinq international banks to co-operate in the trackino-down of traffickers.
Its conclusions should be examined very closelv, especially durinq the forthcominq
April summit in London, and later at the G-7 summit in Houston.
Intelliqence-qatherinq and information-sharinq will also play a crucial role
in the years to come.

In this reqard we may even have some catchinq up to do in

information-manaqement to keep up with traffickers who are able to monitor
law-enforcement action with the latest technoloqy.

Success will dePend on our

Proqress in data-fusion technoloqy and our capacity to process raw data from a
variety of sources and use it to identify potential criminal activities.

The

diffusion of such information is of particular importance to small countries with
limited resources, which mioht overniqht become prey to druq traffickers seekinq to
diversify their trade.

The financial influx of narco-dollars mav thus, by its

novelty and maqnitude, have staqqerinq effects on a country's economv and stability.
To Prevent such danoers Mauritius recently introduced in its Offshore Bankinq
Act strict requlations aoainst monev-launderinq.

It also beqan closer co-operation

with the United Nations Division of Narcotic Druqs in Vienna to improve all aspects
of druq control and prevention, havinq enacted in 1986 new leqislation imposinq the
death penalty on druq traffickers.

Since then, anti-druq proorammes based on the

efforts and initial experience of Mauritian volunteers have been Praised for their
low costs, and were used as models for two courses, in 1987 and 1989, for trainers
in East Africa.

BCT/ed

A/S-17 /JN. 7
39-40

(Mr. Peerthum, Mauritius)
Human resources remain a priceless asset in the fiqht aqainst druqs, but
proqrammes for prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, however anbitious, will
not reduce druq traffickinq on a qlobal scale unless fundamental problems like
pov~:ty,

debt and fallinq commodity prices are addressed.

Measures for debt

relief, better prices for export commodities, and market quarantees have been
suqqested.

In considerinq those proposals, we should rise above POlitical and

economic differences.

For the lives and livelihood of millions in druq-consuminq

and druq-producinq reqions alike depend on a mutual trade-off between diverqinq
economic interests.

So too does the survival of future qenerations.

Mr. AJOOHIA (Suriname):

It qives mv deleqation qreat Pleasure to see

you, Sir, presidinq over this important special session.
The conveninq of the seventeenth special session is a demonstration and a
recoqnition of the importance the international community attaches to the druq
problem.

As previous speakers have said, the nature of druqs, both for individuals

and for societies, has reached such destructive, indeed mortal, proportions that
intensified international co-operation and ioint action aqainst the demand for,
production of and traffickinq in illicit druqs are unavoidable.

A/S-17/PJ. 7
41

EMS/9

(Mr. Ajodhia, Suriname)
During the past decade the world trade in illicit drugs has spread at a
frightening rate, and, as has been noted, may now have overtaken oil as the second
largest commodity in world trade,

M

xt only to arms.

There is no doubt that the

drug phenomenon has now assumed such proportions that it is beyond the capacity or
resources of any single country:
specific area of the world.

drua addiction is no longer confined to a

Drua cartels easily cross the boundaries of States,

for they do not recoanize frontiers so lonq as they are able

to

carry out their

criminal activities, thus destabilizing the economic and social structures of a
growinq number of countries.
In some countries, criminal syndicates thriving on drua trafficking proceeds
are openly confronting the authorities and imposing conditions on them, us ina any
means to prevail over the application of the law.

As we have seen, violence,

corruption, intimidation and deliberate attacks against public institutions have
been common weapons of the drug barons.

It goes without saying that there is a

very clear link between illicit trafficking and international terrorism, subversive
activities and organized crime.
Accordinq to a world survey on the extent and Patterns of drug abuse, this
scourge has spread to all social strata and age groups.

While the maioritv of

persons abusing drugs are male, the proportion of women abusing druas continues to
grow, and children and adolescents are often involved with drugs at a much earlier
aae than in past years.
At an early staqe our Organization reoognized the serious challenges of the
drug problem, and it has played an essential role in the negotiation of relevant
international agreements.

In this respect I refer to the International Conference

on Drug Abuse and Illicit Traffickinq, held in Vienna in 1987.

That Conference

EMS/9

A/S-17/PV. 7
42

(Mr. Aiodhia, Suriname)
adopted a political Declaration and a Conprehensive 1\olul ti disciplinary Outline
consistinq of a wide-ranqinq set of proposals aimed at dealinq with all aspects of
the druq problem.
In this regard, my delegation weloomed the adoption in 1988 of the Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Druqs and Psychotropic Substances, which is an
excellent example of multilateral co-operation.

The Government of Suriname has

already signed the Convention and steps are beinq taken which should lead to the
ratification of the 1988 Convention.
At this point I wish to inform the Assembly that only last week our National
Assembly approved the followinq conventions:

the Sinqle Convention on Narcotic

Drugs, the Protocol amendinq that Convention, and the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances.
I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the constructiwe and valuable work
carried out by the United Nations Division on Narcotic Drugs, the United Nations
Fund for Druq Abuse Control and the International Narcotics Control Board.

It is

the view of my delegation tM t the United Nations is one of the most appropriate
forums in which to address the fight aqainst druq abuse, and we therefore urqe that
co-ordination and co-operation with United Nations bodies such as the International
Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children• s Fund, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orqanization and the United Nations
Development Programme be intensified and increased.
We therefore fully support the proposal made durinq the forty-fourth session
of the General Assembly that the mandates of the United Nations anti-druqs units be
reaffirmed and expanded.

A/S-17 /PJ. 7

EMS/9

43

(Mr. Ajodhia, Suriname)
This special session has the important task of findinq a balanced approach
that takes into account both sides of the druq problem, namely measures to reduce
demand for illicit druqs and measures aqainst the cultivation, production,
processinq and traffickinq of narcotic druqs.

In addition to strinqent political

and leqal measures, educational proqrams should be desiqned to help those in
society who are most vulnerable to the danqers of druqs.

Therefore, we urqe that

comprehensive policies, proqrammes and strateqies be devised to prevent and reduce
the abuse of druqs.

If the demand for druqs could be reduced, then other

druq-rela ted problems such as criminality, money launderinq and the production of
certain chemicals could be eliminated.
The fiqht aqainst druqs cannot be fouqht in isolation.

Effective

international co-operation at the multilateral, reqional and bilateral levels is an
effective weapon t~combat the druq problem.
Althouqh the presence of druqs in Suriname dates back to the last century, it
could not in the past have been considered as a problem.

Today, however, the

problem has manifested itself as an acute, unwanted and tenacious scourqe within
Surinamese society.

One of the main measures to combat the druq problem was the

enaction of the Opium Act of 1955, which established as offences the cultivation of
the opium poppy, the coca bush and the hennep plant.

Under the Opium Act, the

import, export and transit of some druqs were prohibited, alonq with their
preParation, processinq, sale, delivery, supply and transport.
Our leqislation

could not, however, keep pace with developments in illicit

druq traffickinq, in particular when Suriname became involved as a transit port for
the international druq trade.

The Opium Act was amended twice.

In 1981 penalties

were increased to a maximum sentence of 12 years and/or a fine not exceedinq

EMS/9

A/S-17/PJ. 7
44-45

(Mr. Aiodhia, Suriname)
50,000 qu ilders.

A provis ioo was included by which a person could be placed under

a restriction order by the court and treated at the expense of the State.
the possession of marijuana seeds was also made punishable.

In 1988

In qeneral it can be

stated that our present leqislation has a repressive nature, emphasizinq the
detection and punishment of offenders and the medical counsell inq and tre tment of
druq addicts.
Havinq emphasized some aspects of our present leqislation, I have to state
that the Opium Act does not provide sufficient room for law-enforcement bodies to
perform their duties.

In this connection I am deliqhted to mention the

establishment of a commission early this year to revise the leqislation on narcotic
drugs.

The terms of reference of that commission are to studv and evaluate

existing legislation with reqard to the trade anti illicit use of narcotic druqs and
to make recommendations with a view to amendinq the statutory requlations and draft

the necessary requla tions.
The Government of Suriname is aware that it will take some time before our
drug legislation has been adjusted to present needs and developments and brouqht
into line with the reoommendations of the 1988 Convention aqainst Illicit Traffic
in Narcotic Druqs and Psychotropic Substances.
The problem of druq abuse is a cause of qrave concern for the community since
it not only affects public health but also entails social disruption and increased
criminality.

It is therefore a must that every Government take the necessary steps

to halt this danqer.

A/S-17/PV.7

RM/10

46

(Mr. Aiodhia, Suriname)
It was aqainst that backqround that in 1986 our Government established the
National Council on Druq Control, with the task of controllinq and preventinq the
illicit use of druqs in every possible wav.

The Council has drafted an ambitious

plan to tackle the druq problem in all its aspects, but, owinq to financial
constraints, it is obliqed to limit its activities.

Because of these financial

constraints it is not yet possible to oay adequate attention to rehabilitation.
As a consequence of the increase in druq-related crime in Suriname, a
Narcotics Division was established within the Police Corps of Suriname.

Althouqh

this Division is carryinq out its duties in a properly orqanized manner, we have to
take into consideration the different restraints it encounters in executinq its
functions.

In particular we may mention the fact that it is not properlv equipped

to function adequately.
Suriname attaches utmost imPortance to a proper functioninq of the Narcotics
Division, and all efforts will therefore be made to strenqthen that Division
throuqh traininq and expansion of personnel in charqe of druq control, the
introduction of undercover operations, since that is an inteqral part of anv
druq-enforcement unit, the purchase of professional equioment to control
druq-related crimes and the exchanqe, on a reqular basis, of information with the
countries of the Caribbean and South America and with the United States of America,
Canada and other friendly nations.
In this reqard we may, if needed, request financial and technical assistance
from relevant United Nations bodies for the purpose of improvinq our infrastructure
in the fiqht aqainst illicit traffickinq.
The Government of Suriname is steadily workinq on the national front towards
the fulfilment of the policy set forth in our President's statement on the
subject.

He said:

A/S-17/PV. 7

RM/10

47

(Mr. Aiodhia, Suriname)
"The increasinq criminality, particularly the vouth and druq-related
criminality, is of qrave concern to the Administration.

The policy of the

Government is thus aimed at the total eradication of the illicit traffic in
druqs and the battle with druq abuse.
"More than before, the investiqation and prosecution policy will be
directed to an effective suppression of those crimes.
"The Administration will make the preparations for that purpose and is
considerinq additional leqislation which will make the battle aqainst and the
prevention of those crimes more effective."
My Government reiterates its commitment to do everythinq possible to curb the
druq problem, both on the reqional and on the international levels.
There is already close co-operation with netqhbourinq countries, and
aqreements have been siqned with Brazil, Guyana and Venezuela.

Neqotiations are

takinq place with other friendly nations to conclude bilateral aqreements for the
prevention, curbinq and eradication of the illeqal production, consumption and
traffickinq of narcotic druqs and psychotropic substances.
We cherish the hope that the qoals and obiectives of the special session can
be achieved and that the action proqramme and political declaration will be adopted
by consensus.
Mr. STANISLAUS (Grenada):

My deleqation is deliqhted to see in the Chair

at this seventeenth soecial session of the General Assembly the distinquished son
of Niqeria who presided with amazinq diPlomatic skill and facility over the
forty-fourth session of the Assembly.

We extend hearty conqratulations and best

wishes to Major-General Garba, now a minister in Niqeria's presidential Cabinet.
Please allow me the liberty to refer to this most important conveninq of the
United Nations General Assembly as a "special" special session, called at a hiqh

A/S-17/PV. 7

RM/10

48

(Mr. Stanlislaus, Grenada)
political level to consider as a matter of urqency the question of international
co-operation aqainst the illicit production, supply, rlemand, traffickinq and
distribution of narcotic druqs and psychotropic substances.
Of the special sessions convened thus far since the foundinq of the United
Nations, this one, the seventeenth, deals with the most danoerous situation facinq
society and the international community, more danqerous today than nuclear
confrontation, a situation that is qnawinq away at the very fabric of family and
society with deleterious and devastatinq consequences qlobally.

The evil has

spread subtly, in qeometric proqression as it were, until today it has become a
qlobal problem callinq for a qlobal response.
session so special.

That is what makes this special

It is friqhteninq to contemplate the speed with which this

evil is becominq a culture, a way of life in civilized society.
The underlyinq cause for the rapid qrowth of the monster of the druq culture
is to be found in the inordinate profits derived from that nefarious trade.
In his 1989 report on the work of the Orqanization the Secretary-General
stated that:
"estimates suqqest that the monetary value of druq traffickino has recently
surpassed that of international trade in oil and is seconrl onlv to the arms
t r a de • "

( A/ 4 4/ 1, p. 2 3)

Fortune maqazine Places a trade taq of S500 billion a year on this illicit business.
For any trade or business to be profitable, the law of supply and demand
propounded by Adam Smith applies.

The evil of slavery flourished because of supply

and demand, and that qave rise to traffickinq and distribution in human misery.
The druq trade, which thrives equally on human misery, is supported essentially by
the two main pillars of supply and demand.

Traffickinq in druqs is modern-day

slavery, and here we are faced with the "chicken-eqq" syndrome, the perennial

RM/10

A/S-17/PV. 7
49-50

(Mr. Stanlislaus, Grenada)
polemics as to which comes first, which is more important to control:
demand?

supply or

In between, however, we have to tackle the traffickinq and distribution

coefficients.

It would seem, therefore, that this consuminq evil demands a

many-pronqed approach, rhetoric notwithstandinq.
In the pursuit of whatever qlobal strateqy appears riqht and reasonable, the
international community should bear in mind that as we travel the uncharted waters
of the druq culture we either swim toqether or witness our e::>cieties qo down, one
by one.
It is thus imperative that, after our deliberations here will have ended, a
comprehensive and workable political declaration and a proqramme of action evolve
to which all Members of the international community can subscribe with comfort and
confidence.
In the fiqht aqainst druqs an inventory must be taken of what the
international community's arsenal contains, in addition to qoodwill.

A/S-17/PV.7
51

AE/sm

(Mr. Stanislaus, Grenadal
In this connection, international qoodwill received a shot in the arm when, on
29 September last, President Barco of Colombia addressed the United Nations General
Assembly.

In a substantive, eloquent and passionate statement, he reaffirmed the

qlobal danqer of the druq culture and appealed for a special session - this special
session.

On 1 November 1989 the General Assembly, by resolution 44/16, approved,

and set down terms of reference for, a special session, out of which should come
for adoption a political declaration and a qlobal proqramme of action.

The

anti-druq declaration siqned last week in Cartaqena by the Presidents of Bolivia,
Colombia, Peru and the United States of America should further enhance this
qoodwill.
To effectuate the qlobal proqramme of action that the General Assembly, at
this special session, is mandated

to

produce, the United Nations must have in Place

the necessary leqal instruments or tools, and these must be subscribed to and
ratified by national leqislatures and other competent bodies.

A major leqal tool

with which to fiqht the scourqe of qlobal traffickinq in drUQs is the United
Nations Convention aqainst Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Druqs and Psychotropic
Substances, which was adopted in Vienna on 19 September 1988.

As of

15 January 1990 the Convention had been siqned by 89 States and ratified by four.
To enter into force, it must be ratified by 24 States.

The Convention Provides,

amonq other thinqs, for the extradition of druq traffickers, the tracinq and
freezinq of assets derived from the illicit druq trade, and the elimination of bank
secrecy in druq investiqations- a tool aqainst launderinq.

To put teeth-

metaphorically speakinq - into the Convention, two thinqs are necessary:

first,

its entrv into force, with the necessary 24 ratifications; secondly, the
streamlininq of countries' domestic laws to correspond with the provisions of the
Convention - and several countries have already done so.

AE/sm

A/S-17/PV.7
52

(Mr. Stanislaus, Grenada)
Other tools in the United Nations arsenal in the fiqht aqainst illicit
traffickinq in druqs are bodies such as the Commission on Narcotic Druqs, whose
recommendations are an inteqral part of this special session aimed at enhancinq the
role of the United Nations in the fiqht aqainst illicit druqs; the United Nations
Fund for Druq Abuse Control

(UN~C),

whose efforts are concentrated on help for

developinq countries faced with the illicit cultivation, traffickinq or abuse of
narcotic druqs, with the focus on all asoects of the druq problem, includinq crop
substitution, rural development, law enforcement, public education, leqislative and
institutional reform - a veritable master plan; the Commission on Narcotic Druqs,
which is the main Policy body of the United Nations system in matters of
international druq control; the Division of Narcotic Druqs, which serves as the
secretariat and executive arm of the Commission; and the International Narcotics
Control Board, whose function is to limit cultivation, production and manufacture,
so that the quantity available is just adequate for medical and scientific
purposes.

Workinq closely with the Commission are specialized aqencies and bodies,

such as the World Health Orqanization, the International Criminal Police
Orqanization (Interpol) and the International Labour Orqanisation.
My deleqation respectfully submits that there is hardly any need for new
instruments, such as treaties, protocols or conventions, or for new United Nations
international-control bodies, to waqe the war aqainst druqs.

Streamlininq what

already exists, bv makinq structural chanqes- inteqration, co-ordination and
consolidation - could increase the effectiveness of the role of the United Nations
in the fiqht aqainst this social evil.

Very often, what is needed is not new

thinqs but the will to make old thinqs work.
Havinq touched upon the broad outline of the matter under consideration, my
deleqation would like to refer to the druq situation in the Commonwealth Caribbean

A/S-17/PV.7

AE/sm

53
(~r.

subreqion.

Stanislaus, Grenada)

This is hardlv an area of excessive druq supply or demand.

However,

because of their qeoqraphical location and the wide spread of the islands, manv of
them are used bv traffickers as transit and trans-shioment points.

This, toqether

with the fact that the islands are stunninq tourist attractions, creates an
opportunity for visitors to brinq in and use illicit druqs.

Unsuspectinq members

of the population are tempted to try this new-found elixir.

This creates the vice

of druq abuse, which is a matter of social, moral, economic and public-health
concern.
Our leaders are keenly aware of the problem, so druq abuse is olaced hiqh on
the aqenda at CARICOM ministerial meetinqs.

At the meetinq, in mv countrv, last

July of Commonwealth Caribbean Heads, the declaration of Grand Anse was adoPted.
This contained two proposals which it is hoped will be adopted by the international
community.

The first, which was put forward bv the Prime Minister of Trinidad and

Tobaqo, is that an international criminal court, with jurisdiction in respect of
certain cateqories of offences, should be established.

The second, which was put

forward by the Prime Minister of Jamaica, consists of broad initiatives, with
respect to investiqation and interdiction, to control druq traffickinq throuqh the
subreqion, which is beinq used as a trans-shipment centre.
The problem of druqs in Grenada is a small part of the qlobal picture.
Nevertheless, it is of sufficient concern to my Government to warrant puttinq early
deterrent measures into place.

Traditional institutions, such as home, school,

church- the first line of defence in combatinq this social evil, particularly
amonq younq People - are sensitized to the danqer throuqh public education
campaiqns to discouraqe experimentation with druqs.
pamphlets are widely distributed.

Books, videos, films and

Community-level traininq and Government bodies,

such as police and customs and public-health authorities, are necessary aids in the

AE/sm

A/S-17/PV.7
54

(Mr. Stanislaus, Grenada)
fiaht.

In addition, the oowers of the court and the rehabilitation of offenders

play a sianificant role in the struaale.
The illicit cultivation of druqs cannot, and should not, be condoned.
Nevertheless, the socio-economic dimension of the problem involves poor farmers who
qrow the coca leaves, the opium POPPY and the marijuana plant to eke out a bare
existence.

These farmers are pawns in this dirty aame.

They are not the

manufacturers, the distributors, the traffickers in the trade.
booty from the loathsome enterprise is neqliaible.

Their share of the

The link in the chain can be

broken bv croo substitution, and that is an area in which the United Nations can
olav a healthv role.
At this soecial session the international community has analysed the
druq-abuse phenomenon.

Let us now svnthesize our thinkinq to do battle with this

social malaise in all its forms and manifestations, at the national, reaional,
interreaional and qlobal levels.
fouaht.

It is a war that can be won and should be

However, if this is to be accomplished, there must be the necessary

political will and a commensurate level of financina by all Member States,
accordina to their abilitv to oay.
It is the hope of my deleaation that the political declaration and the qlobal
proaramme of action to be adopted at the end of this soecial session will reflect
adequately the urqency of the situation.

Otherwise the cancer of druq abuse will

continue to eat into the decade of the 1990s, and history will record that, qiven
the opportunity to help mankind to overcome a serious social and physical
affliction, we were simolv qivers of the word, not doers of the word.
The international oommunitv should be motivated to action locked as it is in a
deadly fiaht aqainst the unholy trinity of druqs, arms and terrorism - the last two
beina spin-offs from the first.

We imolore nations of aoodwill to brina a

non-political dimension to this universal effort.

AE/sm

A/S-17/PV.?
55

The PRESIDENT:

The next speaker will be the representative of Albania.

Immediatelv after his statement we shall take up the report of the Credentials
Committee and thereafter continue with the qeneral debate.
I should like to say how qrateful we are to representatives for their kind
co-operation.

Statements are qettinq shorter and, I believe, more obiective.

~/12

A/S-17/PV.?
56
~r. PI~

(Albania):

First of all, Sir, allow me on behalf of the

Albanian deleaation to conqratulate you on vour election as President of the
General Assembly at this sPecial session and on your very successful auidance of
our business.
It has become evident by now that the production, consumption and traffickina
of druqs and psychotropic substances have turned into a social plaaue and an acute
economic and political problem afflictina both developed and developina countries.
Druq traffickina, in particular, is an activity associated openly with
international terrorism, and the evermore increasina dimensions it is assuminq have
now become of leqitimate concern to the entire international community.

As the

Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, pointed 0ut in his annual report
submitted to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session:
"Althouah efforts to combat this scourae have intensified in recent years,
estimates suqqest that the monetarv value of drua traffickinq has recently
surpassed that of international trade in oil and is second only to the arms
trade ••• ". (A/44/1, o. 23)
Moreover, the extensive use and consumotion of druqs, coupled with the druq
trade and traffickinq, inflict not only deaeneration and ohysical and moral damaqe
on the peoole, the younaer aeneration primarily but also result in catastrophic
increases in crime as well as in other qrave economic and social consequences.

The

problem is attainina ever-increasinq orooortions endanaerina the very oolitical and
economic stability of certain States.

This situation has justifiably heiqhtened

world-wide concern and not only brouaht to the surface the indispensability of
intensifyinq the struaale aqainst these neaative phenomena on a national level but
also of co-ordinatina efforts and strenathenina co-ooeration on a reaional and
international basis.

Proof of this arowina concern is the unanimous decision of

the General Assemblv at its fortv-fourth session to convene this soecial session

JVM/12

A/S-17/PV.7
57
(Mr. Pitarka, Albania)

devoted to international co-operation aqainst the illicit production, supply,
demand, traffickinq and distribution of narcotic druas and psychotropic substances.
The People's Socialist Republic of Albania shares the concern over the
alarminq Problems created by the use of and traffic in druas in most of the
countries in the world, and welcomes the sincere efforts of the international
communitv to ioin forces and co-ordinate actions in the fiaht aaainst this social
scourae in full compliance with the Principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law.

Our country, despite the fact that druas and other illicit

substances are not used and traffic in such substances has never been allowed in
its territory, is party to several international Conventions on druas and has
condemned and continues to condemn the illicit traffickina of these substances as
an activity that criminally undermines human life and dianity and endanaers even
the economic~ social and political stability of various countries.
Prompted by the sincere desire to make its contribution to the struaqle
aqainst drua traffickinq, and aware of the danaers such traffickina could brinq
about for the peoples of the Balkans, Albania has consistently considered as useful
the reqional co-operation of the Balkan countries in the war aqainst druas.

It has

participated in a series of conferences, Balkan or European, held on these issues.
While we support the leqitimate efforts of the international community and the
co-ordinatinq activity of the United Nations and its bodies in the struqale aqainst
these Phenomena, we stand aqainst everv act which, under the pretext of the fiaht
aaainst production and traffickina of druas, is in fact aimed aaainst the freedom
and independence of Peoples, aaainst their democratic riahts and aspirations.

The

Albanian deleqation therefore upholds the view that under no circumstances at all
should the druq war be allowed to be used for the purpose of attainina certain
Political aoals or for interferinq in the internal affairs of other countries, thus

J~/12

A/S-17/PV. 7
58

(Mr. Pitarka, Albania)
infrinoinq on their sovereianty and territorial intearitv, much less should it be
allowed to be used to iustify moves of a military nature or acts of aqqression.
We are of the opinion that the roots of the Phenomena of the production,
consumption and traffickinq of druqs and their qrave consequences in the economic,
social and political life of the countries afflicted by them lie primarily in the
very nature of the social and political system.

It is known that druq consumption

in different countries involves the various strata of the oopulation, from the
upper classes down to the poorest ones.

If there is a "fashionable" use of druqs

amono the former, the latter seeks "consolation" in druq s.

Even so, it would not

be riaht for the expenses of the war aqainst druas to be paid by the weak.
In Albania the policy of social and economic development, which has ensured
social equality for everyone to live with dianity on his honest work, the concern
of the entire society for a life with humane motives and ideas, suPported bv
necessary iudicial and administrative measures, has barred the wav to the incidence
and spreadinq of the phenomenon of the use and traffickina of druas.
Albani~n

society has dedicated special care to the education of the younqer

aeneration, to which all roads have been opened uP and all possibilities have heen
created for all-round cultural, Physical and sPiritual development.

Of Primordial

importance has been the continuous preventive education, which aims at alertina all
strata of the population to the damaaes caused by druqs so that the whole society
and the family, too, oppose druqs and stand aqainst them like a stronq barrier.
Drua addiction is not now and has never before been an issue of concern to
us.

We have preserved and will continue to preserve this sound tradition so that

this social plaque does not hit our country.
of our State and our entire society.

To this end there is total commitment

The Albanian State bans throuqh leqal

A/S-17/PV.?
59-60

JVM/12

(Mr. Pitarka, Albanial
provisions the cultivation of narcotic plants and does not allow druqs to be
trans-shipped to other countries throuqh its territory.

Our laws provide severe

punishment for those who miqht produce, distribute or use druqs.

Thus, althouqh

there is no druq problem in our country, in view of the proportions that the druq
problem, esoecially druq traffickinq, has assumed in the world, special importance
is attached to strict observance of the relevant leqislation, includino equallv
severe measures and reoulations desioned to bar the way to the production, use and
traffic of druos.
Uo to now, in Albania there has been no occurrence of problems relatinq to the
abusive use of medications fallino under the cateoory of druqs.

Special leoal

provisions requlate their circulation, preventinq their illicit use, possession and
sale.

On the other hand, continuous care is shown so that the media, health

institutions and educational and cultural bodies educate and inform the population,
esoecially the younqer qeneration, by constantly pointino out the danqers posed by
the use of druqs to the human body and personality and to the whole of society.
~side from the above-mentioned measures, the People's Socialist Republic of Albania

has adopted a series of other technical and orqanizational rules to assist in close
scrutiny at likely crossinq points in order to prevent the penetration and traffic
of psychotropic substances throuqh Albanian territory to other countries.

JB/13

A/S-17/PV.7
61
(~r.

Pitarka, Albania)

In conclusion, the Albanian deleqation wishes to reiterate that it fullv
comprehends the lonq-held preoccuPation expressed bv the international communitv
and our Orqanization over the druqs phenomenon and the illicit traffic in druqs that horrendous business second only to the arms trade.

In its view, this SPecial

session should, amonq other thinqs, name the real causes of the druq Phenomenon, of
the qrowth of its traffic and consumotion.

By identifyinq the real causes of the

problem and its consequences and by adootinq the most effective measures to combat
it, we can onlv hope that the road to a solution will be found and that mankind
will be saved from this serious threat and the consequences that its future
development would entail.
AGENDA ITEM 3 (continued)
CREDENTIALS OF REPRESENTATIVES TO THE SEVENTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY:
(b)

REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (A/g-17/lOt
The PRESIDENT:

I invite members to turn their attention to the draft

resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee in paraqraph 21 of its report
(A/S-17/10).
I shall now call on those deleqations wishinq to soeak in e~planation of vote
before the votinq on the recommendation of the Credentials Committee.

May I remind

deleqations that, in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by deleqations from their
seats.

JS/13

A/S-17/PV.7
62

Mr. AL-ALFI (Democratic Yemen)

(interpretation from Arabic):

As Chairman

of the Group of Arab States for February 1990, and on behalf of the followinq
member countries - Alqeria, Bahrain, Democratic Yemen, Diibouti, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab
Emirates and the Yemen Arab Reoublic - and on behalf of Palestine, I should like to
out on record our obiections to the credentials of the deleqation of Israel to the
seventeenth soecial session of the General Assemblv.
At the outset, I should like to raise the political and leqal considerations
concerninq our obiections to the credentials of the deleqation of Israel.

Israel

has been a Member of the United Nations for more than four decades, durinq which
time Israel has oroven that it is not a peace-lovinq countrv, in contravention of
the Provisions of the Charter, Particularly Article 4, which calls for acceptance
of the obliqations contained in the Charter, which Israel has not carried out.

It

has also completely disreqarded General Assembly and SecuritY Council resolutions.
Here I should like to refer to General Assembly resolution ES-9/1 of
5 February 1982, which declares that Israel's record and actions confirm that it is
not a oeace-lovinq Member State ann that it has not carrien out its obliqations
under the Charter.
Hence, we should like to put on record our reservations on the credentials of
the deleqation of Israel to the seventeenth special session of the General
Assembly.

Our obiections are based on the followinq:

First, Israel has not imPlemented Security Council resolutions on the question
of Palestine, on the situation in the ~iddle East, on Lebanon, and on other
relevant issues, thereby contraveninq Article 25 of the Charter.

JB/13

A/S-17/PV. 7
63

(Mr. Al-Alfi, Democratic Yemen)
Second, Israel has not implemented General Assembly resolutions on the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle East, which call for the
restoration of the inalienable riqhts of the Palestinian people, includinq the
riqh~

to return, the riqht to self-determination, and the riqht to establish an

independent Palestinian State on the land of Palestine.

Those resolutions also

call for an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, in accordance with
the principle of the non-acquisition of land bv force and the need to secure
Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since 1967, includinq
Jerusalem and the Syrian Arab Golan Heiqhts.
Third, Israel has not imPlemented General Assemblv resolutions on other
questions relevant to the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East.
Fourth, Israel has violated the human riqhts of the Palestinian peoPle in all
occupied Arab territories and in Jerusalem.

I refer in particular to its violation

of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 19 Auqust 1947 and the escalatinq Israeli
OPPression of the Arab and Palestinian population in the occupied territories,
includinq the forced repatriation of the Arab population from those territories
since the beqinninq of the intifadah aqainst the Israeli occuPation.
Fifth, Israel has continued its annexation of occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories, includinq Jerusalem and the Arab Golan Heiqhts, thereby violatinq
the Charter of the United Nations and rules and norms of international law.
Sixth, Israel continues to waqe aqqression aqainst Arab countries.
Seventh, Israel continues to co-operate with the racist reqime of South
Africa, particularly in the nuclear and economic fields.

A/S-17/PV. 7
64-65

JB/13

Eiqhth, the credentials of the deleqation of Israel have been issued from the
occuoied citv of Jerusalem, which is a violation of Security Council resolution
478 (1980), and other relevant General Assemblv resolutions, oarticularlv
resolution 35/169 E of 15 December 1980.
Mr. QURESHI (Pakistan):

In pursuit of the decision taken by the

Orqanization of the Islamic Conference, and the realities of the situation in
Afqhanistan, Pakistan continues to adhere to its policy of withholdinq recoqnition
of the reqime in Kabul, which does not enjoy the suooort of the Afqhanistan
people.
In reqard to the reoort of the Credentials Committee contained in document
A/S-17/10 of 21 Februarv 1990, which is before the General Assembly, my deleqation
wishes to out on record its formal reservation to the credentials of the deleqation
reoresentinq Afqhanistan at the seventeenth soecial session of the United Nations
General Assemblv.
Mr. ZAMORA (Cuba)

Cinteroretation from Soanishl:

Mv deleqation wishes to

put on record that the Government of the Republic of Cuba does not recoqnize the
so-called Government of the Republic of Panama nor its reoresentative.

These were

chosen bv the invadinq troops of the United States of America, which imoosed a
satellite Government.

The Panamanian oeoole was unable to exercise its riqht to a

free choice, without foreiqn interference.

Thus, the credentials of the

representative of Panama are not leqitimate, nor do they represent the interests of
the Panamanian oeoole.
in this respect.

We therefore wish clearly to out on record our reservations

RM/14

A/S-17/PV. 7
66

The ~RESIDENT:

The Assembly will now take action on the recommendation

of the Credentials Committee contained in paraoraph 21 of its report (A/S-17/10).
In the Credentials Committee the draft resolution was adopted without a vote.

May

I take it that the General Assembly wishes to oroceed in the same manner?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-7/1).
The PRESIDENT:

The representative of Afqhanistan has asked to make a

statement in exercise of the riqht of reply, and I now call uoon him.
Mr.

MOH~~~

(Afqhanistan):

My deleqation cateqorically rejects all of

the alleqations of the representative of Pakistan.

We believe Pakistan's unreal

attitude towards the Reoublic of Afohanistan - which is not a new one - to be
q roundless.
The_ PRESIDENT:

We have thus concluded the consideration of aqenda item 3.
AGENDA ITEM 8 (continued)

GENERAL DEBATE
Mr. PAOLILLO (Uruouay)

(interpretation from Spanish):

This special

session of the General Assembly is testinq the international community's capacity
to come tooether to take effective action
activities.

to

put an end to druq-related illicit

We cannot afford to fail this crucial test.

It is an extremely difficult task for several reasons.

First, we are facino a

formidable, powerful and ubiquitous enemy, one that seduces, corrupts, enslaves and
kills, swallowinq up vast economic resources in the process.

Secondlv, druo

traffickino is an extraordinarily complex phenomenon because of its orioins, its
manifestations and its consequences.

It spreads easily and it is difficult, if not

impossible, to fioht it in isolation or without co-ordination.*

*

Mr. Hurst (Antiqua and Barbuda), Vice-President, took the Chair.

A/S-17/Pil. 7
67

RM/14

Thirdly, druo traffickino affects States in different ways, just as the nature
and amount of resources available to combat it differ.

Hence the priorities and

capabilities of each countrv differ, somethinq which adds to the existino
difficulties in arrivinq at qlobal and homoqeneous co-operation.
Lastly, our task is compounded by the fact that, while we must continue to
waoe the war aqainst druq traffickinq, we must also safequard the principles of
sovereiqnty, territorial inteority and non-intervention, on which international
coexistence is based, and maintain certain vital objectives

the economic

well-beinq of our peoples and the stability of the denocratic system.
Our future decisions on the manner in which the plan of act ion we will adopt
at the soecial session will be implemented must take all those factors into
account.
In the first instance, international co-operation must be qlobal in its
objectives.

The war aqainst druq traffickinq will not be won unless it attacks all

of the causes and manifestations at once.

We cannot reasonably expect producer

countries to root out the illicit production of druqs if consumer countries do not
at the same time attempt to reduce or eliminate consumption, if illicit transit is
not halted and if the use of precursor chemical products is not controlled.
Fortunately, the principle of shared responsibility has made strides and is
universally recoqnized todav, and we can therefore avoid the pitfall of
inconclusive, Manichean debates.

The recent Cartaoena Declaration is a historic

example of that constructive and praqmatic spirit.
Secondly, international co-operation must be qlobal in scope.

It must be an

element in the efforts taken bv all States, since all States are real or potential
victims of the harmful effects of the illicit production and consumption of druqs.
The pervasive maonitude of the scourqe demands a universal response.

The fact that

R~/14

A/S-17 /PV. 7
68

(Mr. Paolillo, Uruquay)
159 countries have qathered here to pool their efforts towards a common qoal is a
reaffirmation of the need to find universally aareed solutions to a problem that
concerns us all.
Thirdly, our future actions must be based on a just sharina of
resPonsibilities and tasks, which must follow the pattern in which drua traffickinq
has affected each country and match the resources available in each.

The plan of

action must be implemented in such a way that it does not impose upon States tasks
or responsibilities that exceed their caPabilities and so that it does not create
imbalances amonq them that would make the victory over druq traffickinq
unattainable.
We must not overlook the close relationshiP that exists between the problems
of underdevelopment and the spread of the production of illicit druqs.

Thousands

of people in developinq countries are takinq the profitable drua-traffickinq route,
forced by poverty, unemployment and the lack of alternative forms of subsistence.
If we are to attack druq traffickina at its roots, we must therefore assist
developinq countries to overcome their economic problems.
In this connection, developed countries should play a special role.

Not only

are thev better placed to contribute the financial and technoloaical resources
needed in the fiqht aaainst the illicit traffic in and production of druas; they
can also adopt such measures as, for examPle, makina their markets accessible to
the products of developina countries, thereby allowina for crop substitution and
the revitalization of the latters' economies.

This special responsibility of the

developed countries is doubly justified by the fact that it is, after all, in the
larqe urban centres of the industrialized world that most of the demand for druqs
is qenerated, forqina the first link in the chain of that perverse industry.

A/S-17/PV.?

RM/14

69
(~r.

Paolillo, Uruauav)

We must not be discouraqed bv the maqnitude of the task before us.
startinq from square one.

We are not

The international communitv alreadv has precise

knowledqe of the danqers inherent in the problem's manv and insidious
manifestations and of its social, economic and political consequences.
means we must employ and the resources we require.

We know the

Furthermore, we have

institutional mechanisms that have alreadv been proved effective- the competent
bodies of the United Nations with headquarters at Vienna, which have vielded
maximum benefits within the limits of their budaetarv constraints.
In addition, there are several international treaties that provide a leqal
framework that, while incomplete, creates an appropriate ooint of departure for
future efforts.

Lastlv, and most importantlv, we have the firm resolve of States

to destrov the scourae which is undermininq the health of their Peoples and the
stabilitv of their institutions.

That resolve, admirably expressed in manv acts of

personal and collective couraqe - such as those taken bv the authorities and the
people of Colombia - enables us to have confidence that victorv is not too far awav.
Fortunately, Uruquay has not been subiected to the harsh trials from which
Colombia and other fraternal countries have suffered.

In Uruauav there is no

illicit druq production, but incipient consumption and traffic do exist, and the
trend is upward.

In addition, we are forced to assume that, qiven the difficulties

they are experiencinq in the traditional traffickinq channels, dealers could shift
their operations to our country's territorv.

Uruquav therefore attaches qreat

importance to the problem and has adoPted a number of measures to deal with it.
Since the creation in 1988 of the National Board on Prevention and Punishment
of Illicit Drua Traffic and Drua Abuse the fiqht aqainst druas in our countrv has
been takinq Place in a Planned and co-ordinated manner.

The National Board, which

is an interministerial bodv at the hiqhest level, has been entrusted with the task

RM/14

A/S-17/PV.7
70
(Mr. Paolillo, Uruquayl

of formulatinq policy in the matter and of assessinq and monitorinq its
implementation.

The Board has Prepared studies and reoorts; it has oromoted

international, reqional and subreqional co-operation; and it has adopted manv
measures in the areas of security, preventive education, assistance and
rehabilitation and international co-operation, all to be implemented by the
appropriate bodies.

A/S-17/PV. 7

RM/2

71

With reqard to druq-related financial flows, Uruquay knows that, because of
the nature of its bankina system that system can be used bv druq traffickers to
launder money obtained throuqh their illicit operations.

The Uruauayan bankina

system is based on the principle of secrecy, which protects operations, but that
principle is not absolute.

Current leqislation provides that in certain

circumstances the judiciary can have access to bankinq information under a court
order.

That procedure can be used to carry out judicial investiqations on the

launderinq of dollars, when based on well-founded accusations.

In that way, we

balance the need to retain the essence of our bankina system - which is a basic
factor in our economy - and the need to enable the judiciary to do its job and
Prevent the system from beinq used for criminal ends.

Additional measures to

improve the leqal system in this area are now beina considered.
We are certain that thanks to the expert leadershiP of Ambassador Garba and
the valuable contribution of Ambassador Peter Hohenfellner, as Chairman of the
Preparatory Committee, to our work, this session will be successful and will in the
future be viewed as the start of the final chapter in the history of our fiqht
aqainst the druq trade.
Mr. AL-MASRI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic):

I am

pleased that Ambassador Garba is presidinq over the work of this important soecial
session.

We are impressed bv the wisdom and skill with which he has been quidinq

the work of the forty-fourth session, which has already made qreat historic
achievements; this makes us hOPeful that the special session too will achieve
success.

I conqratulate him.

The conveninq of this special session is a clear reflection of the feelinas of
the international community and its areat concern about the problem of the
production and traffickinq of druqs and drua addiction, and about the arowth of
that problem internationally and nationallY.

EMS/15

A/S-17/PV. 7
72

(Mr. Al-Masri, Syrian
Arab RePublic)

--------

Thus it has beoun to pose a threat not only to the structure and continued
existence of society but to international peace and security, for the oanqs of druo
traffickers have become a powerful armed force that is able to undermine the
security of States and destabilize international relations.

For that reason the

international community must promote the fioht aoainst this Pernicious phenomenon
with a view to eradicatina it.

That aoal cannot be attained without effective

measures at the national and international levels.
The responsibility to eradicate the problem is a common responsibility of all
States.

The United Nations should play a central role in leadinq and co-ordinatinq

efforts in this sPhere, for it is the proper international forum to pool the
efforts of all States in combatina the problem while safeauardinq the sovereiqnty
and independence of all States.
The fiqht aaainst illicit narcotics must be both national and international.
On the national level, all States - Producer, consumer and transit States alike should adopt strict measures

to

combat the production, transit .omd consumption of

druqs on their soil.
In Syria, the competent authorities take active steps to prevent druqs from
beinq smuqqled into our countrv.

They also work constantlY to formulate deterrent

and Preventive measures and to bolster Syria's druq-control machinery, stationina
units alona our borders.
into Syria.
1989:

Police doqs are used to prevent druqs from beina smuqqled

Those intensive measures resulted in the followina drua seizures in

a one-ton shipment of hashish was seized and the smuqqlers arrested;

684 kiloqrammes of hashish was seized and the smuaalers arrested;
18.105 kiloqrammes of heroin was seized and the smuqolers arrested; 463 qrammes of
cocaine was seized and the offenders arrested; 361,773 tablets of Keptaqon were

EMS/15

A/S-17/PV. 7
73-75
(Mr. Al-Mas~i, Syri~~
Arab Republic)

seized and the offenders arrested; thanks to co-operation with Arab and other
countries, more than six tons of hashish were seized and the smuqqlers arrested.
Under a Prime Ministerial Decree, a national committee has been established to
combat the use of druqs and psychotrOPic substances.

The committee includes

representatives of the Ministries of Justice, Health, the Interior, Labour and
Public Orqanizations, and it is chaired by the Minister of the Interior.

In a

series of meetinqs, the committee adopted several recommendations on public health
and education, which are beinq imPlemented.

They call for stress on the

educational, health and criminal asoects of the druq problem.
In 1960 a Presidential Decree was issued, and was adopted as Law
No. 182 (1960); it is still in force, and relates to the fiqht aqainst druqs and
the requlation of the use of and traffic in druqs.

The law provides for sentences

of hard labour for life and heavv fines for those who export, import, produce or
manufacture any illicit narcotic druq.

It also provides for hard labour for life

or a shorter period and substantial fines for those who acquire, possess, purchase,
sell, deliver, transfer or offer for use narcotics, and for those who trade in
narcotics, with exceptions set out in the law.

RM/16

A/S-17/PV. 7
76

In addition, similar penalties are fixed for anyone who cultivates croPs that
miqht at any staae be used for the production of druas for trade in any form
contrary to the Provisions of the law.

That same law also provides the death

penalty for anYone who deliberately kills any druq law-enforcement aaent in the
performance of his duty.
The role of the United Nations on the international level is one of
co-ordinatinq international and national efforts aqainst druas within the context
of qlobal endeavours to eradicate the drua scourae.

Syria has consistently worked

to enhance international efforts throuah its particiPation in international
conferences and seminars of experts in the field dealina with fiahtina druas.
Syria has also concluded bilateral aareements and has acceded to several reaional
and international instruments.

We also work closely with competent bodies enaaaed

in the fiaht aqainst druas in Arab and foreian countries.

We exchanae data to

assist the international anti-drua camPaian to Put an end to this serious threat.
Syria has activelv Participated with fraternal Arab countries in develoPina a
standard Arab law aaainst druqs and in drawinq up the Arab strateaY aaainst the
illicit use of druas and psvchotroPic substances that was adopted bv Arab ~inisters
of the Interior in 1986.
All peoples of the world now look to this special session of the General
Assembly with areat expectations and in the hiah hope that it will make a
siqnificant contribution to savinq present and future aenerations from the evils of
illicit druqs, with their devastatina consequences for all communities and for the
civilization of all of mankind.
Mr._~£~~~~RG~~~~

(El Salvador)

(interpretation from Spanish):

On behalf

of the Government of El Salvador, and on my own behalf, I should like to
conaratulate the President on his unanimous election to auide the General Assembly

R~/16

A/S-17/PV. 7

at its seventeenth special session.

We trust that under his quidance we will

77

achieve our obiectives in the fiqht aqainst druqs.
We should also like to reiterate our support for the important initiative
introduced by the President of Colombia at the General Assembly's forty-fourth
session to hold this important special session.

We extend our thanks to the

Secretary-General who, in consultation with the relevant United Nations bodies, has
Proposed a plan of action to facilitate and promote the adoption of decisions to
implement measures and actions in the war aqainst druqs.
At this time, as we near the end of our deliberations, we can sav that
everythinq that can be said on the subiect has been said.

Precedinq speakers have

addressed the question with eloquence, Praqmatism and realism and have made
proposals containinq recommendations and measures of unquestionable value that
warrant our support.

However, since the subiect of druqs is a comPlex and serious

one, one that knows no frontiers and that affects us all in different ways and to
varyinq deqrees, it is only logical that each country should want to express its
own Particular views on the matter and to make its own contribution, with
conviction and enthusiasm, to the search for ways to alleviate it and eventuallv
eradicate it.
So serious have the production, supply, demand, traffickinq in and illicit
distribution of druqs and psychotroPic substances become that they now constitute a
threat to national societies owinq to their neqative effects on our institutions,
on the political and economic stability of States and on the unity of the familv,
particularly with reqard to children and younq People.

That is demonstrated bv the

interest of a qreat many of the Members of the Orqanization takinq part in the
special session in an effort to strenqthen international co-operation and to adopt
and implement practical measures to combat the common enemv, one that is further

R'i/16

A/S-17/PV.7
78

____ __ _

(r.tr.
Hill-Arquello, El Salvador)
-----,

aqqravatinq the already difficult economic, so~ial and humanitarian problems that
exist, particularly in developinq countries.

The traqic and deplorable events in

Colombia are an example of the danqers of this Persistent evil- and we must at the
same time express our admiration to that Government for its firm and resolute
struqqle aqainst nruq traffi.ckinq.
The druq Problem cannot be viewed in isolation from the internal Problems of
countries nor solely from the standpoint of producers and consumers; it must be
viewed in a broader and more comPrehensive persoective, both national and
international, one that includes social, economic, cultural and political factors
and takes into account the moral values and precepts that qovern mankind.
My

Government considers that, notwi thstandinq the fact that everv State is

responsible for adoptinq and implementinq machinery and measures to combat druqs,
there is universal recoqnition that, on the one hand, the size, nature and scoPe of
the Problem transcend the individual capacities of manv countries, especially
poorer countries with limited economic, technoloqical and financial resources,
and, on the other hand, that there is a need to act in concert and in close
co-operation amonq all the members of the international communitv.
We understand the hiqh priori.tv of the struaqle aaainst the Production of and
illicit traffickina in druqs in the maior Producer and consumer countries, but
there is also a need for appropriate attention to be paid, in countries where the
Problem has not vet assumed alarmina proportions, to avoidinq a deterioration in
the situation, which could have repercussions on fraqile international stability.
In that connection we believe that as the 1988 United Nations Convention
aqainst Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Druqs and Psychotropic Substances enters into
force we will find ourselves in possession of an effective universal instrument
that will contribute to alleviatinq the Pressures and threats that confront States

A/S-17/PV. 7
79-80

RM./16

todav throuah its deterrent and corrective provisions desiqned to rein in those who
are orofitina from the trade in illicit druqs.
The advances in international co-operation in the struqale aaainst this
scourae of mankind are encouraqinq, and the special session affords us a historic
opportunity to strenathen and consolidate our joint efforts to achieve a better and
more effective co-operation, which, as many soeakers have noted, is necessarv if we
are to work within the leqal framework of international co-operation to erase
frontiers in dealinq with our common enemv.

That would be a manifestation of the

political will, responsibility and determination of our Governments and of everv
sinqle one of our citizens to do all in their power- to find a solution to the
serious Problems we are facinq and to facilitate the oath towards a hiqher standard
of livina for our oeooles.

EMS/17

A/S-17/PV.7
81
(~~ill-Arqu~!lo, El Salvador'

Nor is El Salvador entirelv free fro~ that threat.

But we are still in time -

throuqh determined ioint effort by Government, the nation's Private institutions,
and the community, and with international help- to minimize and eventually
eliminate the ill effects of druqs.
As a country of Central America, El Salvador is exoosed to hiqh risks with
respect to production, consumption and traffic of druQs.

Central America has been

a transit and supply Point for the United States and for local markets which have
an obvious place in the chain of demand.

Larqe seizures of cocaine in the western

Part of the country and in our capital show that the druq trade has found a route
throuqh our country and Prove the existence of an internal supply-and-demand market
which must be fouQht.

Mariiuana Production has been repeatedlv documented, and

consumption has increased alarminqly, Particularly amonq students under 20 years of
aqe.
In the last decade, the Problem of druq addiction in El Salvador took on a new
dimension, because armed conflict has caused war trauma amonq various social
qroups, Particularly youth, creatinq frustration and a crisis of social values and
PrinciPles.

That situation destroys family unity, the very basis of our society.

Considerinq also the economic and social problems that affect the maiority of the
Population, it is clear that conditions are ripe for increased druq abuse and its
POtential threat to a country which is makinq a tremendous effort to consolidate
democracy and social justice.
It would thus be unfair if, after more than 10 years of armed violence, we
were to fall into the qrip of orqanizations carryinq out illicit druq-related
activities, which could easily destroy a nation the maiority of whose People live
on the very brink of survival because, i~te~-~lia, of the irrational destruction by
terrorist action of the economic infrastructure and sources of Production.

A/S-17/PV.7
82

EMS/17

To prevent the situation from qettinq out of control, mv Government shares the
view that in countries like El Salvador, where the problem of drUQs has not taken
on alarminq Proportions, we must take measures of Prevention, treatment and
rehabilitation and adopt leqal measures such as the creation of an approoriate
institutional structure to enable Governments to act effectively and firmlv aqainst
drUQ-related criminal activities.
Consistent with that and keenly aware of the social, economic and political
danqers stemminq from the druq problem, we in El Salvador have initiated
co-ordination between Government and private industrv to formulate and carry out an
anti-druq proqramme.
While there are limits to our financial and technical resources, both human
and material, we have bequn pilot projects in our caPital city's metropolitan
area.

They include schools, colleqes, the labour sector of industry and areas of

scarce resources.

In addition, with the help of e~perts, we have formulated and

bequn a national anti-drUQ project, which I hooe will be supported bv friendlv
interested Governments and the relevant international orqanizations, such as the
United Nations Fund for DrUQ Abuse Control, the Inter-American Commission aqainst
Druq Abuse, the International Development Association and the Inter-American
Development Bank.

We hooe thus to develop our potential and modernize our system

so we can take more effective action aqainst druqs at the national and
international levels.
We are, inter alia, drawinq up a set of laws to punish producers, sellers and
consumers of druqs, alonq with other provisions to qain effective control over
other psychoactive substances.

To co-ordinate those activities we have established

a National Anti-Druq Council, chaired by the Minister of Finance and includinq the
Ministers of Defence, Justice, the Interior, Education and Public Health.

EMS/17

A/S-17/PV. 7
83

(Mr.

Hill~Arquello,

El Salvador)

Amonq these joint efforts, the Anti-Druq Foundation of El Salvador deserves
special mention.

This is a Private, non-political, not-for-profit orqanization

which now quides our comprehensive complementary proqrammes for the prevention of
druq abuse and the treatment and rehabilitation of users amonq the Salvadorian
population.

Those oroqrammes are co-ordinated with the ministries that are members

of the National Anti-Druq Council.

The Council, with financial assistance from

Salvadorian private bodies, participates also in the plan for the rehabilitation
and social reinteqration of users, in the creation of a resource and documentation
centre and in mass campaiqns, aimed oarticularly at heads of families, which are
the basis for the creation of a druq-free home environment.
Solvinq the druq problem is the shared responsibility of all members of the
international community and it is therefore imperative that we broaden and
consolidate international co-operation to confront the hiqhly soPhisticated
machinery of the illicit druq activities.

We believe that, alonq with the struqqle

beinq waqed in countries where the consequences of druqs have, unfortunately, been
disastrous, we must take preventive measures to avoid an even qreater crisis in
countries where the effects of druqs have not vet reached alarminq proportions.
Moreover, we hope that the recommendations of the seventeenth soecial session
will not remain declarations of Principle, but will constitute a qenuine commitment
by States to shoulder our true responsibilities in realizinq those orincioles, and
that this commitment will be included in the plan of action which has been
considered with such qreat dedication and interest both in the Preparatory
Committee and, later, in the Ad Hoc Committee.
If we want to win, we cannot continue to be spectators in the fiqht aqainst
druqs.

We representatives of the communitv of nations must work hard and united

A/S-17/PV.7
84

EMS/17

for the qood of our peoples and, with focused and determined effort, to eradicate
one of the harshest scourqes ever to afflict mankind, thus enablinq us to leave a
better world to future qenerations.
The PRESIDENT:

We have thus concluded the qeneral debate, which included

consideration of aqenda items 9 to 13.

The meetina rose at 12.50 P.m.
