198

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Conference on Trade and Development while simultaneously alleviating some of the chronic problems
facing the provision of such services to the Assembly
and its Main Committees,
Noting, however, that, as far as Arabic translation
services are concerned, the Secretary-General in his
progress report 63 makes it clear that those organizational arrangements have not sufficiently achieved their
purported objectives with regard to the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and to the
General Assembly and its Main Committees, while admitting the uncertain nature of their future prospects,
Recognizing the great importance which the Arab
States Members of the United Nations attach to the
work of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development as well as their expressed need for
having its documentation issued in Arabic in time to
enable their delegations to participate constructively in
its deliberations and activities,
Convinced that an efficient, timely and less costly
provision of Arabic translation services to the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development can
be achieved only by the installation of an adequately
staffed service at its headquarters,

Bearing in mind the magnitude and urgency of the
efforts needed to enable such a service to meet adequately the Arabic translation requirements of the
fifth session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development. to be held in 1979,
1. Takes note of the progress report of the Secretary-General63 concerning Arabic language services
in the United Nations;

2. Requests the Secretary-General, while continuing the speedy implementation of the organizational
arrangements contained in paragraphs 15 to 21 of his
report, 62 to replace the present arrangement set out
in paragraph 25 of his report by establishing, as from
1 January 1978, on a permanent basis, an Arabic
Translation Section in the United Nations Office at
Geneva primarily to serve the bodies of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and,
as an initial step, to provide the staff requirements for
the biennium 197 8-1979 for this Section by transferring to it the posts already established under section
VIII of General Assembly resolution 31 /208, with
the addition of a post of Chief of Section;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in
close consultation and co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, proposals aimed at the full implementation of Conference resolution 86 (IV) of
28 May 1976, 64 endorsed by the General Assembly in
paragraph 18 of its resolution 31 / 159, and to submit
those proposals to the Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue his search for and to apply adequate methods,
including advance translation of appropriate documentation and provision of temporary assistance when
necessary, to ensure the timely provision of Arabic
63 A/C.5/32/9.
64 See Proceedings

of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publica,tion, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

translation services to the General Assembly and its
Main Committees, and to report on the results to the
Assembly as appropriate.
J 10th plenary meeting
2 I December 1977
32/206.

Recommendations of the Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Economic and Social Council, in
the annex to its resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May
1976, set out the terms of reference of the Committee
for Programme and Co-ordination, in paragraph 2 (a)
(ii) of which it is stated that the Committee shall
recommend an order of priorities among United Nations programmes as defined in the medium-term plan,
Recalling also paragraph 10 of General Assembly
resolution 31 /93 of 14 December 1976 on the mediumterm plan,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 2098
(LXIII) of 3 August 1977 ·dealing with the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its seventeenth session, 611
Ta king note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the implications of the recommendations of the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination66 and
the relevant comments of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 67

I
l. Confirms that the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination, by virtue of its review of both the
medium-term plan and the programme aspects of the
programme budget, is the main subsidiary body of the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly for planning, programming and co-ordination with
the perspective necessary to make recommendations
on the relative priorities of United Nations programmes;
2. Urges subsidiary bodies to refrain from making
recommendations on the relative priority of the major
programmes, as outlined in the medium-term plan;
3. Requests such bodies to propose, through the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, relative
priorities to be accorded to the various subprogrammes
within their respective fields of competence;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give all assistance to the Committee for Programme and Coordination in its work, inter alia in connexion with the
recommendation in paragraph 2 of the report of the
Committee on its seventeenth session, 65 in particular
to enable the Committee to assess the implications of
its recommendations;

II
1. Notes the methodology described by the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in paragraph
3 of the report on its seventeenth session 611 for improving its determination of relative growth rates;
65
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysecond Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/32/38).
66 A/C.5/32/26 and Corr.I.
67 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtysecond Session, Supplement No. 8A (A/32/8/Add.1-30),
document A/32/8/ Add.14.

VIII,

2. Requests the Secretary-General to implement,
in the light of the relevant recommendations and comments of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and in the most appropriate manner, the relative growth rates accepted by the General Assembly
as the framework of programme priorities;
3. Considers that the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination, while proposing priorities in its
programme review, should continue to limit its recommendations to ranges of growth;
4. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination, in its review of the medium-term plan at
its eighteenth session, to take into account the abovementioned consideration;

III
I. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation with the executive secretaries of the regional commissions concerned, to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session through the Economic
and Social Council, in the light of the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and of paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,67 programme proposals for increased activity in
the transport programmes of the Economic Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for Latin
America, the Economic Commission for Western Asia
and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific and revised estimates to that end;
2. Decides, in the light of additional information
provided to the General Assembly and of subsequent
developments, to defer until its thirty-third session
consideration of the recommendations of the Committee
for Programme and Co-ordination dealing with programme transfers and reductions.
110th plenary meeting
2 1 December 1977

32/207.

Technolo:z;ical innovations in the production of the puhlicationri and documentation of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Concerned about significant costs accruing to all
Member States, including direct costs to themselves
as well as charges to the United Nations, which result
from current methods of producing and distributing
the publications and documentation of the United
Nations,
1. Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts
and initiatives to improve documentation and publications services;
2. Concurs with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in its report 68 to pursue measures
proposed by the Secretary-General with regard to technological innovations in the production of the publications and documentation of the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to explore and
recommend additional measures to improve and expedite the production and distribution of publications
68 Ibid., document

A/32/8/ Add. I 2.

199

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and documentation, using a cautious, step-by-step approach, and in particular requests him to study:
(a)
The means to ensure publication of the full
official records of sessions of the General Assembly;
( b) Increased revenue from the sale of publications and documentation in recognition of the improved
service;
( c)
Further limitations on free distribution of publications and documents;
( d)
Installation of modern facilities to improve
the in-session availability of important documents;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
progress achieved in the implementation of approved
measures, on the results of further studies and on recommendations for additional measures to improve documentation and publications services.
110th plenary meeting
21 December 1977
32/208.

United
Nairobi

Nations

accommodation

at

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3004 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, in which it decided to locate the secretariat of the United Nations Environment Programme
in a developing country and further decided to locate
it at Nairobi,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on United Nations accommodation at Nairobi 0 n and
of the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 70
2. Accepts with appreciation the generous grant
by the Government of Kenya of the site at Gigiri,
Nairobi, upon which to construct the project, subject
to a suitable agreement between the Secretary-General
and the Government;
3. Concurs in the observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee; 71
4. Approves, in principle, the construction of permanent headquarters facilities for the United Nations
Environment Programme and accommodation for the
other l '.nited Nations offices at Nairobi;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in
mind the observations and recommendations of the
Advisory Committee, to proceed in accordance with the
recommendations contained in his report; 72
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly annually on the status of the project.
110th plenary meeting
2 I December 1977
32/209.

Expenditure with respect to experts and
consultants in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that its decision of 18 December 197 4, 73
taken at its twenty-ninth session, by which it outlined
69A/C.5/32/19 and Add.I.
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. BA (A/32/8/Add.l-30), document
A/32/8/ Add. JO.
71 Jbid., paras. 10-29.
12 A/C.5/32/ 19, para. 32.
73 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/963 I), pp. 136 and 137,
item 73.
7 0 Official
