A /69/PV.22

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

22nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 9 October 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 132 and 136.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote. The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. May I remind members
that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 132
Programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/422)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will take
a decision on the draft resolution entitled “United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response”. The
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 69/3).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 132.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/428)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A/69/428).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-56244 (E)

*1456244*

A/69/PV.22

entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment
of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under
Article 19 of the Charter”, without a vote. May I take
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 69/4).
Agenda item 13
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(b) Follow-up to the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population
and Development
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/69/62
and A/69/122)
The President: As members will recall, the
twenty-ninth special session of the General Assembly,
entitled “Follow-up to the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014”, was held on 22 September
2014, in accordance with resolutions 65/234 of
22 December 2010 and 67/250 of 21 February 2013.
It has been brought to my attention that many
Member States were not able to deliver their statements
at that special session. I wish to state my understanding
of the discontent felt by of the delegations that were
unable to deliver their statements within the designated
time frame at that important gathering. The Secretariat
is also fully aware of the concerns raised by those
delegations, and it is indeed regrettable that a large
number of Member States were unable to speak at that
meeting.
In light of what happened, I have convened this
plenary meeting today under sub-item (b) of agenda
item 13, entitled “Follow-up to the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development”, earlier than scheduled in order to
provide an additional opportunity for Member States
to further deliberate on the topic and to have their
statements entered into the record.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and express the
gratitude of the Ivorian delegation for the resumption
of this debate. It gives Member States that could not
express themselves on 22 September at the twentyninth special session, on the Programme of Action
2/27

09/10/2014

of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), held in Cairo in 1994, the
opportunity to do so today. Côte d’Ivoire would
therefore like to make its contribution to the followup to the implementation of the commitments made ​​in
Cairo to give appropriate responses to the persistent
problems of population and development.
My country has made significant
​​
progress in key
areas of the Programme of Action, although those
advances were slowed down by the decade of crisis
that the country experienced. In the area of education,
for example, Côte d’Ivoire’s march towards universal
education has resulted in an increase in primary school
gross enrolment, which rose from less than 72 per cent
in 1998 to 94.7 per cent in 2013, with a parity index that
increased by 41 per cent. Furthermore, the Government
has just adopted a measure aimed at making primary
school attendance mandatory from the age of six,
starting with the 2015-2016 school year.
With regard to health, efforts undertaken in the
fight against HIV/AIDS have allowed us to lower its
prevalence rate to 3.7 per cent in 2012, as against 4.7 per
cent in 2005. The child mortality rate for children under
5 years fell by 27 per cent, going from 149.5 per 1,000
in 1994 to 108 per 1,000 in 2012. Maternal mortality,
after falling from 597 in 1994 to 543 per 100,000 live
births in 2005, unfortunately had an increase to 614
deaths per 100,000 live births in 2012.
The prevalence of modern contraceptives nearly
tripled, from 5.7 per cent in 1994 to 14 per cent in 2012.
Unmet needs for family planning, though still high, are
clearly decreasing. Those results and others derive from
the institutional reforms and operational interventions
aimed at putting the population at the centre of the
development process. Thus, several laws have been
promulgated, and several strategic documents have also
been made o
​ perational.
The demographic profile of Côte d’Ivoire is
marked by a high fertility rate, estimated at 5 children
per female in 2012, with adolescent girls contributing
13 per cent of that figure. The population growth rate of
2.7 per cent remains one of the highest in the world. The
dropout rate in school also remains high, especially for
girls, because of poverty, sociocultural problems and
the scourge of early pregnancies. Furthermore, the
combined effects of climate change, with the resulting
drop in rainfall, water supplies and forest cover, have
further impoverished the population, created food
insecurity and worsened public health problems.
14-56244

09/10/2014

With a view to facing those challenges, the Ivorian
Government is working to be able to offer universal
health coverage so as to provide the public with better
access to health services, increase the efficiency and
availability of the health system, increase the access of
youth and women to reproductive and family planning
health services, and continue the far-reaching national
programme, entitled “Zero pregnancies in the schools”,
now under way.
Côte d’Ivoire is active in building the foundations
of its successful emergence in 2020. An important pillar
will be the effort to improve the demographic dividend
by means of the necessary strategic investments for a
strong and prosperous economy. My country is delighted
with the efforts already under way on the part of the
international community, and invites it to increase
its efforts with a view to achieving the goals agreed
upon on the issues of population and development at
the major international conferences and international
meetings.
Our common will to build a more just and equitable
world depends indisputably on promoting human rights.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire is committed to respecting
the rights of the individual without exception. My
delegation thus reaffirms the commitments that my
country has made, both internationally and regionally,
in accordance with our institutional and regulatory
provisions, our development priorities, our customs,
cultures and beliefs.
From that point of view, we welcome the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Follow-up to the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development beyond 2014”
(A/69/62). Given our concern about the promotion of
sustainable development, my country reaffirms its
commitment to the implementation beyond 2014 of the
ICPD Programme of Action and sincerely hopes that
the well-being of humankind will be at the core of the
post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome
this important meeting, which gives us an opportunity
to express our opinions regarding the holding two weeks
ago of a special session of the General Assembly on
the integrated and coordinated implementation of the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD).
As an international community, we have highlighted
development and implementation and the progress

A/69/PV.22

achieved so far. Regrettably, my country still has gaps
with respect to implementation of the ICPD Programme
of Action. We are facing challenges and inequalities of
a socioeconomic nature.
Many people live in abject poverty throughout
the world, which is a major challenge that undermines
the development efforts undertaken. I would therefore
like to avail myself of this opportunity to highlight the
importance of the ICPD Programme of Action, which
asserts that human rights and human dignity are a
sine qua non for sustainable development. It is also a
fact that we are facing a number of recurring global
challenges. We attach particular importance to the
issues of development and population. In that respect,
we have made tireless efforts to implement the agreed
development objectives. A number of indices and
reports demonstrate that most of the objectives set in
the Millennium Development Goals will have been met
before 2015.
Qatar has established a national comprehensive
strategy with respect to development. Our national
vision for 2030 is to transform Qatar into a developed
State that can protect its development and give
everyone in our country, as well as future generations,
a high standard of living. Qatar’s national vision has
produced long-term results and has allowed us to create
a framework in which to develop national strategies and
implementation plans. The State adopted a population
policy in 2009. We have undertaken the implementation
of that policy, striking a balance between population
growth and sustainable development. We shall also seek
to implement the sustainable development goals, as
well as the main elements of the post-2015 sustainable
development agenda.
We reiterate today our reservations regarding
some controversial issues set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports (A/69/62 and A/69/122) that have to
do with follow-up measures for the ICPD Programme
of Action. Those measures exceed what was agreed
in the Cairo Plan of Action.There is no consensus on
matters relating to sexual orientation, sexual identity,
abortion, health and sexual rights, reproductive and
sexual health, or global sexual education. That is why
we would like to reaffirm one of the major principles
of the Cairo Programme of Action ‑ the sovereign
right of all countries to implement recommendations
that are in line with their national legislations and that
fully respect the various moral and religious values and

14-562443/27

A/69/PV.22

cultural backgrounds of their peoples, in conformity
with internationally recognized human rights.
Much remains for us to do, working together
as Governments and individuals, to implement the
objectives and goals of the ICPD Programme of Action ‑
to increase the standard of living of everyone by
adopting suitable development and population policies
and programmes that will help us fight poverty, achieve
economic growth, develop human resources and
guarantee human rights for all. We hope that our debate
will yield positive, concrete results and comprehensive
measures that will facilitate our doing everything we
can to implement the ICPD Programme of Action. In
establishing a post-2015 development plan, we need
to focus on the issues highlighted in the Cairo Plan
of Action, especially women, the elderly, youth, and
persons with disabilities.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that Qatar
will spare no effort to continue to honour one of its major
commitments, that is, respect for and the promotion and
protection of human rights. We also want to restate our
commitment to implementing the ICPD Programme
of Action, which is considered a major milestone or
reference point for all matters relating to population.
Our commitment will continue even after 2014, and
we will implement the Programme of Action with
full respect for religious, ethical and cultural values
and backgrounds and in accordance with our national
legislation.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): As we mark the twentieth
anniversary of the International Conference on
Population and Development (ICPD), India remains
committed to the consensus reached at the ICPD and
subsequent reviews. India has achieved substantial
declines in infant and maternal mortality rates as a
consequence of targeted interventions to promote
institutional deliveries, as well as a number of other
interventions relating to, for example, the provision
of free medicines, diagnostics and nutrition. The
proportion of institutional births has now reached
85 per cent, and the Government is working to further
expand the programme.
Securing and promoting the health and wellbeing of young people, especially adolescents, and of
women and children is a priority. Reproductive health
commodities and services, including comprehensive
abortion care, are now among the 20 essential services
of universal health coverage to be provided free of cost.
Besides strengthening the financial commitment to
4/27

09/10/2014

health services, the State will maintain its coverage of
the 100 million women currently using contraceptives
and is committed to adding still more women to the
programme by 2020. Overall, our focus is on expanding
health care for all, as well as on meeting the challenges
posed by a changing demographic profile and the
gradual shift of attention from communicable to
non-communicable diseases.
In education, our current focus is on improving
quality, the expansion of secondary and tertiary
education, improving equity and accessibility for
girls and women, and skills development to improve
employability.
We have recently launched a national adolescent
health strategy, which comprises the provision of
information, counselling, commodities and services,
and which will cover all our 250 million adolescents
The strategy realigns the existing approaches in order
to focus on community-based health promotion and
prevention. It identifies six priority areas of action:
reproductive and sexual health, nutrition, mental health,
injuries and violence, including domestic and genderbased violence, substance abuse and non-communicable
diseases.
Ensuring gender equality, promoting women’s
empowerment and combating discrimination and
violence against women remain a priority. We have
adopted enabling legislative and policy frameworks
for the advancement of women and have undertaken
programmes to generate awareness and sensitization
in order to fight social prejudices and stereotypes.
The Government has launched a new rights-based,
non-discriminatory, adolescent-friendly programme
that reaches out to an adolescent population that is
250 million strong.
We are firmly addressing the problem of violence
against women. The amendments to the criminal law
last year significantly broaden the definition of sexual
assault and harassment, include new types of violent
behaviour such as stalking, and so on, and aim for
greater accountability of public officials. The Sexual
Harassment of Women at the Workplace (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act of 2013 aims to provide
a safer work environment for women. Those measures
supplement the existing framework for dealing with
the crimes of trafficking, domestic violence and sexual
offences against children. As part of a multisectoral
approach to violence against women, and following
up on our statement at the sixty-sixth World Health
14-56244

09/10/2014

Assembly last year, the Government of India worked
with experienced activists from civil society and legal
and mental health experts and drew up guidelines and
protocols for the medico-legal care of survivors of
sexual violence.
India has been proactive in sharing its development
experience with other developing countries, including
in the areas of health care and telemedical services.
India is also a major source of cost-effective generic
medicines of good quality that are critically important
to public health strategies in many developing countries.
The Secretary-General’s report entitled “Framework
of actions for the follow-up to the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014” (A/69/62) identifies several
challenges and opportunities. Given the importance of
population and development issues, we expect these to
be adequately reflected in the post-2015 development
agenda. The international community must enhance
its cooperative and mutually supportive role. The
provision of financial resources, technology transfer,
technical assistance, access to medicines and capacitybuilding, especially in relation to developing countries,
have not reached optimum levels.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our firm commitment
to the International Conference on Population and
Development and its Programme of Action and to
taking the ICPD agenda forward beyond 2014 to tackle
current challenges both nationally and globally.
Mrs. Bunge (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s meeting.
The Argentine Republic attaches great importance
to the debate on population in the context of the
three dimensions of the sustainable development
agenda ‑ social, economic and environmental. We
are here to renew and deepen our commitment to the
implementation of the Cairo Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2015.
Challenges change and reality evolves, so policies
and strategies also have to evolve in order to remain
valid. In that search, we believe that the first meeting
of the Regional Conference on Population and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean,
which was held in 2013, was of special importance
because it allowed us to see how much progress we have
made in the implementation of the Cairo Programme of
Action through substantive policies based on national

A/69/PV.22

strategies. The virtuous process of change which
the countries of Latin America have experienced in
political, economic, social and cultural terms since the
holding of the Cairo Conference in 1994 is reflected
in the many policies, programmes and plans developed
with a view to achieving the highest quality of life for
our populations.
We take this opportunity to welcome the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Framework of
actions for the follow-up to the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014” (A/69/62). Argentina was
one of the countries that contributed to the world survey
on the Cairo Conference beyond 2014, which provides
timely information for evaluating the considerable
progress achieved and the challenges that remain in
implementing the Programme. We confirm that human
rights and equality are the core of the analytical approach
underlying the report, and we agree that investment in
individual human rights, capacity-building and respect
for the dignity of everyone, without any discrimination
and throughout a person’s life cycle, are the basis of
sustainable development.
The actions undertaken by the Argentine State
since 2003 show how fully aligned we are with the
objectives of the Programme of Action. In some cases,
the Argentine Government has set and achieved goals
that are more demanding than those set internationally
and has registered significant progress in formulating
and implementing public policies in all priority
areas. The political will and the determination of the
Argentine Republic to ensure in each decision the full
exercise of human rights are reflected in the premise of
helping people to become agents for change.
Among the achievements of the Argentine
Republic in that regard we would note the Immigration
Act of 2004, which represented a paradigm shift in
the Argentine migration policy, granting the right to
migrate, not migrate and return, as well as guaranteeing
the access of migrants to education, health and social
services regardless of their migration status.
The national responsible sexual and reproductive
health programme, which was established by law in
2002, guarantees universal access to health services,
including sexual and reproductive health services,
thereby closing gaps in accessibility to and quality
of care. It promotes decision-making that is free
of discrimination, coercion or violence, thereby
enabling women to participate in decision-making,

14-562445/27

A/69/PV.22

including on family planning,and helping to reduce
maternal and child morbidity and mortality, prevent
undesired pregnancies and promote the sexual health
of adolescents.

09/10/2014

reality in the quest for open, transparent and democratic
solutions.

Law 26150 (2006), on comprehensive sex education,
guarantees the right of all children and adolescents to
receive comprehensive sexual education and requires
systematic action on sex education throughout the
entire public education system.

Ms. Kiernan (United States of America): It is an
honour to speak on behalf of the United States and to
join other Member States, United Nations agencies
and civil society in renewing our full support for the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD), adopted in
Cairo nearly 20 years ago to this day.

The cross-cutting social policy underlying the
universal child allowance of 2009 has a positive effect
on education, health and gender equality and is of
direct benefit to the socially vulnerable populations.
The foregoing are just a few examples.

Let me begin by commending the work that led to the
special session and that has informed our discussions. I
want to thank the United Nations Population Fund, the
ICPD Beyond 2014 secretariat and the United Nations
Population Division for their many contributions.

Finally, we would mention the adoption of Law
26862 (2013) on medically assisted reproduction, which
guarantees comprehensive access to those practices
and requires public and private social protection
programmes, as well as prepaid medical care, to cover
expenses.

The 1994 Cairo Conference changed the global
discussion, illuminating what becomes more
resoundingly clear with each passing year, namely,
that human rights, gender equity, global health
and development must go hand in hand. The Cairo
goals remain the foundation of our work to promote
reproductive health and rights and the empowerment of
women and young people. As United States Secretary
of State John Kerry pointed out, societies where women
and girls are safe, where women are empowered to
exercise their rights and move their communities
forward ‑ those societies are more prosperous and more
stable, not occasionally, but always.

We are aware of the challenges that remain in terms
of improving the quality of life of our populations and
the need to guarantee equal and equitable treatment for
all. The results of the review undertaken by the United
Nations show that, despite the important progress made
in reducing poverty and improving economic growth
since the International Conference on Population
and Development in 1994, many countries still have
problems in terms of satisfying basic needs ‑ decent
work, full employment and access to social protection.
The gains made motivate us to renew the commitment
to continuing our work on outstanding issues. At the
regional level, we rely on the Montevideo Consensus as a
framework for national progress based on the paradigm
of equality, inclusion and equity and a people-centred
approach to rights, family and community.
We are fully committed to the implementation of
the Programme of Action, bearing in mind the regional
review and the recommendations for beyond 2014. We
understand that that perspective brings indispensable
elements for sustainable development and should be
incorporated in the post-2015 development agenda,
based on the agreements achieved in the framework of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals.
Argentina has decided to continue to embody a
political, economic and social model underlying a State
that is active and committed to the improvement of our
6/27

The international community has made impressive
strides, especially in education and in reducing maternal
and child mortality, but progress has been uneven and has
left many behind. According to the operational review
and the index report prepared for our discussions on
the ICPD Beyond 2014 (see A/69/122), many countries
agree that those gaps require urgent attention. To make
reproductive health and respect for reproductive rights a
reality for all, we must get health services to those who
still lack them, including many women, young people
and those caught in conflicts and crises. We must also
stand up for every individual, regardless of his or her
sexual orientation or gender identity, and protect the
rights of individuals to make their own choices about
sexuality and reproduction, and to make these choices
free from coercion, discrimination and violence.
We must do more to empower young people. Over
40 per cent of the world’s population is under the
age of 25. The choices they make will have profound
consequences for themselves and the world. Many
must navigate in treacherous waters. More than two

14-56244

09/10/2014

million adolescents live, for instance, with HIV.
Three million girls each year are subjected to genital
mutilation or cutting, and many will suffer lifelong
health consequences as a result. Despite near universal
commitment to eliminate early and forced marriage,
one in three girls in developing countries will be
married before she is 18. More than 15 million girls
will give birth each year. Those early pregnancies can
kill, cause lifelong disabilities, cut off opportunities
and extinguish hope. Many young mothers never finish
school. Their chance to learn and earn enough to lift
their families and communities out of poverty may be
lost forever.
We must take more concrete and decisive steps
to reach our goal of greater gender equality and
empowerment of women and girls. We must end the
scourge of gender-based violence, both in peace time
and in war time. We must end impunity for perpetrators,
provide services to survivors and prevent, not just
punish, such human rights abuses. Integrating sexual
and reproductive health services is also a priority.
Providing maternal health care, contraception, and
the treatment and prevention of sexually-transmitted
illnesses, as a package, is not just a matter of
convenience, it is a matter of life and death. We know
that providing family planning to all who want it could
prevent nearly one-third of the estimated 300,000
maternal deaths that occur every year.
Finally, we must keep the eyes of the world focused
on achieving the ICPD goals beyond 2014. The two
decades since Cairo have confirmed that Governments
have chosen the right path, and we must continue to push
forward. The post-2015 development agenda offers an
opportunity for the global community to come together
around a new set of development goals for the next
15 years, and the United States stands behind of that.
We fully support a dedicated goal to promote gender
equality and empower women and girls. Recognizing
that aspiration could be one of the most transformative
goals we could set in the post-2015 development agenda.
The special session has been an opportunity for
everyone to reaffirm support for the ICPD agenda and
to ensure that we address those issues in the post-2015
development agenda. We must seize this chance, and
the United States is committed to doing its part.
Ms. Stener (Norway): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway. We are encouraged
by the overwhelming support for and commitment to the

A/69/PV.22

Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) expressed by
the world leaders at the special session on the findings
and recommendations of the report on the ICPD Beyond
2014 review. We believe that the outcomes of the ICPD
Beyond 2014 review and the special session provide the
United Nations system and Member States with a solid
foundation for continued efforts to ensure universal
access to sexual and reproductive health and rights.
Among the many important recommendations for
future work in this area, we would especially like to
underline the need for access to comprehensive sexual
education. The solid support from world leaders at
the special session is also a strong message about the
need to include universal access, on a priority basis, to
sexual and reproductive health and rights in the post2015 development agenda.
While we recommit to the promises made in Cairo
and welcome the enhanced commitments and efforts
that are being made to fully implement the ICPD, we
believe that it is time to go beyond the Cairo Programme
of Action. Every person has the right to be free from
discrimination and to fully enjoy all human rights
without distinctions of any kind, including those based
on sexual orientation or gender identity.
Finally, on a practical note, the full statement
that Norway’s State Secretary planned to deliver on
22 September has been submitted to PaperSmart.
Ms. Ravilova-Borovik (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): We are grateful for the convening
of today’s plenary meeting. It is our view that the Cairo
Programme of Action of 1994 remains the groundbreaking reference point for inter-State cooperation in
the area of population and development. The priorities
and strategic approaches agreed to 20 years ago are still
fully relevant and vital.
The Russian Federation attaches great significance
to the review of the implementation of the decisions
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), including in the context of
agreeing on new priorities for global socioeconomic
cooperation in the post-2015 period. We are convinced
that population issues should be adequately reflected in
the sustainable development goals being established. In
that context, the key challenge, we believe, is satisfying
the basic requirements of the population in terms of
access to health, education, food, water, energy and
employment. We are persuaded that it is counter-

14-562447/27

A/69/PV.22

productive to focus international efforts on promoting
concepts that are not universally supported or that
run counter to the social values of entire groups of
countries. Therefore, the Programme of Action should
not be reviewed but rather should serve in future as a
political framework and provide guiding principles for
the work of the United Nations and of Member States.
Achieving progress in demographic development is
a priority of the State policy of the Russian Federation,
including in the context of sustainable socioeconomic
progress. Among our strategic challenges were
overcoming the demographic crisis at the start of the
1990s and comprehensive support for the family.
The recent special session to review the ICPD
Programme of Action was to become an optimal
platform for an open and comprehensive consideration
of population issues with a view to advancing the
global development agenda in the post-2015 period. We
deeply regret the fact that the Russian delegation and
the delegations of 60 other countries were not able to
present their population scenarios during the special
session. We hope that in the future that situation will
not be repeated. Member States can find the text of the
statement that was to have been delivered by the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
at the twenty-ninth special session of the General
Assembly on our Mission’s website. We understand that
it will also be available on the websites of the United
Nations Population Fund and the General Assembly.
In conclusion, I would like to confirm that the
Russian Federation wants to continue dialogue with all
our partners on the issues of population, and we are
prepared to strengthen our multilateral cooperation in
that area.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me thank
the Secretary-General for his outstanding work and
elaborate reports, “Framework of actions for the followup to the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development beyond
2014” (A/69/62) and “Recurrent themes and key elements
identified during the sessions of the Commission on
Population and Development” (A/69/122).
This year, we celebrate the twentieth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) with a comprehensive assessment
of the status of the implementation of the Programme
of Action as a critical opportunity to take stock of
achievements and remaining challenges and to define a

8/27

09/10/2014

clear vision for future action. The forty-seventh session
of the Commission on Population and Development
and the twenty-ninth special session of the General
Assembly on the follow-up to the Programme of
Action on the ICPD, held on 22 September, provided
appropriate forums for deliberations in that regard.
Here, let me briefly comment on the status of ICPD
implementation in my country over the past 20 years.
Georgia, while going through a socioeconomic and
political transition, has made significant progress
vis-à-vis the ICPD Programme of Action. The priorities
in the 2000 Cairo Plan of Action in the areas of
population development, reproductive health, women
and youth empowerment, protection of displaced
populations, an enabling environment for children
with disabilities and for the elderly have been reflected
in our national development plans and legislation.
Historic gains were documented in reproductive health,
including significant decreases in maternal, infant and
under-five mortality rates, all of which were basically
cut in half. Abortion rates have also decreased by half
from 3.7 per cent to 1.6 per cent, with a parallel increase
in a contraceptive prevalence rate from 20 per cent
to 54 per cent. Screening programmes for breast and
cervical cancer were introduced in 2005, and universal
access to HIV treatment has been maintained since
2003. Georgia introduced its flagship universal health
care programme in February 2013. Whereas two years
ago, just half of the population was covered by public
or private health insurance, today, every citizen of the
country has a basic package of health services.
The expansion of social protection schemes has
provided a more reliable security net for socially
vulnerable population groups, including families living
in poverty, old-age pensioners, internally displaced
persons and persons with disabilities. Last year, oldage pensions and social allowances were increased
from the 2012 baselines by 50 per cent and 100 per cent,
respectively.
Women’s empowerment has also been given
high priority in our national development agenda.
Georgia exceeded a 10 per cent threshold for women’s
representation in the Parliament in 2012. Women hold
key positions and ministerial portfolios in justice,
education and foreign affairs and lead the National
Security Council and the Central Election Commission
of Georgia. The economic empowerment of women has
also been visible since 1994, with 30 per cent of women

14-56244

09/10/2014

being primary breadwinners and 20 per cent heading
business enterprises.
Based on an international assessment, Georgia
has been ranked among the countries successful in
combating trafficking, an advance achieved under the
leadership of the National Coordination Council against
Trafficking in Human Beings.
In response to young people’s special needs and
because of the importance of investing in youth for the
country’s sustainable development, a national youth
policy was adopted earlier this year and elaborated
through a participatory process with the United Nations
Population Fund and UNICEF, based on knowledge
gained from surveys of the sexual and reproductive
health of young people and youth situation analysis.
Despite those achievements, however, much
remains to be done – and not just in my country, but
in many parts of the world. We therefore endorse the
urgency of the findings of the ICPD Beyond 2014 review,
which show that, despite significant gains in poverty
reduction and economic growth since the ICPD, many
have been left behind, with basic needs unfulfilled, and
lacking meaningful work or access to social protection
or public services in health or education, and that there
are still significant barriers that prevent many people in
the world from enjoying their human rights.
To tackle the remaining challenges in my country,
specific measures are being taken, aimed at ensuring
sustainable and inclusive economic growth, the benefits
of which will be enjoyed by the whole population. That is
emphasized in the socioeconomic development strategy
of my country for 2020, which provides for demographic
improvement, equal opportunities for persons with
disabilities, the fulfilment of young people’s special
needs, the integration and participation of older persons
in society, the further enhancement of gender equality
and the empowerment of women, and the improvement
of the collection, analysis, dissemination and use of
sex- and age-disaggregated data for informed policymaking. My country has taken several legislative and
institutional steps to address human rights challenges,
including the adoption of a national human rights
strategy for 2014-2020, a national human rights action
plan for 2014-2015 and a new antidiscrimination law.
In conclusion, let me underline once again what
my Prime Minister said from this very rostrum (see
A/S-29/PV.1), namely, that my country is proud to
join the international community in reaffirming

A/69/PV.22

its support for the ICPD Programme of Action and
stands ready to further contribute to that effort. As
reported in the record of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe 2013 High-level Regional
Conference, “Enabling Choices: Population Priorities
for the 21st Century”, we support the human rightscentred approach for the post-2014 programme of
action. Furthermore, the experience clearly shows that
only a comprehensive, results-oriented, rights- and
evidence-based strategic planning process that engages
all concerned stakeholders and focuses both on access
to and the quality of services can ensure progress
towards the equality, individual dignity, well-being and
sustainable development of all nations.
Mr. Nekiguchi (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to the President of the General Assembly, the
staff of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
and the other staff who contributed to the successful
organization of this meeting. It is an honour for me to
take this opportunity to review the developments since
the 1994 International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), in Cairo, and to convey our views
and position on the world beyond 2014.
The key to addressing population and development
issues is without a doubt the empowerment of women.
It is women who play a vital role in the human life
cycle, from birth through old age. But they are also
among the most vulnerable members of society. They
need universal access to sexual and reproductive health
services as well as to information and education. It is
essential to ensure their fundamental rights.
The ICPD Programme of Action has served as the
international community’s guideline on population and
development issues. Based on a people-centred approach
focusing on individuals, the ICPD Programme of Action
has promoted gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls and has contributed to the achievement
of human security, which is one of the most important
guiding principles of Japan’s development assistance
strategy.
Japan fully supports the ICPD Programme of Action
and has long been committed to its implementation.
Immediately following the Cairo Conference, we
launched Japan’s Global Issues Initiative on Population
and AIDS – a seven-year programme package,
amounting to $3 billion, to promote family planning,
health education and HIV/AIDS prevention. It has been
followed by various additional assistance packages

14-562449/27

A/69/PV.22

focusing on sexual and reproductive health, maternal
and child health, and the empowerment of women.
Japan continues to make contributions. The
advancement of the role of women has been and will
continue to be one of the pillars of Japanese official
development assistance. At last year’s session of the
General Assembly, my Prime Minister, Mr. Shinzo
Abe, highlighted “womenomics” (see A/68/PV.12) and
pledged to implement assistance in excess of $3 billion
over three years that would place women at the centre.
As part of this pledge, Japan organized a symposium
of the World Assembly for Women in Tokyo one month
ago.
In response to the recent humanitarian crisis of the
abduction of schoolgirls by Boko Haram in Nigeria,
Japan extended emergency grant aid amounting to
$855,000 to UNFPA and other organizations to support
the abducted schoolgirls, their families and the affected
communities.
Japan is also among the most active countries for
international advocacy. The Japan Parliamentarians
Federation for Population was established in 1974 as
the world’s first non-partisan organization devoted
to population issues. Since then, it has made every
effort to advocate for population issues in close
cooperation with its counterparts around the world.
The Government of Japan supports the activities of
international parliamentarians through the Japan Trust
Fund at UNFPA.
We seek to contribute also to the fruitful debate
formulating the post-2015 development agenda.
Japan, in cooperation with the International Planned
Parenthood Federation (IPPF), recently co-organized
a side event entitled “Gender, HIV and Sexual and
Reproductive Health and Rights in the Post-2015
Framework” on the margins of the AIDS Conference
in Melbourne, Australia. We renew our commitment
to contributing to the successful implementation of the
framework of ICPD beyond 2014.
Regarding the world beyond 2014, the international
community must collaborate in order to cope with
the many remaining and emerging challenges. Today
we are faced with rapid demographic changes and
an increasingly diversified set of concerns. In some
regions, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, nations
are still showing high increases in fertility. Many
young people are suffering from challenges such as
unemployment, malnutrition and poor access to health

10/27

09/10/2014

services. It is essential to continue to provide support
for those in need to satisfy their unmet needs, including
sexual and reproductive health services as well as
information and education.
At the other end of the spectrum, troublingly low
fertility is found in some counties in regions such as East
Asia and Europe. Many countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and other regions are, in turn,
exhibiting such trends. Given such trends, the world
is ageing. Even a region where the population is still
young today will have to face an aged society in the near
future. An ageing society without healthy longevity
will encounter many problems, including an increasing
cost of social security. This may even threaten global
economic sustainability. Staying healthy even as we
grow older is therefore an important goal. If coupled
with healthy and active longevity, an ageing society can
be a blessing.
The proportion of our population that is aged has
become the highest in the world; currently, one in four
persons in Japan is older than 65 years of age. While
major reforms have been and will continue to be planned
to deal with the issues of an ageing society, Japan was
ranked first among countries in terms of healthy life
expectancy in both 1990 and 2010, according to a study
published in the Lancet magazine in 2012.
The realization in Japan of universal health
coverage as early as 1961 surely played an important
role in achieving the remarkable health and longevity of
the Japanese people. Universal health coverage reaches
the entire population, including the most vulnerable
and marginalized people, of all ages and generations.
By eliminating disparities in access to essential health
services, universal health coverage can also contribute
to inclusive economic growth.
The world beyond 2014 must deal with diversified
and complicated challenges and tasks. The tasks of
ensuring maternal and child health, empowering
women, girls and young people, providing sexual
and reproductive health services, encouraging an
economically active population and supporting an
ageing society ‑ all that rests on our shoulders. There
may be no miracle solution, but one key element should
be ensuring healthy lives for all at all ages. Throughout
our life cycle, from childhood to adulthood and through
old age, health and wellness are human needs. The
promotion of a work/life balance and family-friendly
environments, coupled with the implementation of
measures for gender equality and appropriate health
14-56244

09/10/2014

systems as seen through the lens of universal health
coverage, should be essential components of our
strategy. Japan stands ready to share its experiences
and extend its support in that regard.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Over
the past two decades, the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) has provided
a global road map for addressing population and
development issues. Even today, the objectives
stipulated in the 1994 Programme of Action seem
valid and pertinent to present circumstances and
requirements, though we need to be innovative as the
world population ages. I commend the forward-looking
approach of the founders of this comprehensive and
balanced document.
The world is undergoing a historic transition in its
population age structures, with fundamental impacts on
the economic and social lives of its inhabitants. In order
to have healthy, educated and prosperous populations
that will be the engine and fortifier of sustainable
development, we must combat poverty. That means that
we must empower the poor and deprived and those who
live in vulnerable situations. Addressing the challenges
requires support for inclusive economic growth and
sustainable development through enabled national
societies within an enabling international environment.
To lessen inequalities, Governments should undertake
more robust steps in support of the equitable distribution
of development gains. In the same vein, the provision of
basic social services should remain an integral part of
national and international measures to achieve poverty
eradication.
More than half of Iran’s population is under 30.
This young generation is thought of as providing a
golden opportunity, an asset for achieving sustainable
development. At the same time, Iran’s population is
rapidly ageing. These developments will have noticeable
economic and social implications. The shrinking of the
innovative young generation, whose members offer
efficient expertise and energy, is deemed an obstacle
to securing resilient and sustained development in the
long term. Following a few decades of successful lowfertility promotion policies, the Islamic Republic of
Iran has recently decided to shift gears with a view to
sustaining its population dynamics so as to ensure an
empowered, educated and prosperous society.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has been successful in
achieving many of the ICPD objectives and Millennium

A/69/PV.22

Development Goals (MDGs) even prior to their
deadlines. Iran’s achievements in the areas of decreasing
child and maternal mortality rates, enhancing access
to medical services, including prenatal health-care
services, and providing those affected by HIV/AIDS
with care, treatment and prevention have received high
recognition from relevant international bodies.
From a more general and sustained perspective,
over the past two decades since the adoption of the ICPD
outcome and its Programme of Action, Iran has worked
continually to provide access to inclusive education
to all boys and girls, even in the remotest parts of the
country, as well as training and health care for all,
without discrimination. The results are well reflected
in relevant United Nations reports on the MDGs and
the ICPD goals.
However, I would like to call the attention of
the Assembly to the illegal and inhumane economic
coercive measures and sanctions imposed against my
people, with negative implications for their enjoyment
of basic human rights as well as for our national
development agenda, in flagrant contravention of
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and in
disregard for the content of the ICPD. The sanctions
have impeded timely and affordable access to the
medicine, vaccines, equipment, commodities and
technologies that are necessary for providing health
care services. It is incumbent on the world community
to stop such inhumane and illegal acts.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
reports entitled “Recurrent themes and key elements
identified during the sessions of the Commission
on Population and Development” (A/69/122) and
“Framework of actions for the follow-up to the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development beyond 2014”
(A/69/62). However, I would like to emphasize that the
use in the reports of controversial terms and phrases
that do not enjoy consensus among the membership
will not be helpful in advancing our future discussions
on population issues, including the ICPD Beyond 2014.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that a
safe and healthy world is attainable only if mothers
no longer lose their lives giving birth, only if children
are no longer robbed of their childhoods, and only if
every girl and boy finds the doors of a school open to
them and enjoys easy access to quality education and
training, health care services and nutritious food.

14-5624411/27

A/69/PV.22

Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Indonesia acknowledges
the great importance of the twenty-ninth special
session of the General Assembly as the culmination
of the activities mandated by the General Assembly in
its resolution 65/234. We take note of the findings of
the operational review, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report entitled “Framework of actions
for the follow-up to the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014” (A/69/62). The review
indicates that despite considerable achievements
during the 20-year implementation of the Programme
of Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development (ICPD), progress in some critical
aspects has been slow, unequal and fragmented, while
new challenges and opportunities have emerged.
Indonesia believes that addressing the gap in the
implementation of the Programme of Action requires
new commitments, cooperation and concerted efforts
by Governments at all levels, with the support and
participation of all relevant stakeholders, including
civil society organizations and the private sector. As
one of the pioneering countries, Indonesia has been
implementing the ICPD Programme of Action for
20 years and is strongly committed to making real
contributions to the achievement of progress in various
areas of population and development. Indonesia’s
notable accomplishments include a reduction in the
poverty level from 17 per cent in 2007 to 11.4 per cent
in 2013, thanks to pro-poor, pro-job and pro-rural
development policies.
In addition, Indonesia has maintained its focus on
expanding access to basic services such as universal
education for 12 years, universal coverage of health
care and nutrition, and family planning; investing in
basic infrastructure such as sanitation and clean water;
involving poor communities in poverty-reduction
efforts and capacity-building for that purpose; creating
a social security system for the vulnerable and the
poor; and reducing the significant disparities among
the provinces as well as among urban and rural areas.
Indonesia, known as an international leader in
family planning, recognizes the manifold aspects of
the interrelationship between population growth and
development through the changing emphasis of the
stated goals in family planning. That can necessitate
shifting the paradigm away from a target-driven
orientation to one based on the concept of demand
fulfilment. Increased attention to the quality of care has

12/27

09/10/2014

been seen as an effective way to address unmet demands
for reproductive health information and services. In
so doing, Indonesia is pursuing some critical steps,
primarily by developing human resources, improving
infrastructure,
developing
medical
protocols,
promoting the integration of family planning services
as benefit packages of national social health insurance,
and tripling the budget for family planning over the
past five years.
Indonesia will reach the top phase of the
demographic dividend between 2028 and 2031, given the
youth potential of 65 million that will be contributing
to long-term socioeconomic development. Indonesia
is committed to preparing and protecting the rights
of young people in health, education and employment
as well as to encouraging them to become active in
community activities. The Government’s initiative to
include the health and reproductive rights of young
people in the policy agenda through a programme
entitled “Generation with a plan” has become a national
movement, which is rooted in family norms and values.
The empowerment of women, gender equality
and the health of youth and children have gained full
recognition as integral parts of national development.
Through appropriate efforts, Indonesia has managed
to reduce the infant mortality rate from 57 for every
1000 live births in 1994 to 32 in 2012. In addressing
the maternal mortality rate, the Government has
improved people’s access to reproductive health
services, including maternal health services, by
gradually providing universal health care coverage for
all Indonesians. The national social health insurance
system will cover 86 million Indonesians who are poor
or at risk of falling into poverty, with premiums paid by
the Government. By 2019, all Indonesians are expected
to be covered. Furthermore, Indonesia has increased its
national budget allocation for social security.
As an archipelagic country, Indonesia is at risk
of bearing the negative effects of climate change. We
continue to provide education, in particular to people
living in coastal and agricultural areas, aimed at reducing
exposure to catastrophic climate change. We are also
endeavouring to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by up to 26 per cent. Such efforts have increased
understanding of the relationship between population
dynamics and climate change and have improved local
government capacity to undertake mitigation activities
and develop early warning systems.

14-56244

09/10/2014

The special session is indeed timely, ensuring as
it does that we learn lessons from the implementation
of the MDGs and that the Programme of Action is
inclusive and relevant within the post-2015 development
agenda. We would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the report of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development Goals (A/68/970) and the
Assembly’s adoption in September of the proposed
goals (resolution 68/309). The post-2015 process will
also provide opportunities to address new and emerging
challenges, ensuring that no one is left behind,
based on the principles of common but differentiated
responsibilities.
Indonesia would like to emphasize that the
implementation of the ICPD Programme of Action
should be guided by the Programme of Action
principles, including respect for national laws and
development priorities, as well as religious and cultural
values and diversity. We would also like to emphasize
that in order to successfully address the gaps in the
ICPD Programme of Action, its overall balance must
be preserved. Imposing the priorities or value systems
of one country on another is not acceptable and could
threaten the hard-won 1994 Cairo consensus.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our strong
commitment to the ICPD Programme of Action and its
further implementation beyond 2014. Indonesia stands
ready to contribute constructively in the upcoming
intergovernmental processes.
Mr. Sarufa (Papua New Guinea): Let me thank
you, Sir, for convening and presiding over this meeting
at a moment when we mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the International Conference on
Population and Development (ICPD) Programme of
Action. We pledge to work with all stakeholders to
ensure that we do not regress and that instead, in the
course of implementing the ICPD Programme of Action
beyond 2014, we consolidate the gains that we have
made in the two decades since the Cairo Conference.
Papua New Guinea commends the excellent work
that has been done, as reflected in the scope and
depth of the report of the Commission on Population
and Development on its forty-seventh session
(E/2014/25-E/CN.9/2014/7) and the themes and key
elements contained therein.
The ICPD Pogramme of Action is a visionary
platform whose relevance and importance today cannot
be overemphasized. Papua New Guinea therefore fully

A/69/PV.22

subscribes and recommits to the Programme of Action
itself and to its fundamental principles and objectives
of stabilizing world population, promoting responsible,
sustainable consumption and production, and protecting
the environment so that sustainable development is
possible for today’s and future generations.
For my country, Papua New Guinea, a cornerstone of
our development road map is a focus on people-centred
population management and stabilization. It requires
individuals, especially women and girls, to take on
leadership roles and to assume full responsibility
for improving their livelihoods through appropriate
measures. This now forms an integral part of our
national sustainable development road map, known
as Vision 2050, and other subsidiary frameworks,
including the 2014 national strategy for responsible
sustainable development.
The post-2015 development agenda now under
consideration must ensure that the important outcomes
of the ICPD Programme of Action are adequately
integrated in the new set of sustainable development
goals. If humankind is to have a sustainable future, the
drivers of population growth, poverty, environmental
degradation and inequality urgently need to be
decelerated at all levels, but that must be done in such
a way as to ensure that basic human needs are met.
We must be mindful that the natural environment can
sufficiently provide for the needs of humankind but not
for its greed.
We also urge that there be intensified commitment
and strong ownership on the part of leaders and
all stakeholders in order to accelerate affirmative
action — including through education, advocacy,
policy, legislation and enforcement at all levels — to
promote the equality, empowerment and human rights
of women, and also in order to ensure that there is zero
tolerance for all forms of violence and discrimination
against women and girls. Those are prerequisites for
achieving not only the ICPD Programme of Action, but
also the post-2015 development agenda that we adopt
next September.
My Government values our women and girls, who
constitute half of our population, as equal development
partners. We are ensuring that gender empowerment and
equality continue to be a cornerstone of our responsible
sustainable development. As a demonstration of that
commitment, Papua New Guinea has earmarked funding
of $10 million this year for various initiatives, including
partnering with the United Nations Population Fund to

14-5624413/27

A/69/PV.22

make available 40,000 contraceptive implants as an
important intervention measure for the health of our
women and girls of childbearing age. That will be scaled
up to $20 million by 2015. We are also partnering with
our development partners by investing in upgrading
vital midwifery skills, along with improving our health
referral system to address the problems posed by
complicated pregnancies.
Our Government has helped with the seed capital
for the first national women’s bank and microcredit
schemes to involve our people at the grass-roots level
and enable them to become owners and drivers of their
future well-being. In addition, we are prioritizing
small and medium-sized enterprises in a move to drive
development forward. Furthermore, Papua New Guinea
is also developing a national statistics development
strategy to provide a road map for continually
improving and updating our statistical information
collection and management methods in the interests of
improved decision-making. That includes embarking
on a national biometric identification card system to
record and maintain population information on our
citizens.
Papua New Guinea recognizes that sexual and
reproductive health and rights are central to good health
and well-being, especially those of our women and
adolescents, particularly girls, and therefore important
for building our nation. We, the Member States, and
the United Nations collectively must ensure that every
woman has access throughout her life to a comprehensive
and integrated package of high-quality sexual and
reproductive health services, including modern forms
of contraception and up-to-date sexuality education, in
order that women’s sexual and reproductive health and
rights may be fully respected and protected.
Finally, at the Pacific regional level, in accordance
with the declaration on human rights of the Pacific
leaders, we are making positive progress in strengthening
political will and efforts to achieve gender equality,
empowerment and women’s human rights, including
through affirming sexual and reproductive health and
rights. We recognize that the denial of women’s sexual
and reproductive health and rights perpetuates gender
inequalities, exacerbates poverty and intensifies the
intersecting forms of discrimination that women and
girls face. We are making measured strides in our region
to enable our women to increasingly have autonomy
on matters regarding their sexuality and reproductive
health and rights, free from coercion, discrimination or

14/27

09/10/2014

violence. Much more work remains to be done, but we
are moving in the right direction. We are committed
to working with our development partners on this
important development issue, provided that it is on our
own terms.
Ms. Dwyer (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to deliver the statement that we
had planned to deliver at the twenty-ninth special
session of the General Assembly, held on 22 September.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered on that
occasion by the observer of the European Union (see
A/S-29/PV.1).
At the outset, Ireland wishes to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Population Fund and the other organizations
involved in providing us with the relevant reports. We
appreciate in particular the substantial scale and the
participatory nature of those exercises and consider that
they provide a robust evidence base for our discussions,
particularly in the context of the post-2015 development
agenda.
Twenty years ago, the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) established a
global consensus that the recognition and fulfilment of
human rights must be at the centre of any development
agenda. As we mark the twentieth anniversary of
the ICPD Programme of Action, it is clear that much
progress has been made. However, the reports before
us also highlight the fact that aggregate progress often
masks significant unfinished business, particularly
when it comes to women’s empowerment and in terms
of access to sexual and reproductive health and rights.
The reports echo the conclusions from other forums
that inequalities, both between and within countries,
stubbornly persist. Those who have been left behind
by inequality and discrimination, particularly women
and girls, must now be given our absolute priority. The
reports also highlight the new challenges that we must
incorporate into our response, including climate change,
migration, urbanization and the increased percentages
of younger and older cohorts in our societies.
Ireland remains fully committed to playing our part
in implementing the ICPD Programme of Action. Last
year, we launched Ireland’s latest policy for international
development, which recommits us to the protection
and promotion of human rights throughout our work.
The policy also contains an explicit commitment to
the Cairo Programme of Action, through the support

14-56244

09/10/2014

of efforts that reduce maternal and infant mortality,
promote universal access to reproductive health care,
including antenatal care, and provide family planning
services aimed at ensuring safe motherhood while
allowing women to control their fertility.
In conclusion, let me state clearly that Ireland
reaffirms our strong support for the ICPD Programme
of Action. Twenty years on from Cairo, we are at a
critical junction. As we prepare to finalize the post2015 development agenda, the principles, objectives
and outstanding commitments from the ICPD and the
Beijing Platform for Action simply must be at the centre
of the development agenda in the years ahead.
Mr. Naivalurua (Fiji): The Fiji delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and providing members with an opportunity to
deliberate on actions required under the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD).
At the outset, Fiji welcomes the priority theme
this year. The theme is most appropriate, as we now
build on the important progress made, not only towards
agreeing on the post-2015 development agenda, but more
significantly in ensuring its effective implementation.
As we gather here 20 years after the ICPD, we are
reminded of the global consensus on the integration of
diverse aspects of population, development and human
rights. Fiji’s commitment to that global consensus, as
well as its subsequent reviews, is evident in our evolving
policies and programmes, as a result of which much
progress has been recorded in the last two decades.
Although Fiji is faring well with the implementation
of the ICPD Programme of Action, much remains to
be done. Fiji is a small island developing State with
over 300 islands and a population that is at once
highly concentrated in urban and peri-urban areas
and dispersed among remote outer-lying islands. The
additional layer of existential challenges caused by
vulnerabilities to climate change, frequent natural
disasters and environmental degradation poses a
challenge for Fiji in addressing all the core ICPD issues.
The juxtaposition of such stark situations in a small
island developing State brings with it unique challenges
for policy formulation and the implementation of
twenty-first century sustainable development solutions.
The availability and accessibility of sexual and
reproductive health services are a major element of the
solutions, particularly in meeting the special needs of

A/69/PV.22

the most vulnerable groups. The 2013 Constitution of
Fiji encompasses a broad range of civil, political and
socioeconomic rights, including the right to health and
the progressive realization by every person of the right
to health-care services, including reproductive health
care.
Fiji also recognizes the importance of addressing
inequalities and the empowerment of women and girls
in equitable and sustainable development. On the eve of
International Women’s Day this year, Fiji launched its
National Gender Policy, which is our guiding document
for mainstreaming gender issues across all sectors and
within all spheres of national life. The Government
of Fiji is committed to increasing women’s and young
people’s participation in decision-making and in
political, social and economic processes at all levels.
We believe that that will be all the more important as
we look ahead to the post-2015 development agenda.
This is an opportune time for our delegation to
underline the importance of data in development
planning. My delegation has noted in United Nations
reports and documentation that statistical data from
our Pacific Islands region are patchy or often listed
as missing. We would like to stress the importance
of securing timely and appropriately disaggregated
and verified data in order to design evidence-based
programmes and development planning. Adequate
resource allocation is urgently needed for that purpose,
and we urge cooperative action between Governments,
relevant United Nations agencies and other stakeholders
to ensure the necessary capacity for effective
integration of disaggregated, verified population data
on our region.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Fiji’s firm
commitment to the further implementation of the ICPD
Programme of Action and to addressing priority areas,
particularly where either the global review has found
gaps in implementation or our own national analyses
have found greater needs. To ensure a robust approach
to implementation, we recognize that mutually
supportive partnerships are crucial. We must garner
resource allocation from all available sources and from
partners that have clearly not reached optimal levels of
cooperation to date.
It is imperative that national efforts be dedicated to
bridging gaps in implementation, advancing the ICPD
agenda and ensuring that ICPD issues are included in
the post-2015 development agenda. Governments and

14-5624415/27

A/69/PV.22

09/10/2014

the lead United Nations agencies must place them high
on their agendas if we are to maintain a sustainable
planet for the generations to come.

cooperation of our development partners, particularly
in building the necessary infrastructure and our
productive capacities, will be crucial to our success.

Mrs. Namgyel (Bhutan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening the debate on the followup to the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development beyond
2014, and for providing the opportunity for my
delegation to share our experiences, as well as the
challenges we faced, in implementing the Programme
of Action.

Bhutan is experiencing rapid demographic change.
With about 65 per cent of its population in the 25-andunder age group, the potential for a demographic
dividend is at its peak. Access to quality education and
vocational training that are responsive to the demands
of our social and economic development process is
therefore a key priority. The Government has been
increasingly engaging the private sector to create
the necessary jobs. Skills development, promotion of
foreign direct investment and development of small
and medium enterprises are part of our endeavours to
enhance employment opportunities for the youth.

The International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) marked an important shift in
our approach by placing the individual at the centre of
population and development policies. It also focused
our attention on relevant issues, including economic
growth and sustainable development, empowerment
of women, urbanization, education and technology.
In addition, as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
reports (A/69/62 and A/69/122), significant gains have
been made in population, health, life expectancy and
the protection of human rights, and an estimated one
billion people have been moved out of extreme poverty.
However, much still remains to be done.
In my own region, the detailed analysis by the
United Nations reveals that significant challenges still
remain in the implementation of ICPD. And, while it
is reassuring that the Programme of Action has been
extended beyond 2014 and that that review process will
inform and shape the post-2015 development agenda,
many of the challenges require urgent attention if the
progress and achievements since the Cairo summit are
to be sustained.
The Secretary-General has aptly underscored the
challenges of inequity and sustainability in his report,
as follows:
“Our greatest shared challenge is that our
very accomplishments, reflected in ever-greater
human consumption and extraction of the Earth’s
resources, are increasingly inequitably distributed,
threatening inclusive development, the environment
and our common future.” (A/69/62, p. 2)
In that context, my Government is committed
to ensuring that development is both inclusive and
sustainable. Bhutan is committed to remaining
carbon-neutral even as we strive to overcome
multidimensional poverty and meet the special needs of
the most vulnerable groups. The continued support and
16/27

Rapid urbanization due to rural-urban migration
has proved to be an increasingly complex challenge for
Bhutan. With 60 per cent of our population still in rural
areas, the pace of urbanization will inevitably intensify
in the near future and outpace our current capacity
to provide the necessary basic infrastructure and
public services to urban residents. Ensuring access to
land, housing, water, sanitary and waste management
services and livelihood, particularly for the urban poor,
are new dimensions to the development challenges that
we face.
Gender equality, equity and the empowerment of
women must continue to receive the highest priority
if we are to realize the full potential of the ICPD. In
that regard, Bhutan continues to promote women’s
rights and facilitate their full participation in the
socioeconomic development and the political and
decision-making processes. The current five-year
plan — the eleventh — has placed high priority on
gender-based monitoring and data generation, as well
as interventions to promote gender equality in local
governance. It will address visible gender gaps in the
areas of education, employment, political representation
and violence against women.
We also note and welcome the strong role that can
be played by civil society in realizing the ICPD agenda,
and we have taken concrete measures to encourage
its participation. While we had just few civil society
organizations in 1994, Bhutan now has 38 registered,
consisting of 29 public benefit organizations and
9 mutual benefit organizations. I take this opportunity
to acknowledge the support of all our development
partners and the efforts of United Nations Population
Fund and the Commission on Population and
14-56244

09/10/2014

Development towards the achievement of the goals and
objectives of the Programme of Action.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Bhutan
remains resolute in its commitment to the ICPD
Programme of Action and to further incorporating
all its aspects into our national planning process.
We hope that our renewed political commitment to
that Programme of Action will be backed by a strong
commitment from our development partners to provide
the financial and technical assistance that are necessary
for the full achievement of its goals and objectives. My
delegation looks forward to working to ensure that the
ICPD Programme of Action remains a high priority in
the post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomed the twenty-ninth special session to review
progress towards implementing the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD)
agenda. We particularly thank you, Mr. President, for
providing this occasion to ensure that those who lacked
the opportunity to speak on the issue during the special
session have the chance to air their views in the General
Assembly.
The ICPD review acknowledges significant
progress since 1994, but there is still much more to be
done if the vision of the ICPD Programme of Action is
to be realized, particularly for women, young people
and marginalized groups. The ICPD commitments are
the crucial foundation for a universally recognized,
relevant and sustainable development agenda.
Globally, women remain subject to violence and
harmful practices that negatively affect their health and
their human rights. In New Zealand and in our Pacific
neighbourhood we face high rates of violence against
women and must ensure that all survivors of violence
have immediate and safe access to critical services.
We must also focus even more on reducing violence
by involving men and boys in violence-prevention
initiatives.
Worldwide, 220 million women still have unmet
contraception needs. All women should be entitled to
accurate information and counselling on a range of
affordable, accessible and high-quality contraceptive
methods. In New Zealand, new contraceptive
technologies have resulted in significantly improved
access. In 2010, for example, our Government increased
access to long-acting reversible contraception by fully
subsidizing contraceptive implants.

A/69/PV.22

Despite progress, a key challenge still facing New
Zealand is the persistence of ethnic disparities, with
Máori and Pacific populations disproportionately
affected by negative sexual and reproductive health
outcomes. We must ensure that indigenous people
receive appropriate services, and, importantly, we
must address the social and economic factors that
disadvantage indigenous people.
New Zealand is also focused on assisting the
Pacific region to make progress under the ICPD. I
therefore listened with great interest and support to
the statements made a short time ago by Papua New
Guinea and Fiji. That assistance includes supporting
key multilateral organizations that work in the region,
such as the United Nations Population Fund, the
International Planned Parenthood Federation and the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.
We endorse the findings of the ICPD Beyond
2014 review, and we believe the actions it identifies
are vital to achieving inclusive, non-discriminatory
and equitable access to services, education and
information. For those reasons, New Zealand remains
firmly committed to working with Member States to
ensure that the post-2015 agenda and the ICPD Beyond
2014 processes promote inclusive development. Above
all, we will work to ensure that no one is left behind.
Ms. Stone (Australia): The issues covered by the
follow-up to the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) are
central to global efforts to achieve a peaceful, stable
and prosperous world and are at the core of our human
experience. While there has been some good progress
in implementing the Programme of Action, it is an
outrage that on the twentieth anniversary of the ICPD
we are still struggling to ensure fundamental human
rights for women and girls, to protect women and girls
from discrimination and violence in all their forms, and
to prevent early marriage and early pregnancy. Not only
must we ensure those rights and protections, but we
must address the reality that women and children are
also bearing the brunt of increasingly violent conflict
and protracted humanitarian crises around the world.
Women and children are receiving barbaric
treatment at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), which is systematically targeting
women and children with rape and other forms of
sexual and physical violence. Unmarried Iraqi girls and
women have been forcibly transported to Syria either

14-5624417/27

A/69/PV.22

to be given to ISIL fighters or sold as sex slaves, and
there are reports that an office for the sale of abducted
women has opened in Mosul city.
It is 178 days since 273 girls were kidnapped by
Boko Haram in Nigeria. And we are seeing increasing
rates of early and forced marriage as a response to
displacement and insecurity, with reports that rates
of child marriage have increased alarmingly in some
Syrian refugee populations. We cannot collectively
tolerate those actions, which are not only terrible acts,
but also fundamentally undermine basic global norms
and the rights of women and girls, which continue to be
challenged and questioned in far too many situations
around the world. That is not tolerable in the twentyfirst century.
Given those alarming trends, the ICPD Programme
of Action is as important today as it was 20 years ago.
We must work together to advance the rights of women
and girls, and not allow those rights to be eroded. That
will take commitment and action.
Australia commits to protecting and promoting
the rights of women and girls in all settings, including
humanitarian and conflict situations. Women and
children make up the vast majority of internally
displaced and refugee populations. The loss of their
homes, communities and social safety nets renders
those women and children extraordinarily vulnerable.
We will not let conflict or disasters become an
excuse to weaken our resolve to empower and protect
those women and children. In that spirit, Australia is
providing a further $2 million to the United Nations
Population Fund to continue its work to protect women
and girls in Iraq. We must not forget that women and
children in perilous circumstances still have rights, and
that those rights need to be protected.
Australia confirms its commitment to the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development Programme of Action, to the Beijing
Platform for Action and their subsequent reviews. And
Australia is committed to ensure that gender equality
and sexual and reproductive health and rights are
firmly embedded in the post-2015 development agenda.
At the Asian and Pacific Population Conference
in Bangkok, held in September last year, Australia
and the majority of countries in our region supported
a forward-looking declaration that upholds sexual and
reproductive rights for all. That demonstrates that as a
region we can continue to further the ICDP agenda, and

18/27

09/10/2014

we can be even more ambitious in our aspirations under
the Programme of Action.
Australia’s commitment to women’s economic
empowerment and leadership and to protecting women
from violence is a priority for us in Australia and
internationally, through our diplomacy and our aid.
Australia has set a benchmark for its aid programme,
making the commitment that at least 80 per cent of all
development activities must have a gender-equality
focus. We are also prioritizing maternal and child health
and family planning in our aid programme. Australia
has a dedicated ambassador for women and girls,
Natasha Stott Despoja, who engages internationally
to shift attitudes about the role, value and contribution
of women and girls. We urge others to appoint such
ambassadors. That could form a powerful global
network working for the rights of women and girls,
including indigenous women and girls, everywhere.
While we face serious challenges, we can deliver
on the promise of the ICPD Programme of Action if we
continue to shine a light on these important issues and
work together to deliver on our commitments.
Mr. Ferreira (Cabo Verde): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
election, and to express the pleasure of the Government
of the Republic of Cabo Verde in taking the floor in
this follow-up to the Assembly’s twenty-ninth special
session.
We would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the Secretary-General’s report entitled “Framework of
actions for the follow-up to the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014” (A/69/62). The Government
of Cabo Verde shares the report’s conclusion that
increasing individual human rights, capabilities and
dignity across the multiple sectors of the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) is
the foundation of sustainable development.
Cabo Verde has been putting human beings at
the centre of its endeavours to implement the ICPD
Programme of Action, particularly in the areas of
poverty reduction, access to sexual and reproductive
health services, access to education, the reduction of
maternal and child mortality, family planning and the
protection of reproductive rights. Combating violence
against women and women’s empowerment have been
among the highest priorities for our Government. In
its annual report, just released, UNICEF indicates that

14-56244

09/10/2014

Cabo Verde is about to achieve Goal 4 of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), on child and maternal
mortality. I can inform the Assembly that Cabo Verde
is in fact on the brink of meeting most of the MDGs.
The education of a young population and job creation
continue to pose great challenges for the Government
of Cabo Verde. However, as a consequence of our sound
policies in that area, our reduced fertility rates and the
ageing of the population have created new challenges
in issues related to the phenomenon of immigration,
which is already beginning to put pressure on our social
and economic structures. The expertise and support of
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in that
area is of the utmost important to my country.
Cabo Verde is fully committed to further
implementing the ICPD Programme of Action. We are
aware of and committed to the outcome of our regional
review and the findings and recommendations of the
ICPD Beyond 2014.
I will conclude by stressing that my country would
like to count on the continued and strong support of the
UNFPA in order to implement the 15 recommendations
in the report on its review of Cabo Verde.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I am very pleased to be able to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session and
wish you every success. I would also like to thank you for
convening this special and important meeting to follow
up on the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD)
beyond 2014. My delegation also thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the topic entitled “Framework
of actions for the follow-up to the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014” (A/69/62). We also thank
the United Nations Population Fund and the regional
commissions for facilitating the operational review in
our States and regions.
Today we would like to stress that one of the most
important challenges we are now facing is the eradication
of poverty and our efforts to to do that. Those efforts
require coordination and cooperation at every level
in dealing with the underlying causes of poverty and
with the phenomenon of climate change, with which
poverty eradication is now intertwined. Food security
and unemployment are the most prominent issues to be
dealt with.

A/69/PV.22

We emphasize the importance of enhancing
international cooperation and partnership everywhere,
as well as coordinating activities aimed at formulating
environmental policies to achieve equitable and
sustainable economic growth and to mobilize the
necessary financial resources. It is also necessary to
study the relevant challenges, taking into consideration
countries’ varied levels of development and striving for
a smooth transition to a post-2015 development agenda.
In that regard, we would like to recall the 1994 ICPD,
at which we adopted a Programme of Action based on
human rights and the principles of sustainability. It
aimed at enabling populations to exercise their right to
participate in development through enhancing healthcare services, better education and good governance,
without discrimination on the basis of race, colour or
religion.
The Sudan is now going through a phase of
demographic transition, since according to the most
recent census, taken in 2008, our population has now
reached 30 million and is expected to double by the year
2035. That demographic reality requires us to establish
national strategies to improve our demographic records,
quality of life and well-being.
The secession of South Sudan in 2011 created a
new economic, demographic and political reality in the
Sudan, which requires that we come up with the support
needed to update our demographic data through a new
census and by conducting the comprehensive national
surveys and intensive studies required for sound
planning for development.
We have seen enormous changes in the issue of
immigration, owing to the continuing flow of migrants
both internally and externally. Because it borders on
seven other States, the Sudan is considered a transit
State, which makes the problem of human trafficking,
especially of women and children, a major challenge. It
requires concerted effort both nationally and regionally
through cooperation among South-South countries, and
internationally through partnership among departments
managing migration. We must change the challenges
into opportunities for development among the countries
involved.
The Sudan has fulfilled its obligations in
establishing peace, security, stability and development.
However, we have continued to face genuine challenges
owing to economic sanctions and the burden of foreign
debt, which have adversely affected all aspects of our
development and basic services.

14-5624419/27

A/69/PV.22

In spite of all the restrictions facing the Sudan,
it has achieved notable progress in implementing the
ICPD Programme of Action, especially with regard to
the empowerment of women and gender equality. My
Government has adopted numerous policies that serve
as incentives to increase the political participation
of women, especially in leadership roles and at the
decision-making level. The Government of the Sudan
has continued to spare no effort to reduce the threat
of poverty through social security programmes,
microfinance services and social protection networks
aimed at supporting poor families, upgrading the
standard of living and generating employment for
young men. With regard to the reduction of maternal
mortality, the Government has continued to improve
the health of mothers and children through vaccination.
The Government is sparing no effort to fight AIDS,
malaria and chronic diseases, and it is also seeking to
mainstream health insurance programmes and to offer
free treatment for children under 5 years of age.
My delegation calls on the United Nations and its
specialized agencies to provide assistance, especially
in conflict-affected States. The Sudan has participated
in the review preparations and in all the reviews
conducted at the regional level in the Arab and African
contexts by virtue of its commitment to the ICPD
Programme of Action after 2014 and to the post-2015
development agenda. We endorse the outcomes of the
global and regional reviews regarding the fact that
such programmes have not been completed and urge
that they be completed through concerted efforts and
the building of partnerships on all levels, especially
since today the prospects for development are far better
than they were in 1994. We are in desperate need of
investment in programmes for youth and for the creation
of further opportunities for young people to participate
in building peace and promoting development for a
better future.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
(A/69/122)
stresses the importance of accountability and sound
governance to guarantee the post-2014 implementation
of the Programme of Action. It emphasizes the need
to consolidate effective partnerships and cooperative
relations that support national development strategies
and include population dynamics. We should like to
underscore the central role of the United Nations system
in supporting and enhancing the efforts of States to
implement the ICPD Programme of Action after 2014
and the post-2015 development agenda.

20/27

09/10/2014

In conclusion, my delegation notes that the Sudan
is now on the threshold of a critical new political phase
thanks to the initiative launched by President Omer
Hassan A. Al-Bashir on 27 January, which involves
holding a comprehensive national dialogue to ensure
that all political forces in the country participate in
decision-making. The current dialogue is not about who
governs the Sudan, but how to govern it in such a way as
to achieve our desired development objectives and the
necessary stability to be able to continue implementing
the Millennium Development Goals and the goals of the
post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): The delegation of
Brazil takes this opportunity to welcome and express our
deep appreciation for the supporting documentation by
the Secretary-General. The Secretary-General’s reports
(A/69/62 and A/69/122) reveal that Member States
have made considerable progress in implementing the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD). We have
significantly reduced poverty and improved access to
and the quality of health and education services. Since
the Cairo Conference, reproductive rights have been
realized all over the world. And the outcome documents
of the regional conferences have recognized that,
from the perspective of population and development,
evidence-based comprehensive sexuality education is
one of the paths to progress.
In celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the
Cairo agenda, Brazil reiterates its full commitment and
unwavering support to the United Nations initiatives
aimed at promoting the goals of that Programme
and confirms its subsequent commitments. Brazil
has subscribed to the Montevideo Consensus on
Population and Development, adopted by the Latin
American and Caribbean region in 2013, which not
only recognizes the importance of universal access
to health and reproductive rights and gender equality,
but also advances progressive commitments on sexual
orientation and gender identity. The Montevideo
Consensus took the lead in supporting comprehensive
sexuality education and recognizing the right to safe and
legal abortions, to access to emergency contraception
and to recognition of unpaid work.
With a view to assessing the results of and
improving the policies implemented in this area within
the framework of the ICPD Programme of Action, in
2012 Brazil reactivated its National Commission on
Population and Development. The Commission is made

14-56244

09/10/2014

up of representatives of ministries and civil society
organizations, who contribute to the elaboration of
integrated policies in such areas as the treatment of
HIV/AIDS and sexual and reproductive health. Our
public policies with respect to sexual and reproductive
rights are in line with the principles of the Cairo
Programmeof Action. In keeping with the concept
of comprehensive care for women, Brazil is seeking
to guarantee the right to free exercise of sexuality,
reproductive planning and humanized prenatal,
delivery and postpartum care, with a marked reduction
in maternal mortality.
Brazil has covered a great deal of ground since
the Cairo Conference. The percentage of the Brazilian
population below the extreme poverty line is today
just one third of what it was when the ICPD took
place. The per capita income of Brazil’s poorest 10 per
cent increased almost four times faster than that of
the richest 10 per cent, and that translated into an
unprecedented decline in inequality within the country.
Labour conditions have improved very substantially,
and average unemployment on a yearly basis now
hovers around the 5 per cent mark, one of the world’s
lowest — and this notwithstanding the economic and
financial crisis of 2008, from which major economies
are still recovering. Average labour income is now
60 per cent higher than it was 20 years ago. Life
expectancy is almost 10 years longer, and the infant
mortality rate is only one quarter of that in 1994. Today,
under 1 per cent of Brazilian municipalities have a very
low human development index, as against 85 per cent
in the early 1990s.
Brazil has also made progress in adopting a legal
framework that addresses the vulnerable segments of
its society. In 2011, by a decision of the Supreme Court
of Justice, Brazil recognized and ensured equal rights
for same-sex unions.
Many challenges lie ahead. Levels of maternal
mortality and unwanted adolescent pregnancy need to
decline more rapidly. Rates for youth unemployment
and dropping out of school early need to be further
reduced. The country has persistent gender gaps and
asymmetries domestically, socially and in the labour
market, in both the public and the private sectors,
as well as large and enduring racial differentials in
opportunities and outcomes. That is where Government
programmes such as the national programme for access
to technical education and employment, Bolsa Família
and many others have been brought into play in order

A/69/PV.22

to reverse the historical negative trend resulting from
years of insufficient attention to marginalized and
vulnerable groups, the needy and the less fortunate.
The world is still plagued with unacceptable
levels of inequality, aggravated by many forms of
discrimination. Progress in realizing fundamental
human rights ‑ such as sexual rights, comprehensive
sexuality education, the right not to be discriminated
against on the grounds of colour, gender, age, civil
status, gender identity and sexual orientation, respect
for diversity and the full protection of the rights of
all migrants ‑ has been slow and fragmented. We are
hopeful that a global consensus of the United Nations
on a new vision for sustainable development based
on the Rio+20 outcome document, “The future we
want”, will bring the international community closer
to cooperating effectively to overcome those critical
hurdles.
The 17 goals and 169 targets adopted by the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals
provide an integrated platform for this new vision. They
are a groundbreaking outcome that we wish to preserve
as the main basis for integrating the sustainable
development goals into the post-2015 development
agenda, to be adopted a year from now.
We value the social and human rights dimensions of
this new set of goals and targets, ranging from poverty
eradication and combating inequality to universal
access to sexual and reproductive health-care services
under a framework of economic growth, inclusiveness
and sustainability. It is an agenda that seeks to be
universal in nature while recognizing the common
but differentiated responsibilities of developed and
developing countries.
We now need to concentrate on ensuring that the
means of implementation are clearly identified and
that they measure up to our high ambitions in terms
of official development assistance commitments,
policy space for developing countries, and national and
international mobilization of resources and technology.
We will have to focus on adequate and effective
indicators, with assistance from the United Nations, the
competent national entities of Member States and the
relevant civil society groups.
Realizing rights entails promoting equality and
equity within and among countries, securing respect
for diversity, and improving education, working
conditions and opportunities for all. Development also

14-5624421/27

A/69/PV.22

requires worldwide synergy and global leadership from
the United Nations. This is where we need to reaffirm
unambiguously that the right to development is a
fundamental, universal and inalienable human right.
If we are serious about population and development,
and I believe we are, the foregoing are our main
endeavours. In that spirit, I would like to reaffirm
Brazil’s full commitment to the ICPD Programme of
Action, to the key actions for its further implementation
and to the findings and recommendations of the
Secretary-General.
Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Colombia
thanks you, Mr. President, for allowing us to show our
commitment to the population and development agenda
and its extension beyond 2014.
In 1994, we decided to implement the Cairo
Programme of Action to guarantee to all persons a life
lived without discrimination, in equitable conditions
and free from poverty, and with full respect ensured for
all rights, including sexual and reproductive rights. Our
goal was the full implementation of the Programme of
Action by 2014, and today we can count innumerable
prime examples of progress for all our populations. In
the case of Colombia, that agenda was fundamental for
guiding public policies on the subject.
Colombia has made significant progress in
combating poverty. More than 2.5 million people
have emerged from poverty in the past four years.
That figure does not correlate with income alone but
reflects a multidimensional perspective that takes into
account such variables as education, health and work.
The multidimensional vision of poverty has allowed us
to measure the true extent of the transformation in a
person’s quality of life and its sustainability over time.
Furthermore, my country has a comprehensive human
rights policy, which has a differential approach and
covers children, youth and women, together with lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, as well
as indigenous peoples, Afro-Colombians, people with
disabilities and older persons.

09/10/2014

discrimination of any kind, as universal human rights.
For that reason, in the framework of the sustainable
development goals, we have advocated the inclusion
of a goal along those lines. Synergy between the
population and development agenda and the sustainable
development goals is undeniable because they address
multidimensional development and are people-centred.
At this session of the General Assembly, we will
be called on to discuss the sustainable development
goals. We cannot lose sight of the fact that those goals
have the potential of transforming our States and the
lives of the individuals and peoples in them. They are,
undoubtedly, a set of tools with which to accomplish
the goals set in Cairo in 1994.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
debate, which I hope will be fruitful.
Although the world has changed significantly
in the last two decades, the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD), adopted in 1994, remains
relevant. Furthermore, the strong interdependence of
the issues of development, environment and human
well-being outlined in the ICPD Programme provides
the solid foundation for sustainable development and
the post-2015 development agenda.
I would like to inform the General Assembly that,
despite the complex political processes and economic
difficulties in Kyrgyzstan, we have achieved good
progress in our implementation of the Programme of
Action. The new Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic,
adopted after the revolution of 2010, proclaims
Kyrgyzstan as a socially oriented State. It should be
noted that the European Commission for Democracy
through Law, known as the “Venice Commission”,
commended the section of the Constitution that
addresses human rights and freedoms.

Among our achievements, I must point out today
the progress made in reducing maternal and child
mortality. In addition, I am pleased to note that we have
made significant headway in preventing adolescent
pregnancies.

To date, my country has ratified seven of the nine
major United Nations international conventions on
human rights. Furthermore, Kyrgyzstan has subscribed
to more than 40 international obligations and standards
in the area of human rights, within the framework of
the legal instruments of the United Nations, the main
conventions of the International Labour Organization
and the Helsinki Final Act.

The population and development agenda has
allowed us to undertake concrete action to guarantee
sexual and reproductive health for everyone, without

Most of the international standards on human
rights and basic freedoms have been incorporated
into our national legislation. Kyrgyzstan has adopted

22/27

14-56244

09/10/2014

25 regulatory legal instruments to protect the legitimate
rights and interests of children. Laws guaranteeing
equal rights and equal opportunities for men and
women, together with social and legal protection
from domestic violence, are the underpinnings of
an equitable gender policy. To effectively regulate
migration and demographic trends, we have adopted
laws on such subjects as external migration, internal
migration, international labour migration, refugees
and preventing and combating trafficking in human
beings, as well as many other legal instruments on
social and health protection issues. Kyrgyzstan also
attaches great importance to improving health care and
fighting HIV/AIDS and preventing its impact on our
socioeconomic development. It is necessary to note that
child mortality has been substantially reduced in recent
years, and we have achieved some progress in the area
of reproductive health.
Kyrgyzstan has also succeeded in implementing the
Programme of Action with regard to the empowerment
of women and the improvement of their political and
social status. The representation of women and youth at
decision-making levels has significantly increased. In
recent years, our women have held leadership positions,
including as President, Chairperson of the Supreme
Court, ministers and heads of other governmental
institutions. Today, nearly a third of our Parliament
members are women.
The new challenges in economic development have
led to a growth in unemployment, which is a major
factor in internal and external migration, especially on
the part of the young population. The analysis of the
country’s demographic and labour situation shows that
the trend of growing labour migration from Kyrgyzstan
to foreign countries will continue, at least for the
next five years. Although that tendency will lead to
a reduction in the unemployment level, it will have
a negative influence on demographic trends, labour
power and the institution of the family.
Despite the progress achieved, there is still
much to be done. Further empowerment of women,
especially in rural areas, child protection, employment
opportunities for young people and the improvement
of social protection for the elderly and disabled, have
become key objectives for the future we want. In order
to reach those objectives, we have adopted a national
sustainable development strategy for 2014-2017, which
focuses on improvements in the effectiveness of health
care and education, the protection of human rights and

A/69/PV.22

freedoms, the role of the family, gender equality and
social protection.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm that Kyrgyzstan
is strongly committed to strengthening international
cooperation and effective partnership with the United
Nations Population Fund and other United Nations
agencies. That is the only real way to facilitate a
full implementation of the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): It
is with great pleasure that I take the floor at this
meeting dedicated to reviewing the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development (ICPD) beyond 2014. I take this
opportunity to thank the Executive Director of the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) for the
attention he has given to the issue through the many
events held, the reports published and the support
provided to developing countries aimed at enabling
them to benefit from the experience that has been
gained in terms of population and development policies.
Since the adoption of the 1994 Cairo Programme
of Action, significant progress has been made and has
been reviewed in 1999, 2004 and 2009 and, finally, at
the comprehensive review of the ICPD Programme of
Action held in April 2014 at the forty-seventh session
of the Commission on Population and Development.
My country, the Kingdom of Morocco, welcomes the
many consultations and surveys carried out with the
support of UNFPA, which have enabled us to assess the
progress made and identify the challenges that continue
to affect the achievement of the objectives set out by
the Cairo Conference. Similarly, audits performed in
2013 during the regional conferences, in cooperation
with the United Nations regional commissions, allowed
for an open and inclusive regional consultation on the
subject of monitoring the Programme of Action beyond
2014 and the post-2015 development agenda.
Morocco has made ​​progress in many areas, including
universal access to sexual and reproductive health
services. The rate of contraceptive use has increased
significantly, and infant and maternal mortality have
declined significantly over the past 20 years, from
76.1 infant deaths per 1,000 in 1991 to 30.5 per 1,000
in 2011, and from 332 maternal deaths per 100,000 live
births in 1992 to 112 deaths in 2010. The number of
prenatal consultations and the proportion of assisted

14-5624423/27

A/69/PV.22

births also increased significantly, reaching 77.1 per
cent and 73.6 per cent, respectively, in 2011.
Moreover, in addition to its reproductive health
strategy and national family planning programme,
Morocco has implemented a health strategy aimed
at meeting the specific needs of young people and
adolescents, particularly in terms of information,
education and clinical services for the prevention of
unwanted pregnancies, on the risks related to unsafe
abortions and on the prevention and treatment of
sexually transmissible diseases and gender-based
violence.
In terms of strengthening democracy, Morocco
has undertaken bold reforms at both the institutional
and the legislative levels. They include the revision
of the Constitution; the reform of the penal, election,
family, nationality and labour codes; and the adoption
of advanced regionalization measures. Alongside those
reforms, the Kingdom has established institutions
tasked with enforcing the rules of good governance,
protecting rights and freedoms and strengthening
participatory democracy.
That decisive progress towards realizing the vision
of a society that ensures the effectiveness of rights
and freedoms is enhanced by the Kingdom’s efforts
to harmonize national law and align its policies with
internationally ratified conventions. We have also lifted
our reservations to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
adopted the Optional Protocol thereto, which is in line
with that progress.
The results achieved in the 20 years since the
Cairo Conference are encouraging but remain uneven
across regions and countries and within countries.
Those difficulties are compounded by new challenges
in a constantly changing environment characterized
by rapid globalization and changes in types of family
organization, the emerging needs of youth, the ageing
of the population, rapid urbanization in developing
countries and growing disparities.
In addition, the mobilization of resources
continues to be a concern. Of course, internal resource
mobilization should be encouraged and diversified,
but without an effective contribution by the donor
community, it will be difficult to achieve the objectives
of the Cairo Programme of Action, which remain valid
beyond 2014, as stressed in resolution 65/234, which
was adopted in 2010.

24/27

09/10/2014

The delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco firmly
supports the ICPD review process, which reaffirms
the validity of the goals set out in the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development for the period beyond 2014 and
supports their inclusion in the post-2015 development
programme.
Mr. Bristol (Nigeria): At the outset, I would like
to commend you, Mr. President, for your excellent
leadership of the General Assembly at this session
and, more importantly, for providing us with the
opportunity to share our perspectives on the important
issues arising from the International Conference on
Population and Development (ICPD) beyond 2014 for
human development and improvement.
As this debate is coming on the heels of the
twenty-ninth special session of the General Assembly,
on the follow-up to the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) beyond 2014, which was held last
month, Nigeria believes that a window of opportunity
has once again been provided for Member States
to exchange ideas on the best practices needed to
transform the lives of the poor and the vulnerable. We
are of the view that the global community must take
advantage of the opportunity to shape the two key
global development agendas: the ICPD Programme
beyond 2014, and the post-2015 development agenda. Of
particular importance is the need to engage an effective
framework for reviewing existing population trends and
related policies to capture all emerging development
issues within the context of the two agendas.
Nigeria also reiterates that concerted efforts must
be devoted to the assessment of the quantity and quality
of investments made to improve the lives of the various
components of the population, especially young people,
women and girls, as well as the condition of the aged.
In that regard, we affirm our commitment to the full
implementation of the ICPD+20 agenda. We would,
however, like to highlight that the agenda must include
the following priority areas.
Quality investments in young people’s education,
health care, employment and inclusion are necessary
ingredients for reaping the democratic dividend.
Extreme poverty and hunger must be eradicated. The
sexual and reproductive health of adolescents, young
people and women must be improved, with a view
especially to accelerating the promotion of family

14-56244

09/10/2014

planning practices. The rates for avoidable maternal
deaths and those of infants and children under 5 must
be reduced to single digit figures. Practices that protect
women, girls and children, including those in conflicts
and insecure situations, against violence must be
prioritized. Policies that inhibit early marriage must be
supported. Social security must be institutionalized, so
as to provide support for the elderly, especially ageing
women.
We have to properly situate population dynamics
in the entire spectrum of our population and
development programmes. We have to provide support
to build capacity and invest more in technology, data
collection, analysis, disaggregation, dissemination,
communication and management strategies for the
effective monitoring and evaluation of policies and
programmes. We must prioritize programmes of action
that promote the security of life and property and
lasting internal stability. Finally, we must promote
good governance, transparency and accountability.
Nigeria urges cooperation on the part of all
stakeholders through unconditional partnerships and
global leadership from the United Nations as the next
phase unfolds.
Mr. Grima (Malta): Malta welcomes the holding
of this meeting supplementing the special session
celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD)
and its Programme of Action.
The International Conference, held in Cairo in
1994, presented a paradigm shift when the international
community agreed that population was not just about
people, but about making people count. Through the
Programme of Action, States made a pledge to improve
the lives of individuals by moving away from the
focus on numbers and instead putting human rights at
the heart of population and development issues. That
approach ensured that realizing and protecting human
rights would in turn contribute to the improvement of
human lives and advance everyone’s well-being.
The 1994 Conference Declaration and its
Programme of Action is a point of reference to other
processes and other key documents, such as the Beijing
Platform for Action. As a matter of fact, the principles
highlighted in Cairo were reconfirmed six years
later when world leaders endorsed the Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2) and the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), which have been a central

A/69/PV.22

part of the United Nations work over the past 14 years.
With less than a year left, it is important that Member
States continue their endeavours to fulfil the MDGs.
The ensuing process will build upon their successes
and seek to address the gaps. The post-2015 framework
should accomplish the unfinished business of the
MDGs.
Economic and social development continue to be
an integral part of the Cairo legacy ‑ they are its pillars
‑ and, together with sustainable development, remain
a dominant factor in today’s development agenda.
However, progress on the ICPD beyond 2014 agenda has
to be universal and should address every part of society,
thereby ensuring an all-inclusive society that leaves no
one behind. It should also support other sectors, such as
agriculture, energy, transport, environment, water and
health.
Furthermore, any development agenda that aims at
individual and collective well-being and sustainability
has to guarantee dignity and human rights to all
individuals. Malta believes that development and
human rights are intrinsically interrelated, and, to that
end, it considers a move towards a human rights-based
approach to development cooperation as a positive
development. Such an approach helps respect, protect
and fulfil human rights universally.
The progress achieved in improving the livelihood
of people since the adoption of the Programme of
Action can easily be seen. Tangible results include the
advancement of the status of women. Most societies
now acknowledge and are working towards improving
women’s full participation in all sectors of society. For
example, the ICPD helped us promote the importance
of economically independent women and their role in
decision-making, particularly political participation,
as a means of enabling development and healthier
societies.
Thanks to the ICPD, we have also seen an increase
in the rate of education, which is also a means of
promoting development and gender equality and of
changing gender stereotypes and discriminatory
attitudes. In the past 20 years, we have seen a decrease
in extreme poverty. There have also been significant
reductions in maternal deaths and improvements in
skilled birth attendance. Having said that, we are still
not there and more needs to be done.
The world is passing through difficult and
challenging times. The prevalence of poverty, climate

14-5624425/27

A/69/PV.22

change, diseases like malaria and HIV/AIDS, the Ebola
pandemic, terrorism, natural diseases, the trafficking
of persons, particularly women and children, and illegal
trafficking in arms and drugs are all proliferating
the risks that our generation is facing and even at
times threaten the very existence of our populations.
Such crises and threats are marginalizing the Cairo
Programme of Action and the MDGs, putting them
beyond our reach unless a renewed effort is made by
all to correct and turn the tide of those predicaments
impeding the protection of our present and future
generations.
We regret that the ICPD Programme of Action
has of late been associated with and linked solely to
reproductive rights. Although chapters VII and VIII
represent important aspects of the ICPD, one must also
appreciate and recognize the other chapters and the
Programme of Action in its entirety. As it did in Cairo
many years ago, Malta would like to once again reaffirm
its position on reproductive rights and its long-standing
position that no recommendation or commitment can in
any way create an obligation on any party to consider
abortion as a legitimate form of reproductive health
rights, services or commodities. Malta continues to
hold the view that any discussion of rights and services
relating to reproductive health cannot take place outside
the framework of one of the most fundamental human
rights ‑ the right to life.
Malta strongly believes that the right to life extends
to the unborn child from the moment of conception, and
that therefore the use of abortion as a means of resolving
health or social problems is a denial of that right. It is
within such a framework of human rights ‑ the right
to life ‑ that Malta has for the past 20 years held the
Cairo Declaration and the Programme of Action in high
esteem. Malta will remain committed to implement the
ICPD values and objectives in that spirit. The ICPD
Programme of Action is a benchmark document that
has served a guide for improving the lives and dignity
of all people. The chapters are based on the notion that
we all have to strive to improve human lives through the
promotion and protection of human rights. Since 1994,
a constant debate has centred on how to implement that
belief.
As we move forward and the target date of
the Millennium Development Goals approaches,
the international community needs to renew its
commitments and efforts to achieve the ICPD goals
and commitments. It must also build on the ICPD

26/27

09/10/2014

and work hard to reach a consensus on a post-2015
development agenda that responds to the opportunities
and challenges of today’s world.
We believe that the work on the framework of
actions for the follow-up to the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014 should be grounded in a
critical evaluation of the success of the ICPD, the
MDGs and subsequent relevant commitments. In
the process, both successful areas and those needing
improvement should be identified and guide our
response to the current development challenges in a
post-2015 framework.
Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important meeting.
At the outset, I wish to express Eritrea’s commitment
to the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD).
The assessment of the status of the implementation
of the ICPD Programme of Action undertaken at the
forty-seventh session of the Commission on Population
and Development, last April, was the result of intense
and lengthy intergovernmental negotiations. It covered
several important matters that are essential to our
core values with regard to moving forward the ICPD
Programme of Action beyond 2014. In that regard, it
is important that the development strategy should be
country-led and take the specific conditions, needs and
priorities of every State into account.
As many countries respond to the challenges of
demographic changes, poverty, social inequalities,
international migration, rapid urbanization and climate
change, it is vital to integrate population dynamics
into development planning at the national, regional
and international levels. With regard to the linkages
between the ICPD Programme of Action beyond 2014
and the post-2015 development agenda and other
intergovernmentally agreed goals, it essential that
the overarching goal should be to eradicate extreme
poverty in all its manifestations.
To meet the commitments that we make and have
made in various forums, cooperation, coordination
and participation should be enhanced in an inclusive
manner among all stakeholders. In the delivery of basic
services, Eritrea has been emphasizing the participation
of communities at the grass-roots level to promote
self-reliance and reduce dependency. By mobilizing
and motivating communities to be involved in the

14-56244

09/10/2014

design, development and utilization of development
programmes, Eritrea has succeeded in meeting the
health-related Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and
6. That significant achievement was announced in a
side event, jointly organized with the United Nations
country team, during the general debate at the current
session.
However, in order to sustain its success, Eritrea
recognized that more needs to be done, which
includes consolidating and building on those gains,
further empowering women and girls, improving
access to strengthened reproductive and health-care
services, intensifying efforts to end child marriages
and female genital mutilation, continuing to build
human capabilities, especially among the youth,
and strengthening data collection analysis and
dissemination.

A/69/PV.22

Since the adoption of the ICPD in 1994, migration
has become a growing feature of our globalizing world,
bringing challenges and opportunities to the countries
of origin, transit and destination. In that regard, the
nexus between migration and development must be
comprehensively addressed.
Let me conclude by thanking the United Nations
Population Fund and its leadership for its cooperation
in organizing a series of consultations and briefings,
especially at the regional level, which allowed us to
benefit from an open and frank discussions on a range
of issues leading to the adoption of an African core
position.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

14-5624427/27
