S/PV.7945

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7945th meeting

Monday, 22 May 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bermúdez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299 (2016) (S/2017/357)
Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/371)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-14420 (E)
*1714420*

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2299 (2016) (S/2017/357)
Fourteenth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/371)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/371, which contains the fourteenth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: The days of the the so-called caliphate
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq
are numbered, thanks to the bravery and patriotism
of the Iraqi security forces, including the Popular
Mobilization Forces, the Peshmerga and the tribal
volunteers, as well as the endurance of the Iraqi people.
The liberation of Mosul is imminent. Operations are
shifting to remaining areas and pockets of Da’esh
presence, including along the borders with Syria.
The 22 March meeting of the international
counter-ISIL coalition in Washington, D.C., was a
clear reminder that we must maintain a dual focus
on both the challenge of defeating Da’esh and on
the post-liberation stabilization and rehabilitation
phase in Iraq. Support and assistance for Iraq from
the international community, including its regional
partners, are indispensable.
2/19

22/05/2017

I am encouraged by the continuous commitment
of the Iraqi National Alliance to achieving a national
settlement. I also acknowledge the long-awaited
submission of the Iraqi forces coalition’s vision
of the historic national settlement, along with a
confidence-restoration initiative. On 17 May, in
Baghdad, the broadly inclusive Turkmen forum
adopted a common Turkmen vision for a national
settlement based on mutual respect of equal rights and
responsibilities within a united Iraq. Other groups,
civil society and tribal elements continue to share their
respective visions on how and on what principles to
rebuild post-Da’esh Iraq.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) is committed to helping Iraqi parties achieve
an inclusive national settlement based on several
guiding principles: respect for the Iraqi Constitution
and the unity of Iraq, citizenship with equal rights
and responsibilities, equal participation in the political
process, the rejection of and fighting against terrorism,
and the rejection of sectarianism, inter alia.
National reconciliation can succeed only if it reflects
the needs and expectations of the people, not only the
politicians. Women and youth, who make up more
than half of Iraq’s population, are a key constituency.
Under the title “Iraq: Youth and Coexistence”, UNAMI
convened seven separate forums across the country
bringing together more than 750 young participants
from all Iraqi provinces.
The project concluded in a national conference in
Baghdad on 20 May that called for separating religion
from politics, enforcing the secular character of the
State, putting an end to the sectarian quota system
through legislation, reforming educational curriculums
for the promotion of the Iraqi identity, patriotism
and the spirit of tolerance, and empowering women,
especially young women.
The imminent defeat of Da’esh must provide an
urgent impetus to address the concerns of minorities
and enable their safe return to their homes. Minorities
in Iraq continue to face existential challenges and need
special attention.
The return of all displaced persons to liberated
areas must be at the top of the list of priorities of
the Government of Iraq. I would like to express my
continuing concern over the delay in the return of
displaced persons to areas liberated long ago, such
as Jurf Al-Sakher or places in Diyala governorate. In
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

addition, many hundreds of alleged disappearances
that reportedly took place last year in Al-Sejar and
Saglawiya in Anbar and at the Razzaza checkpoint,
or this year in Taremia, remain unresolved. Moreover,
there are instances of disappearances as a result
of vetting processes in the liberated areas. Lack of
progress on the issue of return could affect demographic
composition and would undermine efforts towards
national settlement.
I urge Baghdad and Erbil to leverage the reservoir
of goodwill accumulated in their joint battle against
Da’esh and urgently engage in high-level political
dialogue and negotiations on the key outstanding
issues in the political, economic and administrative
fields. Lack of dialogue and progress on issues such
as a functional federation based on partnership or
the implementation of article 140 of the Constitution,
concerning disputed boundaries and territories, will
increasingly create problems and tensions.
Senior officials in the Kurdistan region of Iraq have
declared their intention to hold in 2017 a referendum on
the future status of the region. They stressed that the
objective of the plebiscite would be to show the world
the will of the people, rather than to immediately declare
independence. Also, the authorities in Kirkuk have
indicated their willingness to take part in the planned
referendum on the future status of the Kurdistan region
of Iraq.
The Turkish armed forces have relentlessly
continued to conduct air strikes on suspected positions
of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) in Iraq. For the
first time, on 25 April, they conducted an air attack
on PKK targets in the Sinjar area, Ninewa governorate.
Turkish leaders declared that the strikes would continue
in order to deny the PKK another sanctuary and to
push back threats to Turkey’s national security. Prime
Minister Al Abadi condemned the attack, warning that
these types of activities undermined regional efforts
against Da’esh.
Respect for the rule of law in Iraq remains weak.
Kidnapping and hostage-taking, irrespective of
criminal or other motives, have increasingly become
a problem. A prominent Shia cleric, Muqtada al-Sadr,
warned that the number of kidnappings would increase
in future after, as he said, “shameless militias” take
control of liberated areas. On 11 May, the national
intelligence cell headed by Prime Minister Al Abadi
discussed the issues of kidnappings and organized

S/PV.7945

crime, acknowledged the interconnection between
terrorism and organized crime, and took additional
measures to prevent and resolve such acts.
Ensuring justice and accountability remains
crucial if community and national reconciliation is to
succeed in the post-ISIL period. While the international
community needs to vigorously pursue initiatives that
aim to promote accountability for international crimes
committed in Iraq by Da’esh and hopes to get support
from the Iraqi Government, the United Nations in Iraq
has been undertaking work with a range of partners to
promote accountability at the national level.
A complex electoral calendar looms in Iraq,
including in the Kurdistan region, for 2017 and 2018.
Of primary importance is the holding of elections for
the new Iraqi Parliament within its constitutional term
in April 2018, as a precursor of the creation of the new
Government that will steer the country in the postDa’esh period.
Delays and uncertainties as regards the electoral,
legal and institutional framework and preparations are
increasingly of concern and cast doubt on whether it
will be possible to hold provincial council elections in
September 2017 in a way that would ensure credibility
and inclusiveness as well as wide participation.
Since military operations to retake Mosul began,
in mid-October, 700,000 people have fled their homes,
approximately one fifth of whom have been able to
return home. An estimated 200,000 people are still
in ISIL-controlled parts of the city, where they are
reportedly suffering extreme shortages of food and
water, and are at risk from bombardment and being
caught in the crossfire.
The United Nations Development Programme’s
Funding Facility for Stabilization continues to expand
also, in Ninewa. More than 230 projects are under way
in eastern Mosul, including the rehabilitation of watertreatment plants, electrical substations, schools and
health-care facilities. One hundred and thirty projects
are under way in the Ninewa plains, including in hardhit minority communities.
Allow me to now turn to the fourteenth report of the
Secretary-General on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives (S/2017/371).
On 3 May, I travelled to Kuwait. While
acknowledging the reinvigoration of the file, my

17-144203/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

interlocutors reiterated their regret at the lack of
tangible results. They also voiced pragmatic ideas on
the way forward.
In two days, Iraq will be hosting, for the first time
in 14 years, the forty-fourth session of the Tripartite
Commission. Echoing the press statement issued by
the Council in July 2016, I would urge the Government
of Iraq to fulfil its international obligations under this
file. I also wish to commend Kuwait for the support and
understanding that it has consistently shown towards
the challenges faced by the Government of Iraq over
the years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Kubiš for his briefing.
First, we must express our support for the
Government of Iraq in its ongoing efforts to defeat
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS). To that
end, as the fight to rid Iraqi territory of ISIS fighters
continues, we commend the Iraqi Security Forces for
taking measures to protect civilians while fighting
ISIS in Mosul. The United States is fully committed
to the protection of civilians in its counter-ISIS efforts
and looks to all parties fighting ISIS to make the
same commitment.
Today, I would like to touch on three main subjects:
the humanitarian crisis, building stability for the future,
and accountability for ISIS.
The United States remains deeply concerned
at the grave humanitarian conditions in Iraq. Daily
displacement rates are increasing, and more Iraqis are
vulnerable now than at any time before in the recent
conflict. The humanitarian situation is expected to
deteriorate until families are able to re-establish their
livelihoods. We urge donors to contribute to the 2017
United Nations humanitarian response plan, which is
currently just 28 per cent funded. Funding the Plan is
critical to assisting those in need.
We applaud the efforts of the Iraq Government,
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
agencies aimed at assisting internally displaced persons
(IDPs) by increasing humanitarian-relief capacity. We
urge Government authorities, including those in the
4/19

22/05/2017

Iraqi Kurdistan region, to ensure ready access to IDP
camps as the international community continues to
build capacity. The United States encourages the United
Nations to work closely with both the Government of
Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to continue
efforts towards the voluntary return and reintegration
of those displaced. We likewise appreciate the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) aimed at supporting the Government
of Iraq’s dialogue with minority populations across
the country.
Turning to the future, the United States remains
committed to a united, federal and democratic Iraq,
as defined in the Iraqi Constitution. The stakes for
achieving lasting stability in Iraq will remain high,
and success will depend not just on the outcome of
the military campaign, but also on the steps Iraq and
the international community take in the coming days,
months and years. Iraqi-led, United Nations-supported
stabilization efforts are as critical as ever to promoting
local reconciliation and preventing the resurgence
of ISIS in liberated areas. We welcome UNAMI’s
continued work towards these goals and we commend
Mr. Kubiš’ efforts on behalf of the Iraqi people.
Good governance is also central to enduring
reconciliation. As such, we urge the Government of
Iraq to continue its progress in implementing political,
economic and social reforms. These reforms are key to
bringing an end to corruption and protecting the civil
rights and religious freedom of all Iraqis.
Finally, we support the United Kingdom’s proposal
for the creation of an international investigative body
that will assist the Government of Iraq to investigate,
document and gather evidence of atrocities perpetrated
by ISIS and other extremist groups. We must hold
these perpetrators accountable. Comprehensive efforts
towards accountability and reconciliation will prove
critical to Iraq’s achieving its full potential, which we
all recognized as great, with long-term peace, stability
and prosperity for all Iraqis.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Kubiš for his briefing today. His mission
is carrying out an important function at a critical time
for Iraq, supporting the Government as it seeks to
spread stability and security across the country.
At the outset, I want to commend the brave men
and women of the Iraqi security forces. Thanks to
their bravery and sacrifice, Da’esh now controls less
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

than 12 square kilometres of territory in Iraq. Soon it
will be none. Mosul will be liberated, and Da’esh’s socalled caliphate in Iraq will have been brought to an
end. For us, the Secretary-General makes clear in his
report (S/2017/357) that, until that happens — until Iraq
is free from the terrible scourge of Da’esh — families
will continue to be subjected to horrific violence at the
hands of these fanatics. We therefore cannot relent in
our efforts. We must do everything we can to help them.
The United Kingdom commends Prime Minister Al
Abadi for putting the protection of civilians at the heart
of Iraq’s military operations. It is critical that the Iraqi
Security Forces continue to do so throughout the final
and most difficult stages.
The United Kingdom is playing its part and is
supporting the Iraqi security forces through the global
coalition against Da’esh. We have contributed almost
$220 million in life-saving aid to vulnerable displaced
families across the country. The United Kingdom has
also pledged almost $12.5 million to support United
Nations funding facility for immediate stabilization
to support newly liberated areas. We encourage other
donors to contribute to the humanitarian response plan
for Iraq.
The conflict has had a disproportionate impact on
women and girls. That is why we are also providing
$1.2 million to help implement Iraq national action plan
on women, peace and security. As Da’esh’s caliphate
comes to an end, Iraq will need political reconciliation
and reform. The United Kingdom welcomes the efforts
of Iraq’s political leaders aimed at promoting national
reconciliation, and we urge UNAMI to continue to
facilitate these efforts. We also welcome the support
Iraq’s neighbours have provided in this time of need and
urge them to continue their solidarity and friendship.
As the Security Council knows too well, security
and stability will count for little without accountability.
That is why the United Kingdom launched, along with
Iraq and Belgium, a global push to bring Da’esh to
justice. As we have said before, time is of the essence.
We must start gathering evidence of its crimes before it
is lost. Newly liberated areas hold a wealth of evidence
against Da’esh that the international community must
help Iraq collect and preserve. The United Kingdom
has been working closely with the Government of Iraq
and international partners to achieve this end.
I welcome the discussions we have had with a
Government of Iraq on this issue and Prime Minister

S/PV.7945

Al Abadi’s recent and significant statement made at the
end of March, which called for the Security Council to
adopt a resolution to prosecute Da’esh’s crimes against
civilians. This message was delivered during the
Secretary-General’s visit to Baghdad. We believe the
United Kingdom proposal is the clear way forward for
the Council to answer Prime Minister Al Abadi’s call.
We look forward to working with our Iraq colleagues so
that the proposal can be finalized as soon as possible.
As the global community works together to defeat
Da’esh, we must work together to hold it to account.
As the Council lead on resolution 2107 (2013), the
United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons
and property (S/2017/371). Unfortunately, despite
the strengthening of bilateral relations between Iraq
and Kuwait, there has been no progress on returning
Kuwaiti property this year. I want to extend our support
to all parties in their efforts aimed at achieving tangible
progress over the next year.
Ultimately, we all want to see a stable, secure,
prosperous and unified Iraq. The United Kingdom
stands ready to work with the Government of Iraq and
our in international partners to build the better future
all Iraqis want and deserve. UNAMI will play a critical
role in this effort. On behalf of the United Kingdom, I
thank the Special Representative and his staff for their
work at such a significant point in Iraq’s history.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened carefully to Special Representative
Kubiš’ briefing. We welcome the active and dynamic
efforts made by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI).
Russia is tied to Iraq historically. Because of our
friendship, we support with political and practical steps
those of the Iraqi Government being taken to regain
control over territory taken by terrorists, ensuring the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
We would like to see the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) eradicated as soon
as possible. In view of the close relationship between
Iraqi and Syrian terrorists, the possibility of a complete
victory over ISIL in Iraq, independent of its destruction
in Syria, hardly seems likely. In that regard, international
counter-terrorism operations should be thoroughly
coordinated with the aim of presenting a broad front
in the fight against terrorism. The Russian Federation
is ready to cooperate with efforts in that regard. We

17-144205/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

welcome Baghdad’s use of bilateral communication
channels with its regional partners and its positive
efforts to maintain good relations with neighbouring
States. It is essential to ensure that those involved in
combating terrorism in Iraq respect its sovereignty and
coordinate their actions with the authorities in Baghdad.
Despite the Iraqis’ limited successes in combating
terrorism, the situation remains tense and the
Government of Iraq needs more attention and assistance
from the international community. Terrorists are still
present in a number of cities and governorates. Civilians
are being used as human shields and terrorists are using
chemical weapons increasingly often. We insist that
such crimes must be objectively investigated, including
by harnessing the potential of a joint investigative
mechanism in order to help the Iraqi Government put
an end to this threat. At the same time, however, we
realize that stability cannot be restored in Iraq by force
alone. Along with providing humanitarian assistance,
it is vital that the country’s entire administrative,
economic, housing and socioeconomic infrastructure
be rebuilt. Prime Minister Al Abadi’s Government is
already accomplishing a great deal in that area, but
international assistance is still needed here too.
The key to achieving post-conflict normalization
in Iraq is promoting a national dialogue and creating
the conditions that can bring every religious and ethnic
group into that dialogue with the goal of restoring a
peaceful existence in Iraq for people of all faiths.
We believe that the assistance of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq in establishing that dialogue
through support for national reconciliation initiatives
launched by the various Iraqi political forces and their
transformation into a single comprehensive settlement
plan for Iraq should remain a priority for the Mission.
We commend the spirit and conscience of its staff as
they continue to work in conditions that are seriously
threatened by terrorism and the ongoing war with ISIL.
Iraq needs international assistance, and there is still
much to do to normalize its situation.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We appreciate Special
Representative Kubiš’s update on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. Kazakhstan
greatly values the efforts of the Mission and the United
Nations system to provide critical services to the people
of Iraq amid serious and challenging threats.
At the outset, we would like to commend the Iraqi
army and security forces for their dedication and
6/19

22/05/2017

fearlessness in fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) in western Mosul on a daily basis.
We salute the fighters who are defending Iraq under
the State’s command and that have now become a
part of the country’s armed forces under the Popular
Mobilization Commission Law. For Iraq’s safety and
peaceful future, there can be no weapons outside the
Government’s control.
Kazakhstan supports the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq. The international community
must reinforce Government efforts to enhance public
services and promote inclusive governance. We would
like to emphasize that long-term recovery must be
based on addressing the Government’s role in providing
services and sound security arrangements for all
communities. It is equally essential to reduce corruption,
decentralize federal authority, promote national and
local reconciliation and bring the perpetrators of crimes
to justice. We therefore commend Prime Minister Al
Abadi for affirming his Government’s commitment to
achieving those objectives by working with all Iraqis,
including women and young people. We also stress the
crucial importance for a peaceful future for Iraq of the
provincial and district council elections announced by
the Council of Ministers, as well as the parliamentary
elections scheduled for April 2018. We therefore support
all legitimate demands for electoral reform.
My country underscores the need for national unity
in Iraq. We believe that national reconciliation should
remain high on its political agenda, and the nationwide
discussions of the Historic Settlement Initiative of the
National Alliance, as well as the relations between
the federal Government and regions, are therefore
exceedingly important. We particularly emphasize
the importance of military cooperation between Iraq’s
national and regional security forces and call on the
regions to stay committed to constructive dialogue
with Baghdad.
Kazakhstan underscores the importance of
protecting Iraqi civilians and providing full and
immediate humanitarian access to United Nations
agencies and their partners. We emphasize the need for
support for the return of internally displaced persons and
public safety in liberated areas. The recommendations
for reconstruction, the return of displaced persons and
the fair treatment of detainees must now be speedily
and effectively implemented. We support the statement
on 24 March by the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq
underscoring the responsibility of all parties to protect
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

civilians against the use of human shields and the
indiscriminate use of firepower, and we condemn ISIL
for using such methods.
We welcome the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2347 (2017), which condemned the unlawful
destruction of cultural heritage and the looting and
smuggling of cultural property during armed conflicts,
notably by terrorist groups, and which should help to
facilitate the retrieval of artifacts smuggled out of Iraq
by ISIL.
All Member States, and Arab countries above all,
should affirm their commitment to a partnership in Iraq
that is aimed at rooting out terrorism and promoting
security, political, economic, cultural and educational
cooperation. We therefore endorse the outcome of the
Summit of the League of Arab States held in Jordan in
March, and the expressed will of Iraq’s Arab counterparts
to fight ISIL and provide humanitarian, economic and
development assistance. Regional cooperation between
Iraq and Arab States is fundamental, and the Summit
statement affirmed that the stability and territorial
integrity of Iraq are cornerstones of Arab security.
Lastly, we must not hesitate to support the Special
Representative’s engagement with all sectors and
communities in Iraqi society in order to advance an
inclusive political dialogue and improved delivery
of public services with the aim of achieving sound
statehood and national reconciliation in post-ISIL Iraq.
That, we hope, will result in a new vision and hope
for Iraq in accordance with the Historic Settlement
Initiative presented by the National Alliance.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Uruguay for convening today’s meeting
and Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing.
Under the leadership of Prime Minister Al
Abadi, the Iraqi Government has made progress
in promoting reform of Government institutions,
facilitating national reconciliation, fighting terrorism,
improving the humanitarian situation and advancing
economic development, and China commends all those
achievements. We hope that Iraq will be able to achieve
national security and stability as soon as possible and
that the Iraqi people will be able to lead peaceful,
tranquil lives at an early date.
At present, Iraq is still dealing with an array
of political, economic, humanitarian and counterterrorism challenges. The international community

S/PV.7945

should continue to give greater attention to Iraq,
enhance its engagement in the country, support all the
parties involved in staying committed to resolving their
differences appropriately through political dialogue,
support the Iraqi Government in promoting national
reconciliation throughout the country and support a
continued role for the United Nations in providing good
offices and coordination.
Since its establishment, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has played an
important role in supporting the Iraqi Government
in promoting an inclusive political dialogue, national
reconciliation and reconstruction and coordinating
international assistance. China supports the work of
Special Representative Kubiš and appreciates the efforts
of UNAMI. We hope that the international community
will continue to support UNAMI in the implementation
of its mandate.
China welcomes the Iraqi Government’s efforts
to maintain domestic stability. China supports the
international community’s efforts in that country by
providing Iraq with assistance to fight terrorism. In the
broader context of maintaining stability in the Middle
East, the international community should enhance its
coordination, adopt unified standards and respond
forcefully so as to prevent terrorist organizations from
threatening the region and beyond.
China appreciates Iraq’s ongoing efforts to improve
its relations with Kuwait and other regional countries,
and encourages Iraq to work with relevant regional
countries to resolve outstanding issues through dialogue
and consultations. At the same time, China hopes that
those countries will fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, and
contribute to its stability and development.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative Kubiš for his briefing and for
his dedication and energy in leading the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) as it seeks to
fulfil its important mandate in what remains a very
challenging environment. The recent suicide attacks in
Baghdad and Basra remind us once again that the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism continues and
must be one of our foremost priorities.
We reaffirm our support for Prime Minister Al
Abadi, and we welcome the continued progress made
by the Iraqi forces in the Mosul campaign, with the
assistance of the coalition against Islamic State in

17-144207/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq and the Levant and thanks to the continued
positive coordination between all the various units on
the ground.
The humanitarian needs in and around Mosul
remain unprecedented and are increasing, given the
ongoing large-scale flows of internally displaced
persons from the old city. We commend the United
Nations and its partners, as well as the Iraqi authorities,
for their remarkable work in providing emergency
assistance and shelter quickly and effectively. Italy will
continue to support their efforts. We remain extremely
concerned about the many innocent civilians still
trapped in areas controlled by Da’esh militants, who
continue to use them as human shields and prevent
them from escaping. It is therefore crucial that security
forces maintain their focus on minimizing civilian
casualties and upholding international law during their
conduct of military operations.
The reports on the continued enslavement and
sexual abuse of women, especially Yazidi women, by
Da’esh are also appalling. We welcome the commitment
of the Iraqi authorities to addressing the issues of
conflict-related sexual violence by ensuring the full
implementation of the joint communiqué signed with
the United Nations last year. We will continue to
provide financial support to psychosocial-assistance
programmes for victims. Accountability for those acts,
as well as for the many other heinous and systematic
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by Da’esh, is a priority. Prime Minister Al Abadi’s call
for a Security Council initiative in that regard is an
important step forward. Italy stands ready to work with
all partners to advance the cause of justice and prevent
impunity, while keeping in mind the importance of
national ownership.
As the military defeat of Da’esh in Iraq draws closer,
we must not forget that the fight against terrorism is
long-term and requires a strategic and preventive
focus, as well as the determination to address the
root political causes of the terrorist phenomenon.
The unity of purpose that was developed in the
fight against Da’esh is an opportunity to strengthen
national reconciliation. The concept of universal Iraqi
citizenship based on democratic participation and
human rights offers a compelling route out of religious
and sectarian intolerance and tribalism, and towards
national reconciliation.
8/19

22/05/2017

In order to prevent the resurgence of Da’esh, the
focus must be on providing stability in liberated areas.
As a coalition leader in the training of Iraqi police
forces, my country attaches the highest importance
to that objective. An effective and professional police
force that ensures security and promotes the rule of law
by forging a solid partnership with local communities
will be essential to avoiding the resurgence of the
terrorist threat.
Our Carabinieri have already trained more than
7,200 local and federal police units, and efforts are
underway to increase that capacity. Furthermore,
Italy is ready to engage with the Iraqi Government in
order to preserve and consolidate the results achieved
thus far with a view to broadening security-sector
reform efforts. That includes specific training on the
protection of cultural heritage and the prevention of
illicit trafficking of artefacts.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
mentioning Council resolution 2347 (2017) in his report
(S/2017/357). That resolution, a joint initiative of France
and Italy, will provide a helpful tool for integrating the
cultural dimension into post-conflict recovery efforts.
Stabilization also means ensuring adequate
socioeconomic conditions in liberated areas so that
returning IDPs can see hope for the future in their
communities of origin. Italy supports the excellent
work being done by the United Nations Development
Programme in coordination with the Iraqi authorities.
We also reaffirm our appreciation of the zero-tolerance
approach to corruption. Achieving results on political
reform is equally crucial. We encourage the Iraqi
authorities to make progress on a legislative package
aimed at good governance, including an updated
framework to ensure fair and transparent provincial
and parliamentary elections.
Success in advancing the reform agenda will be key
to building momentum towards national reconciliation
among the various ethnic and religious groups in
Iraqi society. Italy will lend its support to an inclusive
political process, under full Iraqi ownership and
facilitated by UNAMI, leading to a national settlement
where all ethnic and religious components can find their
place. In order for reconciliation efforts to succeed,
they must also address the role and status of Iraq’s
minorities. Those groups are an integral component
of the country’s history and society. We are closely
monitoring the situation of each community in Iraq, and
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

they have repeatedly expressed to the Iraqi authorities
their hope and ours that equality, mutual respect and
freedom of religion will be guaranteed for all groups
and confessions. That principle should apply at both
the national and the local levels, especially in Mosul
and Ninawa, where good governance and encouraging
inclusion and coexistence will be crucial.
Italy’s commitment to Iraq’s long-term peace
and stability is steadfast. As the Secretary-General
underlined during his visit in March, this is an historic
moment for the country, where all stakeholders in
the international community, including neighbouring
countries and regional partners, must come together in
the spirit of solidarity to help Iraq chart its path towards
a stable, democratic and prosperous future.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Mr. Ján
Kubiš for his informative briefing. I also commend him
for his tireless efforts to achieve national reconciliation
and stability in Iraq.
Before I begin my statement, Japan strongly
condemns the terrorist attacks in Baghdad and Basra.
I would like to express my sincere condolences to the
families of the victims, and we pray for the speedy
recovery of the injured.
Japan supports the Government of Iraq, which is
standing on the front line in the fight against terrorism,
especially against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). Following the liberation of eastern
Mosul, Iraqi security forces, with support from the
combined joint task force, are recapturing western
Mosul. We are encouraged to hear that the completion
of that operation is within reach. Today, I would like to
focus on the protection of civilians, the humanitarian
situation and national reconciliation.
First, the protection of civilians is an immediate
challenge that all parties in Iraq must address,
particularly in the context of the liberation operations.
Approximately 200,000 people are living in ISILcontrolled areas of western Mosul. Japan supports
the Iraqi Government’s commitment to placing the
protection of civilians at the centre of its military
operations. The procedures and tactics of military
operations should always be designed to minimize the
impact on civilians, based on lessons learned from past
operations. Furthermore, all parties, including the Iraqi
security forces and the Peshmerga, should bear in mind
that human rights abuses simply lead to further enmity
and violence. Any human rights abuse, whether it be

S/PV.7945

against Shiites, Sunnis, the Yazidi minority or others,
is totally unacceptable. It benefits nobody in Iraq
except the terrorists. The protection of civilians is not
merely an obligation. It also decreases the motivation
for reprisals and is paramount to sustaining peace.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation in Iraq is a
serious challenge in both the immediate and the long
terms. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs estimates that 11 million people in Iraq are
in need of humanitarian assistance, with 3.1 million
people internally displaced. The humanitarian situation
is particularly severe for people displaced by the
fighting, including nearly 678,000 people who have
been displaced from Mosul.
Japan applauds the United Nations and all
humanitarian workers in Iraq for their tireless efforts
in extremely difficult circumstances. Japan has been a
steadfast supporter of humanitarian and stabilization
assistance in Iraq, including through a $100 million
contribution announced in January. That sum is
already being dispersed through various international
organizations, such as the United Nations Development
Programme, to support the rapid rehabilitation of key
infrastructure and livelihoods in newly liberated areas.
Japan is firmly determined to continue such support.
Japan calls on the international community to continue
its robust support for Iraq.
Finally, national reconciliation is the most critical
condition for a peaceful and stable Iraq. The operation
to liberate Mosul is ongoing, but it is not too early to
discuss the post-liberation phase. Without real national
reconciliation, peace cannot be sustained in Iraq. The
unity shown by the Iraqi people in combating Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) must be further
strengthened during the post-ISIL phase.
We welcomed the visit by Secretary-General
Guterres to Iraq in March. I particularly appreciated
that he participated in serious discussions on national
reconciliation. Iraq’s efforts with regard to national
reconciliation have not yet achieved sufficient
results. Japan calls on the parties in Iraq, including
representatives of political parties, religious leaders
and local community leaders, to make every effort to
promote national reconciliation.
The role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq is also crucial in supporting national
reconciliation efforts by the Iraqi people. I thank
Mr. Kubiš for engaging actively with the Government,

17-144209/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

other political leaders and civil society. I particularly
commend the “Iraq: Youth and Coexistence” initiative.
Investing in the future through youth is an approach
that Japan has taken in several countries in need
of reconciliation.
Japan will continue to strongly support Iraq and
UNAMI in their efforts to achieve national reconciliation.
We look forward to seeing tangible results.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/357)
presented by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš,
and convey our strongest support for the implementation
of the mandated activities.
Furthermore, we appreciate the important
work being carried out by UNAMI in fulfilling its
mandate and the dialogue and coordination that it has
implemented to encourage the strengthening of the
peace process in Iraq.
We recognize and encourage the courageous and
determined struggle that the Iraqi security forces
are carrying out against Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), while prioritizing the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. We underscore
that, as the terrorist group is driven out and populations
are liberated from its control, the deployment of United
Nations humanitarian assistance and its reaching those
who need it most can be ensured.
We note with concern that to date, according
to the report of 15 May issued by the World Health
Organization, since the beginning of counter-terrorism
operations in Mosul in October 2016, more than 650,000
persons have been internally displaced and more than
12,000 have been wounded as a result of the military
campaign in that region. Furthermore, according to
the Secretary-General’s report, during the period from
February to April alone, 908 civilians, including men,
women and children, have died, thereby raising the total
number of the conflict’s casualties to more than 80,000.
We are extremely concerned about the weapons
capability that ISIL has developed and the terror tactics
that it has been deploying — carrying out drone attacks
against civilians, using improvised explosive devices
and using innocent civilians as human shields. In
that regard, we reiterate our strongest condemnation
10/19

22/05/2017

of all acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
wherever, whenever and by whomever they are
committed. Similarly, we condemn the cowardly use of
children and women as human shields in the strongest
terms, and reaffirm the need for all States to combat that
practice through all means available in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and other obligations
under international law.
While constantly respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia recognizes the efforts
and will of the Iraqi people to achieve a historic
political and social agreement that will finally lead to
the establishment and consolidation of peace. In that
regard, we look forward to the holding of elections,
and we hope that the electoral calendar and the legal
mechanisms necessary to implement that calendar
will emerge through the consensus of all parties and
stakeholders for the benefit of the population in general.
Furthermore, we entrust the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq to support and accompany
that process in the best way forward. In the same vein,
we welcome the support expressed by the League of
Arab States at its Summit meeting held in Jordan on
29 March, at which it stated that Iraq’s stability and
territorial integrity are fundamental foundations for the
security of the entire Arab region.
We also appreciate the recent efforts of the
Iraqi Government to identify Kuwaiti citizens who
might have been buried on Iraqi soil and to identify
and return property taken during the conflict. We
highlight the constant and active cooperation that
Kuwait and Iraq have developed so as to fulfil their
international commitments.
Finally, we call on the parties involved to find a
way to enable the Iraqi people to achieve reconciliation
and definitive peace through a process led by and for
the benefit of the Iraqi people.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me first thank the SecretaryGeneral for the comprehensive report (S/2017/357)
before us today, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his detailed briefing to
the Security Council. We appreciate the work that
Mr. Kubiš and his team are doing on the ground, often
in very challenging circumstances. We also welcomed
the recent visit by the Secretary-General to Iraq.
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

I would like to begin by expressing our strong
support for Prime Minister Al Abadi and the
Government and the people of Iraq at this critical
juncture for the country. The offensive against Da’esh
in and beyond Mosul is a fight not only to reclaim Iraqi
territory, but to defeat an enemy that is a threat to us all.
For that reason, Sweden is stepping up its contribution
to the global coalition against Da’esh.
In responding to an ideology that is devoid of any
decency or humanity, it is imperative that we uphold
the principles and values that we share and for which
we are fighting in this struggle. In the context of the
current offensive, that means ensuring that civilians are
protected. The humanitarian situation in the remaining
part of western Mosul is gravely concerning. We
commend the humanitarian response carried out to
date by the Iraqi authorities, the United Nations and its
partners. We emphasize the importance of continued
respect for international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians during the final difficult phase
of the liberation of Mosul. We are also concerned by
the presence of armed actors in and around camps for
internally displaced persons and emergency shelters,
which compromise their civilian character.
As the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq has made
clear, significant additional humanitarian needs are
likely to arise before the end of the Mosul operation,
and the end of the operation will not be the end of
the road. Major stabilization efforts will be needed for
a long time to come. Sweden is contributing both to
the humanitarian response, as well as towards postDa’esh stabilization, through the funding facility of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
We call upon all States Members of the United Nations
and other partners to show solidarity with Iraq and
to contribute financially to the humanitarian and
stabilization efforts.
The period ahead will require strong leadership
from the Government, supported by the international
community and with the continued attention of the
Security Council. The United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has the potential to continue
to contribute significantly to preventing a relapse
into conflict by strategically focusing its efforts and
resources. Let me therefore turn to some of the key
challenges to sustaining peace in Iraq after the Da’esh
offensive has been completed.

S/PV.7945

First, reconciliation will be critical to building a
stable Iraq and preventing future conflicts. Strong
Iraqi leadership will be required to help bring the many
initiatives currently under way together, within a joint
plan and with tangible proposals to build confidence
among the various parts of the Iraqi population.
We encourage UNAMI to continue to deepen its
reconciliation efforts and its coordination within the
United Nations family, with other initiatives and with
Iraqi stakeholders. Reconciliation must be inclusive
in order to be successful. In that context, the UNDP
initiative aimed at increasing the participation of
civil society in reconciliation deserves our strong
support. In addition, constructive engagement by
regional and international actors will be crucial to such
reconciliation efforts.
Building a new future for Iraq will require
recognition of the past, however difficult that may be.
Accountability will be critical to reconciliation. Sweden
is supportive of initiatives aimed at strengthening
accountability for violations of international law and
crimes committed throughout the conflict. It is also
essential to strengthen the Iraqi legal system, and we
encourage international partners to consider how they
can support such efforts. We also encourage UNAMI
to increase preventative diplomacy so as to facilitate
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil. In that regard,
we echo the Secretary-General’s encouragement to
political leaders in Baghdad and Erbil that they should
engage in constructive dialogue on outstanding issues.
Secondly, building institutions that are inclusive
and equitable must be a priority in the coming period.
UNAMI has an important role to play in advising and
assisting the Iraqi authorities in strengthening the
rule of law and respect for human rights, including
the rights of minorities. Freedom of expression is an
important element of a functioning democracy. We
are therefore concerned by the recent reports of the
disappearances of political activists and journalists.
Building a security sector that is at the service of the
whole of Iraqi society will also be critical to future
stability. The ongoing security-sector reform work is
encouraging, and we hope that the European Union can
enhance its engagement in support of long-term civilian
stabilization and strengthen its support for the security
sector in Iraq in the near future.
Thirdly, as the Secretary-General has made clear,
gender equality is central to efforts to recover from
conflict. We welcome the establishment of the Women’s

17-1442011/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

Empowerment Directorate and urge the Government
to finance and implement the objectives set out in
the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000).
More must be done by UNAMI to increase women’s
participation in reconciliation and governance postDa’esh.
Finally, we call upon the Iraqi Parliament to
swiftly adopt electoral laws and hold provincial and
parliamentary elections. In that context, we emphasize
the importance of transparency in the work of the
Independent High Electoral Commission.
In conclusion, the Government and people of Iraq
now stand on the cusp of liberating the last parts of their
country from the tyrants of Da’esh. After liberation, they
will then need to turn their attention to reconciliation
and to building an Iraqi State that represents all Iraqis.
That will take commitment and determination. It is
important that we in the international community
continue to support them in that endeavour.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
our condolences to the Government and people of Iraq
with regard to the recent heinous terrorist attacks in
Baghdad and the southern province of Basra.
We also wish to thank Special Representative
Mr. Jan Kubiš for his update.
I want to commend the Iraqi security forces and
the international coalition against Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) for their efforts to liberate Mosul.
We hope that the end of the operation is near and that
local civilians, who suffered enormously under the
monstrous rule of ISIL, will finally be freed. The recent
statement of the military spokesperson of the Joint
Operations Command instils much needed confidence,
as he declared that Da’esh had been driven out of almost
90 per cent of western Mosul.
It is appalling that ISIL keeps resorting to using
civilians as human shields. We therefore reiterate our
call that the protection of civilians should remain the top
priority for the Iraqi security forces and the coalition,
even if it means a slowdown in military advances. To
prevent more losses among civilians, no effort should
be spared in reaching out to them and providing them
with vital information on developments on the ground,
identifying escape routes and ensuring transparent
screening procedures.
Another worrying trend that requires our attention
is that, since the beginning of the operation in October
12/19

22/05/2017

last year, the number of internally displaced persons
near Mosul has reached 670,000 persons and 200,000
more could flee the city in the coming days. We are
therefore concerned that, if such a trend continues,
there will be no more space in the camps, most of
which are already full. That requires prompt action,
and we want to commend the Government of Iraq and
all humanitarian partners for their efforts to transfer
people to other camps located further from Mosul. I
hope that UNAMI, with the support of the international
community, will continue assisting the Iraqi
Government in mobilizing the resources necessary to
address the challenges mentioned.
Ukraine is encouraged by the news that Iraqi
stakeholders are tirelessly working on the national
reconciliation process. It is commendable that the Iraqi
Forces Coalition put forward the Historic Settlement
Initiative, and the National Alliance put forward the
National Settlement Initiative. Iraq should unite its
people, regardless of their ethnicity or religious beliefs.
Only inclusive national reconciliation efforts can heal
the wounds that the country has sustained and help to
achieve a lasting national settlement.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jan Kubiš for his briefing and for his outstanding
work in the field. France reiterates its support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
and thanks the Mission and the Secretary-General for
the most recent report (S/2017/357), which was issued a
few weeks ago.
Like previous speakers, I would like to address
three points: the security situation, the humanitarian
situation and the political situation.
First, on the military front, France commends the
courage and the determination of the Iraqi forces. With
support from the coalition, they have won decisive
victories against Da’esh, which has lost almost twothirds of the territories that it controlled at the height
of its expansion. In Mosul, in particular, Iraqi forces
have made a significant breakthrough since the start of
the offensive in the western districts. We also welcome
the launch of the operation by the Iraqi army against
Da’esh in the so-called 160-kilometre area aimed at
securing Rutba.
Those successes further reinforce the importance of
being demanding and vigilant in the humanitarian field
at all times, in particular with regard to the protection of
civilians. France reiterates its commitment to ensuring
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

that all forces operate under the strict control of the
Iraqi authorities and welcomes the steps taken by the
Iraqi Government to make the protection of civilians
a priority when planning operations, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The most recent advances by the
Iraqi security forces to retake control of Mosul have
sparked a large wave of displaced people. Every effort
should be made to assist those people. France is very
concerned about the plight of civilians trapped in
Mosul and stands with the Iraqi authorities to continue
to mobilize the international community.
I wish to reiterate in the strongest terms our
condemnation of the violence and abuses committed by
Da’esh, including the use of civilians as human shields.
Every effort should be made to facilitate the sustainable
and voluntary return of civilian populations, including
persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities,
where security and development conditions permit.
The dignity of these people and, beyond that, the
maintenance of diversity and ethnic and religious
pluralism in the region, are at stake. Council members
are aware that France is committed to the Paris action
plan. That plan was submitted by France and Jordan at
the International Conference on the Victims of Ethnic
and Religious Violence in the Middle East, which
was held in Paris on 8 September 2015, and for which
the first follow-up conference thereto will be held in
Madrid on Wednesday, 24 May.
We support humanitarian and stabilization actions
on the ground in order to provide the displaced
populations with satisfactory living conditions and,
where possible, to encourage their return to their
towns and villages of origin. The return-assistance
projects currently being implemented focus mainly on
demining, socioeconomic recovery and the resumption
of basic public services, based on an integrated and
geographically targeted logic.
I would also like to refer to the fight against
impunity, which is an essential component of the
mandate of UNAMI. It is now urgent to gather and
preserve evidence as soon as possible so that the
authenticity of the objects is protected and subsequently
that those objects be transferred and examined by the
competent court when the time comes. France will
support efforts in that vein, in support of the Iraqi
Government. The Prime Minister, Mr. Haider Al
Abadi, has called on the Security Council to act. We

S/PV.7945

must shoulder our responsibilities. There can be no
lasting peace without justice.
Given the magnitude of these challenges, the work
of the United Nations and its partners, in conjunction
with the Iraqi Government, must be commended. They
organize and provide humanitarian assistance under
these difficult conditions, and make it possible to host
civilians fleeing the fighting in emergency facilities.
Priority should also be given to strengthening the
already considerable stabilization efforts undertaken
by the Iraqi authorities and the United Nations
Development Programme in areas freed from the yoke
of Da’esh.
Alongside those efforts, cultural heritage, as the
representative of Italy recalled, must also be protected.
That cannot be neglected in view of the extent of the
destruction observed in Iraq. We must exercise utmost
vigilance to combat all trafficking and to make use of
all the tools at our disposal, in particular resolution
2347 (2017), which we submitted jointly with Italy, and
which the Secretary-General references in his report
(S/2017/357).
Beyond the emergency, we must also and above all
now prepare for the future in order to avoid any security
or governance vacuum. That includes an inclusive
governance policy plan for Mosul and its region. Indeed,
winning the war is not enough. Sustainable peace must
be established.
The total and lasting defeat of Da’esh relies on a
comprehensive, political and inclusive solution that
speaks to the aspirations of all segments of the Iraqi
population, with respect for both its diversity and the
unity of Iraq. There is an urgent need for the political,
institutional, economic and social reintegration of
all segments of society, especially Sunni Muslims,
without which chaos will only return. We welcome
the progress that has already been made and call on
the Iraqi Government to accelerate the adoption and
implementation of reforms that encourage national
reconciliation. We also call on that Government to
establish inclusive governance at the national and
local levels and to put in place local security forces
that are accepted by the population. Our support for
Prime Minister Al Abadi is essential to his ability
to overcome these immense challenges in a tense
pre-electoral atmosphere.
Lastly, we encourage Erbil and Baghdad to
continue their dialogue, which, at the political level,

17-1442013/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

has made it possible to define the modalities of an
agreement for operation in Mosul operations; to resolve
differences between them; and to take the first steps
toward a sustainable solution, with full respect for the
unity of Iraq. Given the breadth of these challenges,
our collective and continuous support to the Iraqi
authorities is indispensable.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
for introducing the report on the situation in Iraq
(S/2017/371), but also for his tireless efforts for peace
and stability in that country.
With respect to the security situation in Iraq, the
delegation of Senegal welcomes the notable progress
that has been made in the fight against Da’esh,
including in the western part of Mosul. Those strides
are certainly a reflection of the courageous efforts
and the determined efforts made by the valiant Iraqi
army, with the support of local players as well as the
Global Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant, in order to defeat the terrorist organization
while prioritizing the protection of civilians.
Along with the achievements, in particular
military, that we have seen within the framework
of the fight to eradicate that terrorist group and its
underlying ideology, my delegation is of the view
that we must take urgent and appropriate measures to
provide humanitarian assistance to the population in
need, in favour of national reconciliation and dialogue,
the fight against corruption, and for a virtuous and
inclusive Government without, of course, neglecting
the holding of credible elections, both at the provincial
and legislative levels, and accountability. Fortunately,
we are pleased to be able to point out the efforts of the
highest Iraqi authorities.
In that regard, I have primarily in mind the President
and of the Prime Minister, Mr. Al Abadi, and their efforts
to encourage national reconciliation and dialogue,
including visits to Iraqi Kurdistan where, besides
post-Da’esh reconstruction, important exchanges have
taken place on international and regional elections, as
well as the relations between the two Governments.
In that context, we believe it important to strengthen
cooperation, specifically within the context of the
ongoing operation in Mosul, between the Iraqi armed
14/19

22/05/2017

forces and the Peshmerga, while continuing to place a
priority on the protection of civilians.
Furthermore, we invite the international
community to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance, primarily with respect to the financing of
the humanitarian response plan, which was launched in
Brussels in December 2016. An estimated $985 million
is needed to respond to the needs of the 6.2 million
vulnerable Iraqis, among which there are many persons
that have been displaced, in particular, since the
beginning of the operation in Mosul. In that regard, I
would like to highlight the particularly difficult fate of
children and to condemn the atrocities that terrorists
carry out, including rape, summary executions, as
well as forced conversions, in particular of Yazidis,
and the use of chemical weapons. Those actions could
constitute war crimes.
I would also like to condemn the use of civilians
as human shields, as well as the targeted killings
that Da’esh carries out, actions which go against
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The perpetrators of those crimes must, of course, be
held accountable.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
important action carried out by the United Nations
Development Programme to achieve stability and
progress in Iraq, in particular in zones that were under
the control of Da’esh. I would also like to take this
opportunity to launch an appeal for contributions for
the Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization, which
needs additional funding of $500 million. It should be
recalled that, thanks to the Facility, 500 projects are
under way, in particular in Mosul and in Ninawa.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, it is my pleasure to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing. We affirm our full
support for the Special Representative in shouldering
his responsibility, and for the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in its efforts to promote
security and stability in the country.
We welcome the great victories of the Iraqi forces in
the past few months to liberate Iraqi territories from the
control of heinous terrorist organizations. This could
not have happened without the coordination of all Iraqi
forces and their agreement to work hand in hand to put
an end to this scourge, which threatens the security and
stability of Iraq. We also value the efforts of the Iraqi
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

Government, which attaches importance to protecting
civilians during the current military operations to
liberate Mosul. We call on the Government to continue
to adopt this approach, especially as the fight moves
to highly populated areas, in order to put an end to
civilian casualties.
As the end of the fight to liberate Mosul approaches,
we reaffirm that eliminating terrorism, ensuring
sustainable peace and promoting stability in the country
requires adopting a comprehensive approach that goes
beyond military and security dimensions. It must also
include political, economic and social dimensions
as well. Egypt therefore welcomes the efforts of the
international community to consolidate stability in
Iraq, especially the work of the Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization.
We stress that achieving stability in the liberated
areas requires, in addition to basic development projects,
ensuring the safe and voluntary return of refugees to
their homes in a way that protects their dignity and does
not alter the demographic composition of the different
areas as it was before the conflict erupted. This will
ensure that no group is marginalized at the expense of
another. It is also important to adopt a comprehensive
approach to governing the liberated areas that meets
the aspirations of the citizens and promotes stability.
We must continue to support Iraq’s economic reform
and development efforts, especially in the light of the
next phase, because rebuilding the liberated areas will
be a great burden on the Iraqi economy. We therefore
support holding a donor conference to mobilize the
necessary international support help Iraq at this turning
point. We would like to see efforts in Iraq aimed at
reaching comprehensive national reconciliation — in
which all Iraqi stakeholders are included and none are
marginalized — succeed. Throughout history, Iraq has
always drawn its strength and stability from diversity
and harmony. Therefore, we reaffirm that achieving
reconciliation through a genuine dialogue among all
Iraqi stakeholders to address the root causes of terrorist
ideologies is vital for ensuring lasting stability and
security in Iraq. We also highly value the efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
In conclusion, I would like the stress that Egypt
firmly believes that the strength and stability of Iraq
lie in its unity and sovereignty. We reject any foreign
interventions in Iraqi internal affairs, especially
interventions that fuel sectarian strife and division

S/PV.7945

among Iraqi stakeholders, as that breeds extremism and
terrorism and causes suffering for Iraqi people.
The people of the region have been paying a high
price for terrorism and extremism. In that connection,
Egypt condemns the Turkish air strikes on northern Iraq.
That is an unacceptable violation of Iraqi sovereignty
and cannot be justified under any circumstances. It will
only complicate the regional situation and thwart our
efforts to fight terrorism.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We express
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing
on the latest report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Iraq (S/2017/357) and the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We also join others in expressing sympathy and
solidarity with the people and Government of Iraq on
the recent terrorist attack.
We have been following the recent developments in
Iraq. The fight against terrorist and violent extremism
remains an important priority and we welcome the
progress made by the Iraqi Government, the Peshmerga,
the Popular Mobilization Forces and local fighters, with
the support of the international coalition, in dislodging
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) from
western Mosul following the liberation of the eastern
part of the city. We appreciate the coordination
between the Iraqi security forces and other forces,
which has been indispensible for the progress achieved
recently, and we believe this will remain very critical
in completely defeating ISIL. This kind of coordination
will also have meaningful impact, not only in fighting
against terrorism, but also in tackling other serious
political and security challenges in the country.
The significant advances in the fight against ISIL
has not been without its challenges. The humanitarian
situation, particularly the situation of displaced people,
and a significant number of civilian casualties should
be of concern. With regard to the alleged use of
chemical weapons, we take note of the views expressed
by the Iraqi Government and the ongoing work by the
World Health Organization, together with the Iraqi
Department of Health and civilian protection workers,
to make sure that people who may have been exposed to
chemical agents were identified and treated.
As the report of the Secretary-General noted, it is
women and children who are bearing the brunt because
of the ongoing fighting. The protection of civilians is of

17-1442015/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

paramount importance and we reiterate our appreciation
of the Government’s commitment in prioritizing the
protection of civilians in the Mosul operations. We
hope that the relevant United Nations agencies and
others will do everything possible to deliver much
needed assistance to those displaced by the operation
in close cooperation with the Iraqi Government.
The return of civilian administration and the
resumption of basic services in the liberated areas will
be vital in restoring normalcy and ensuring stability. We
take note of the efforts being made towards inclusive
political dialogue and reconciliation in Iraq. We hope
these efforts will contribute to addressing sectarian and
political divisions and to fostering unity in the country.
In this regard, we appreciate UNAMI’s support to
these endeavours.
Finally, the recent visit of the Secretary-General to
Iraq and his meeting with the country’s leadership was
indeed important in conveying a message of solidarity,
as Iraq continues to fight terrorism and to address the
multifaceted challenges it faces. We support the call
that he made to all the Iraqi political stakeholders to
engage in a broad-based and representative national
dialogue aimed at achieving sustainable peace and
reconciliation. It was a most appropriate call he made
for the Iraqi crisis has continued for too long.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his thorough
briefing. I would also like to offer our condolences to
the representative of Iraq, his authorities and the family
members of the victims of the recent terrorist attacks in
his country.
Uruguay acknowledges the arduous efforts being
carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in close coordination with
the Iraqi Government, in fulfilling a very important
and effective task in order to address the different
emergencies that have been affecting the country for
several years.
Iraq continues to face many enormous humanitarian,
political, economic and security challenges, but today
the main challenge remains without doubt the fight
against terrorism. For that reason, we support the
16/19

22/05/2017

significant efforts made by the Government of Iraq in
the fight against the serious threat represented by the
terrorist group Da’esh for its sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the security of its entire population — a
threat that also affects the Syrian Arab Republic and
to which no country today is immune, since the crimes
perpetrated by that group and associated individuals
and entities do not recognize any borders.
We agree with the need expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2017/371) to find an appropriate
mechanism to ensure accountability for the horrendous
crimes committed by Da’esh in Iraq, which include war
crimes, crimes against humanity and possibly even
genocide. We trust that unlike what has happened,
unfortunately, thus far in Syria, the Council will be
able rapidly to reach a consensus in order to investigate
and prosecute these crimes, including the possible use
of chemical weapons.
We reiterate that the fight against the terrorist
scourge must be carried out within the framework
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law and must take place within the United Nations in
order to prevent atrocities similar to those committed
by these groups from happening again. However,
it must be made clear that military operations in
themselves will not be eliminate the threat of terrorist
in Iraq. Iraqi political leaders must work in order to
overcome their divisions and historical mistrust with
a view to achieving a broad agreement on national
reconciliation that would close the chapter on so many
years of suffering for the Iraqi people as a result of deep
sectarian and religious divisions.
A topic to which Uruguay attaches particular
importance is the formulation of policies aimed at
promoting the empowerment of women. In this respect,
we call upon the Iraqi Government to move forward in
promoting and defending the rights of girls and women
and to promote gender equity, strengthen political
participation for women and address the critical
problem of sexual violence in conflict as a tactic of war
and an act of terrorism.
With respect to Mosul, the humanitarian situation
of the civilian population remaining in that town and
of those who were able to escape continues to be very
difficult. The military operations to take the city have
resulted in one of the greatest humanitarian crises of
our times, and it is far from over. We are concerned by
the situation of the hundreds of thousands of civilians
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

who remain trapped in Mosul, in particular the most
vulnerable, such as women and children, and the report
that they are being used by Da’esh as human shields,
yet another sign of the group’s cowardice and total
contempt for human life.
In such a complex context, we continue to urge the
Iraqi authorities to comply with their declared goal of
prioritizing the protection and the security of civilians
in this offensive against Da’esh and to coordinate with
United Nations agencies the broad-ranging response
necessary to address the humanitarian emergency that
it has caused. Repairing civilian infrastructure, the
normal delivery of services and the gradual return of
displaced persons to their homes should be priorities
after the liberation of Mosul, which is on the horizon.
Likewise, it should be clear that the fight against
terrorism does not end with taking back Mosul.
The discovery of mass graves allegedly containing
thousands of bodies reflects the scope of the horrors
perpetrated by Da’esh in Iraq and Syria in recent years.
Despite the defeats that they have suffered recently
and the significant reduction of the territory under its
control, Da’esh has shown that it has a significant ability
to survive, with its fighters using for an escape route to
Syria the porous border between the two countries, a
border it has controlled for years. The battle of Mosul
should not be the end of the war against terrorism
but, rather, an important milestone that would make
it possible to consolidate the progress that we have
achieved thus far.
We will need an even greater coordinated effort by
Iraq and the anti-ISIL coalition in order to defeat once
and for all that criminal group, which never was and
never will be a State, but is simply a band of intolerant
killers whose only motivation is to destroy, using the
most cruel methods imaginable, everything that does
not reflect their extremist beliefs.
To conclude, with respect to the matter of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals as well as the
looting of Kuwaiti property during the first Gulf War,
we note the positive cooperation between both countries
and encourage the Iraqi Government to step up its efforts
in order to comply with its international obligations and
to clarify these issues as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

S/PV.7945

Mr. Marzooq (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate the Republic of
Uruguay on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month. We thank the Mission of Uruguay
for all the efforts it exerted and that of the United
States of America for their efforts during that country’s
presidency of the Council last month.
I welcome the briefing of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján
Kubiš, and the efforts of his team, and we assure him of
our full support.
Iraq is ushering in a new stage in its just war
against the terrorist gangs of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). This requires providing Iraq
with all the support and cooperation necessary to meet
the challenges of the post-ISIL stage. This is important,
as we suffer from financial constraints owing to lower
oil prices. Hence my Government has developed a
comprehensive vision based on its priorities, including
the economic, social and security dimensions, that
serves the interests of Iraqi citizens. I would like to sum
this vision up in the following points.
First, the focus must be on restoring security,
stability and basic services, and enabling internally
displaced persons to return to their homes and take
part in the process of post-Da’esh rehabilitation and
reconstruction. This is in addition to providing care to
the families of the wounded and those who have made
the ultimate sacrifice, and the rehabilitation of society
to end the culture of hatred and violence and erase
all reminders of the presence of ISIL. Every national
effort must be made to achieve these humanitarian and
national goals.
Second, it is important to ensure a commitment to
respect for others and coexistence with those from different
religious, sectarian and ideological backgrounds. This
requires respect for the sanctity of houses of worship as
a basis for intercommunal reconciliation.
Third, we cannot allow the return of the negative
trends that prevailed in Iraq at the pre-ISIL stage. That
stage was marked by strong sectarian tension and was
not in the best interests of my country, and it allowed
Da’esh to take control of cities and governorates in my
country. Hence we must commit to this course, which
enhances citizenship, unity and cooperation. We should
never allow Da’esh or any other terrorist criminal groups

17-1442017/19

S/PV.7945

The situation concerning Iraq

to return. We must monitor liberated cities and prevent
new terrorist cells from surfacing in those areas.
Fourth, it is important to establish relations of
good-neighbourliness with regional and neighbouring
countries. We must make independent decisions as
Iraqis, and our positions should not be held hostage to
the interests of others.
Fifth, the right to carry arms must be exclusive to
the State, and all other such instances must end. There
must also be respect for the judiciary and the rule of law
across the board.
Sixth, we must continue to fight corruption, as it is
the greatest incubator of terrorism and crime.
Seventh, State institutions should not be forums
for political intervention. There must also be powersharing to ensure justice and equal opportunity, with
reliance on effective, specialized personnel who are
able to work independently and with professionalism.
The Government of Iraq commends the various
Iraqi forces — the Iraqi Army, the local police, the
Popular Mobilization Forces, the Peshmerga and the
tribal forces — for the major sacrifices they have made
as they have worked together with the assistance of the
international coalition. Thanks to them, we were able
to emerge victorious and liberate Mosul. We liberated
the portions of the city on the left bank of the Tigris.
The operations to recover the portions of the city on
the right bank of the Tigris, 90 per cent of which has
already been recovered, are ongoing, as planned. We
have made the protection of civilians our priority, while
terrorists have been using them as human shields.
The various authorities in the liberated areas are
working towards a return to normal life by de-mining
those areas and otherwise preparing for the return of
IDPs. We have started to provide basic services so that
residents can resume their normal lives.
We call upon the international community to
participate in the efforts aimed at rebuilding and
rehabilitation in the cities that were severely damaged.
My Government understands the nexus between
sustainable development, peace and security, and we
are working, with the assistance of the United Nations,
particularly with the United Nations Development
Programme, which organized a conference paid for by
the European Union (EU), to draft a five-year national
development plan for 2018-2022.
18/19

22/05/2017

Those efforts are aimed at achieving the 2030
Sustainable Development Goals. The plan includes new
concepts that enhance administrative decentralization,
the promotion of the private sector, a focus on human
capital and economic empowerment, as well as
investment in education, health care and basic services.
It also includes such elements as the empowerment of
youth, women and vulnerable groups, the creation of
job opportunities for the poorest, and supporting smalland medium-sized enterprises.
The people and the Government of Iraq appreciate
the efforts of all of the countries that have participated
in the international coalition, particularly the EU and
the United States of America. We also thank other
countries that did not participate in the coalition but
which have actively participated in the war against
the terrorist Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant by
supporting us with logistical and military elements
while maintaining full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.
On 25 April 2017, in a clear and flagrant violation
of our sovereignty, good neighbourliness, the rules of
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations, Turkish forces illegally entered Iraqi
airspace and territory by bombarding the Mount Sinjar
region of northern Iraq with more than 20 bombs,
which led to the killing and wounding of members of
the Peshmerga Iraqi forces. I would like to take this
opportunity to request that the Council shoulder its legal
and ethical responsibilities to prevent the recurrence of
such violations, an action that would contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council must demand that Turkey withdraw
its forces from Iraqi territory and respect good
neighbourliness in order to ensure international and
regional peace and security. Such violations could lead
to a complex regional situation, fuel tensions and cause
instability. Similarly, Iraq urges other States to develop
strict legal norms to combat foreign terrorist fighters,
including criminalizing various acts by those terrorists
in other States. Actions to be criminalized should
include any intent to receive training by terrorist groups
or travel abroad for terrorist purposes. Also important
would be strict vetting and other immigration measures
and the exchange of intelligence with countries of
destination so as to curb the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, in implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions.
17-14420

22/05/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.7945

Iraq is studying the various options in the global
campaign to bring Da’esh to justice. With our partners,
we are looking into options for gathering and preserving
evidence of crimes committed by the terrorist ISIL
gangs. That will be done without prejudice to the
jurisdiction and independence of our judiciary.

Iraq looks forward to seeing unity in the Security
Council with respect to a comprehensive solution to the
conflict in Syria, in particular one that would meet the
interests of all parties in that country and lead to ending
the regional support for terrorist groups in Syria and
completely defeat them.

With respect to the IDP crisis in Iraq, friendly
and brotherly States have contributed to rehabilitation
and reconstruction efforts in areas liberated from ISIL
gangs. That is a factor that contributes to reducing the
suffering of IDPs following the war against terror. In
that context, I would like to express our appreciation
for the assistance offered by the Japanese Government
in funding the activities of the United Nations Office
for Project Services in the Middle East. A project will
be launched under the slogan “Improving the Impact
and Effectiveness of Community Police in the Newly
Liberated Areas in Iraq” in partnership with the Iraqi
Government and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Iraq.

The Government of Iraq is committed to making
exceptional efforts in the area of the missing Kuwaiti
national archives. The Iraqi Ministry of Defence
continues to work on documenting and verifying
witness accounts and conducting visits to alleged sites
where Kuwaiti persons and prisoners went missing. We
have resumed digging in section B of the Al-Khamisiyah
site. As for Karbala, the Ministry of Defence has dug
102 holes without achieving tangible results. There are
no new findings on the Al-Jahra and Radwaniyah sites.
Excavation continues at the naval base sites in Kuwait,
with the assistance of witnesses. The Ministries for
Foreign Affairs and Defence continue their outreach
work through television and other media outlets with
a view to gathering accounts by new witnesses and
documenting information in order to reach tangible
and substantial information that could lead to finding
out the locations of the missing Kuwaiti prisoners
and persons.

My country also values the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations, as they work
to provide support for IDPs. We urge other States to
support the relevant programmes in Iraq as we undertake
critical work in the humanitarian and relief areas for
IDPs and in favour of community reconciliation.
The Government of Iraq is working continuously
to enhance its relationship with brotherly States in
the Arab world, in particular the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan, Turkey and Iran, in addition to
its ongoing relationship with the Syrian Government.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation for the work of the Special Representative,
Mr. Ján Kubiš, and his team, as they continue to advise
the Iraqi Government. We thank them for the efforts of
UNAMI aimed at establishing a united, stable Iraq that
is free from the scourge of terrorism.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

17-1442019/19
