United Nations

S/PV.9250

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9250

th meeting
Thursday, 26 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Investment in people to enhance resilience against complex challenges
Letter dated 5 January 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/19)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-02436 (E)
*2302436*

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I warmly welcome the Deputy Secretary-General,
Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, to whom I now
give the floor.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Investment in people to enhance resilience against
complex challenges
Letter dated 5 January 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/19)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Djibouti, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Palau, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Turkmenistan and Ukraine to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr.
Muhammad
Abdul
Muhith,
Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations and
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Ms. Diago
Ndiaye, President of the Network on Peace and Security
for Women in the ECOWAS Region.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/19, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 January 2023 from the Permanent
2/30

26/01/2023

The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
start by expressing my gratitude to Japan for hosting
this timely and important debate.
Peace is the core mission of the United Nations. It
is our raison d’être. That mission is now under grave
threat. People’s sense of safety and security is at a low
in almost every country, with six in seven worldwide
plagued by feelings of insecurity. The world is facing
the highest number of violent conflicts since the
Second World War. Two billion people, one quarter
of humankind, live in places affected by conflict.
That is causing grave human suffering, both directly
in conflict zones and indirectly, by adding to poverty
and food insecurity and reducing access to education
and health care. It is imposing severe constraints on
people’s ability to fulfil their potential and contribute
to society.
Even before the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, conflict-affected countries were lagging
on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Projections indicated that by 2030 more than 80 per
cent of the world’s extreme poor would live in fragile
and conflict-affected countries. In other words, conflict
and poverty are closely intertwined. The pandemic has
only aggravated that dire situation.
The war in Ukraine is devastating the lives of
millions of Ukrainians. It has also compounded a food,
energy and finance crisis worldwide, especially among
the world’s most vulnerable people and countries.
Recalling the words of the Secretary-General, the
world is at a key inflection point in history. Rethinking
our efforts towards achieving sustainable peace is an
absolute necessity. There is only one route to durable
peace — to the peace that withstands the crises of
our times. It is the route of sustainable development.
Inclusive, sustainable development that leaves no one
behind is essential in its own rights. It is also humankind’s
ultimate prevention tool. It is the only reliable tool that
can break through cycles of instability to address the
underlying drivers of fragility and humanitarian need.
Investments in development, investments in people,
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

investments in human security, investments in our
shared prosperity are also investments in peace. And
yet, our investments in recent years have fallen far
short. As we approach the midway point of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, we see that our
current progress is far off track.
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic,
many millions more people — more than 200 million
more — have fallen into poverty. An additional
820 million people — families, mothers, fathers and
children — are going hungry. More women and girls
are having their rights trampled on, erased from public
life and constrained in private life. The global financial
system is failing developing countries, and economies
are failing to serve the vast majority of their citizens,
except for a small elite.
Those challenges are not just development issues.
They pose a threat to our peaceful coexistence.
Development deficits drive grievance. They corrode
institutions. They allow hostility and intolerance to
flourish. When we fail to meet the development needs
of our time, we fail to secure peace for our future.
The triple planetary crisis of biodiversity loss, climate
change and pollution does not merely threaten our
environment. It also threatens to unleash destructive
forces that drive wedges in our societies, erode social
cohesion and ignite instability. As we embark on this
discussion of peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
I urge everyone to consider the fundamental role of
sustainable development in securing peace for current
and future generations.
May I impress upon the Council four observations
for building and sustaining peace that is built on a
bedrock of inclusive, sustainable development.
First, our efforts at achieving peace must be based
on a shared understanding of peace and its pathways.
The follow-up discussions on the Secretary-General’s
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), scheduled for 2023,
under the preparations for the SDG Summit and the
Summit of the Future, open key opportunities to further
a shared understanding of the pathways to peace. The
New Agenda for Peace will provide a unique opportunity
to articulate a shared vision for how Member States can
come together to address those challenges and to honour
the commitment they made in the declaration on the
commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations: “we will promote peace and prevent
conflicts” (General Assembly resolution 75/1, para. 9).

S/PV.9250

Prevention and peacebuilding therefore will be
at the core of the New Agenda for Peace through a
comprehensive understanding of prevention, linking
peace, sustainable development, climate action and
food security. The New Agenda for Peace will be aimed
at identifying additional ways to support national
prevention and peacebuilding priorities and to channel
the international community’s support to nationally
owned violence-reduction initiatives that are humancentred, with a comprehensive prevention focus, that are
grounded in the core notion of human security and that
seek to build more resilient societies that can address
existing and new forms of risks. Allow me to stress that all
Member States are exposed to risks, and no country lives
in a vacuum. All Governments must be prepared to take
measures that address grievances and prevent violence.
Inclusion will also be at the centre of the New
Agenda for Peace. We know that inclusive processes
are more likely to be effective and to bring about
sustainable peace. Inclusion involves the meaningful
participation of all constituencies and communities,
particularly those traditionally underrepresented in
peace and security processes, but also in the social,
economic and political life of a country. That adds up
to recognizing and ensuring, in the broadest possible
way, that human rights are pivotal in the New Agenda
for Peace.
Secondly, investing in inclusion is not only right,
it is wise. Inclusion leads to more public support and
greater legitimacy. It strengthens societal resilience
and addresses structural inequalities, which are major
risk factors for violent conflict. Among other things,
inclusion means addressing fundamental gender
inequalities. I have just returned from Afghanistan where
I conveyed those messages to the de facto authorities.
A society based on exclusion and repression can
never flourish. A society in which the rights of women
and girls are trampled on is no society at all. Women’s
full participation in politics and the economy makes
a society more likely to succeed. Sustainable peace
cannot be built where the rights of women are ignored.
On the global stage, we have made some progress on
inclusion, but that progress is still far too slow. Women
remain largely shut out of local, national, regional and
international decision-making.
In the Secretary-General’s most recent report on
women and peace and security (S/2022/740), he warned
that the world is currently experiencing a reversal of

23-024363/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

generational gains in women’s rights. The percentage
of women represented in political forums and peace
processes has decreased in recent years. Military
expenditures are growing, while funding for women’s
human rights organizations is falling. We need
transformational change to break that cycle, halt the
erosion of women’s rights and ensure gender equality
in order to build and sustain peace.
Young people also play a key role in promoting
peace, security and stability worldwide, as recognized
by resolution 2250 (2015). To that end, all those involved
in peace should support the establishment of dedicated
regional and national frameworks for youth engagement
in peacebuilding. Youth, peace and security should
be more widely reflected in the mandates of special
political missions and peacekeeping operations. We also
hope that the Council will consider hosting an annual
open debate dedicated to youth, peace and security, as
a platform for engagement with youth-led civil society
and young peacebuilders, especially our women.
Conflict prevention and conflict resolution efforts
must be shaped through inclusive processes, involving
the leadership of women and youth and reflecting
their priorities. It is essential that all peacebuilders,
including women and young people, are protected
against reprisals and attacks resulting from their work.
Thirdly, I underline the importance of the
peacebuilding architecture, in particular the need to
explore how the Security Council can further leverage
the role and advice of the Peacebuilding Commission,
which forges crucial partnerships and collective
responses to peace and security threats, representing
a valuable complement to the work of the Council.
Increasingly, it provides advice on important thematic
and cross-cutting agendas and it highlights countryspecific and regional peacebuilding needs in countries
and regions, including the Central African Republic,
Colombia, the Great Lakes region and West Africa
and the Sahel. I urge the Council to capitalize on the
Commission’s comparative advantages in order to
integrate crucial prevention and peacebuilding lenses
more squarely into our work.
Finally, the success of our collective efforts to
advance sustainable peace worldwide will depend on
adequate investment in peacebuilding. I am heartened
by the unanimous adoption of resolution 76/305, on
financing for peacebuilding, by the General Assembly
in September 2022. The resolution emphasizes the
4/30

26/01/2023

need for greater political, operational and financial
investment in prevention and peacebuilding efforts in
order to sustain peace. The resolution also underscores
the need to invest in local initiatives and in stakeholders
active at the local level. That is essential for building
societal resilience.
I commend the commitment of Member States
to achieving sustained, adequate and predictable
financing for peacebuilding, including through
the consideration of assessed contributions for the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Secretary-General’s Fund
remains the Organization’s leading instrument to invest
in peacebuilding and prevention, in partnership with the
wider United Nations system and together with national
authorities. We cannot allow crises, of which there are
so many, to divert funding away from these core efforts.
I very much look forward to today’s debate.
The President: I thank the Deputy-SecretaryGeneral for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Muhith.
Mr. Muhith: I wish to thank you, Mr. President, in
my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council at this
important meeting.
At the outset, I wish to commend Japan for focusing
today’s debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
and on the importance of further strengthening how
we collectively respond to the multifaceted and often
interlinked challenges that we face today.
The challenges to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace have multiplied, particularly in the context of
the prevailing global pandemic and resulting economic
downturn, exacerbated by climate change and the
changing nature of conflict dynamics. It is imperative to
enhance the ability of individuals, societies and nations
to cope with the challenges specific to our times. That
has led to an increased interest on the part of countries
and regions in engaging with the Peacebuilding
Commission to expand and strengthen their capacities
for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Last year alone,
the Commission engaged with several new contexts for
the first time, including those of Timor-Leste, South
Sudan and the Central Asian region, in order to learn
from their experiences in building peace.
A critical lesson that has repeatedly emerged from
the Commission’s engagement in various parts of the
world is that it is important to support nationally owned
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9250

and nationally led efforts to build effective, accountable,
inclusive and responsive institutions at the national
and local levels aimed at reducing vulnerability and
protecting and empowering citizens. In view of that,
the Peacebuilding Commission recognizes the need
to increase investments in strengthening effective,
accountable and inclusive public service institutions
that deliver for all citizens, within the framework of
the rule of law, cutting across all the Sustainable
Development Goals, in an integrated and coordinated
manner. As recognized in the twin resolutions on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (General Assembly
resolution 75/201 and Security Council resolution 2558
(2020)), which are also relevant to today’s discussion,
inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding
processes and objectives in order to ensure that the
needs of all segments of society are taken into account.
In that regard, the Commission continues to underline
the importance of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, and to call for the inclusion
of both women and young people in capacity-building
efforts at the local, national and regional levels.

to a number of informal arrangements that allowed the
Council to make a better use of the advisory, bridging
and convening role of the Peacebuilding Commission.
To mention only a few examples, those arrangements
included the convening of informal interactive
dialogues, which offered an additional opportunity
for the Council to seek the informal advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission, including in preparation
for the Council’s visits to the field in contexts facing
peacebuilding challenges; the appointment by the
Peacebuilding Commission of an informal coordinator
for the interactions between the Council and
Commission, which contributed to a better alignment
of the Peacebuilding Commission’s programme of
work with that of the Council, thereby improving the
relevance and timeliness of its submissions thereto; and
the decision, taken by the Council in 2022, to share with
the Peacebuilding Commission the advance copies of
relevant reports of the Secretary-General, which allowed
the Commission to make its advice more substantive,
complementing — and not duplicating — the content
of those reports.

As the demand for peacebuilding support
continues to grow, both in terms of the number of
requests for support and in terms of the complexity
of the multifaceted and often interlinked challenges
that need to be addressed for sustainable outcomes,
it is clear that our responses need to be strengthened.
We need to place greater emphasis on efficiency and
coherence, in addition to leveraging our comparative
advantages and ensuring that our actions can have
an impact on the ground, helping societies achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development. That
requires the full commitment of all of us to finding
agreed and often innovative solutions, while working
with full respect for national ownership and existing
United Nations mandates.

Based on those best practices, I would like
to take this opportunity to encourage all of us to
further explore innovative ideas on how the Council
could make use of the Peacebuilding Commission to
complement its work. Those joint reflections could also
be useful in developing guidance for the Peacebuilding
Commission when it prepares written submissions
for the Council’s consideration. The Peacebuilding
Commission is also open to exploring the provision
of other forms of advice to the Council on relevant
countries, especially those in which a peace operation
is present, building on the Commission’s interactions
with the countries in question and the updates it
receives from the United Nations system on the ground,
and leveraging the PBC’s convening role vis-à-vis
regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions, regional development banks and
civil society organizations.

I am pleased to note that the synergies between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council represent a good practice in that regard.
The Commission has considerably strengthened its
advisory role to the Council, at the Council’s request.
The number of submissions from the Commission to
the Council has continued to grow, reaching a total
of 17 in 2022. The timeliness of the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission has also improved, enabling
the Council to take decisions while benefiting from the
broader peacebuilding perspectives shared with it by
the Commission. That progress was achieved thanks

We just heard the Deputy Secretary-General’s
update on the Secretary-General’s commitment to
developing a New Agenda for Peace, as a contribution to
the Summit of the Future to be held in September 2024.
With a view to strengthening the United Nations
response to the multifaceted challenges we are facing,
the Commission looks forward to further discussions
on the outcomes of the Secretary-General’s Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), which echoes the need to

23-024365/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

enhance support for national peacebuilding priorities
and the importance of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, as well as the inclusion of young
people, in peacebuilding processes. The Commission
also reiterates its call for adequate, predictable and
sustained financing for peacebuilding with a view to
reinforcing efforts to build and sustain peace at the
national and local levels.
I am pleased to inform the Security Council that
the Commission will convene a dedicated discussion on
a New Agenda for Peace next Monday. That meeting
will provide an opportunity for the Peacebuilding
Commission members to complement the ongoing
consultation process with peacebuilding-specific ideas,
including on a strengthened and more strategic role
of the Peacebuilding Commission for better and more
sustained peacebuilding outcomes.
The President: I thank Mr. Muhith for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ndiaye.
Ms. Ndiaye (spoke in French): Let me first extend
my warm greetings to all the Ambassadors here today,
especially the President, Mr. Ishikane, Ambassador
and Permanent Representative of Japan, as well as the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
and all the members of the Security Council.
I have been asked to participate in this open debate,
and it is therefore my privilege and honour to address
the Council today to answer two questions. I will
begin by responding to the first guiding question for
today’s open debate (see S/2023/19, annex): how can
the Security Council better address emerging threats
and risk multipliers in order to achieve peacebuilding
and sustaining peace? That is to say, which areas of
concern should be considered, whose voices shall be
heard and how can constructive synergies be created
among various stakeholders?
We came up with several answers, the first of
which concerns how we respond to conflict. Internal
conflicts are related to the problems of governance,
poorly organized elections and a lack of respect for
constitutions. The Security Council, in our opinion,
should also find ways to prevent those situations from
happening. Furthermore, we believe that it is important
to broaden the scope of discussion by involving non-State
institutions in consultative and discussion-based
frameworks. For example, the Security Council could
listen to other voices, including, as Mr. Muhith just
6/30

26/01/2023

said, the voices of civil society, especially those of
women and young people, and of trade unions and
political organizations.
Secondly, we need to respond to social inequalities
and exclusion on the basis of regional, religious and ethnic
differences, which are often the sources of conflict in
many African countries. The Security Council should
seek approaches to rectify such trends in countries
with high levels of inequality and discrimination.
Furthermore, we believe that approaches promoting
collaborative security should also be encouraged, now
that the limits of all-military strategies have come to
light. There is also a need to systematize approaches
to disseminating the provisions of certain Security
Council resolutions that are sometimes ignored
by stakeholders, including resolution 1325 (2000);
resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence in wars; and
resolution 2242 (2015) and resolution 2250 (2015), on
women and peace and security, and youth, peace and
security, respectively.
The second question is as follows: What needs to
be done to build resilient and effective institutions; to
invest in people, especially women and young people;
and to guarantee societal inclusion? We believe in
the need to support countries that have decided to
adopt innovative approaches to building certain State
institutions through inclusive citizen-led dynamics.
Such approaches allow those institutions to be owned
by the populations they serve and who will therefore be
able to guarantee their functioning and effectiveness.
We also underscore the need to stand alongside States
in advocating respect for democratic processes and
free and transparent elections, as well as in the fight
against corruption, which are often sources of conflict
in our States.
Enrolling girls and keeping them in school, even in
times of conflict, remain key in the empowerment of
future generations of women and should be a priority
for our States and partners. Thousands of girls have had
to drop out of school in the Sahel region. The recent
abduction of some 50 women and girls in Burkina
Faso is just one example whereby the promotion and
empowerment of women has suffered a setback.
It is vital to invest in capacity-building, in addition
to ensuring funding, for institutions working on gender
and the women and peace and security agenda at all
levels — from UN-Women, at the United Nations level,
which does not have many offices in Africa due to a lack
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of resources, to the ministries in charge of the promotion
of women and young people and the protection of
children, which cannot always function effectively due
to a lack of funding, despite budgetary allocations from
States and development partners. A greater presence of
women is also essential in mediation and peacebuilding
teams across all regions of the world.
The involvement of women and young people in
formal peace processes should be ensured so as to
prevent them from resorting to parallel or informal
processes. Civil society, young people and women should
be afforded their rightful spaces in the peacebuilding
agenda, including in conflict prevention and inequality
components. As the Secretary-General said:
“Efforts to build and sustain peace are
necessary not only once conflict has broken out,
but long beforehand through preventing conflict
and addressing its root causes. We must work better
together across the peace continuum, focusing on
all the dimensions of conflict.”
The establishment of basic infrastructure, such
as health-care clinics, schools, daaras for religious
education — an aspect of education that must nevertheless
be managed — community infrastructure and tools
that will contribute to easing the burden of women’s
labour, are important tools for the empowerment of
women and young people. The empowerment of women
through functional literacy programmes — which, to
be frank, our States no longer provide — contribute
to the awareness and development of rural and urban
entrepreneurship as sources of income. When women
can actively participate in their children’s education
and become self-reliant, more just, equitable and stable
societies can be achieved for inclusive sustainable
cohesion. Our States must also strengthen the provision
of basic social and community infrastructure to respond
to the needs of vulnerable groups.
If I may, I will now refer to some elements of the
recommendations I have mentioned that should be
included in the New Agenda for Peace in the context of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
The first element is the impact of climate
change. We know that in the Sahel and all over the
world, especially in Africa, women are suffering
termendously from the effects of climate change. They
are also suffering from emerging security threats that
affect women — I mentioned kidnapping and rape
earlier — and from emerging health insecurity, in

S/PV.9250

particular with respect to the spread of dengue fever,
the Ebola virus, which we are all too familiar with,
and, more recently, the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which continues to plague us still today, as well as
other crises to be prevented. The economic, energy and
food crises must also be dealt with, as has been said.
In fact, Senegal has been hosting, since yesterday, a
major international meeting on food security, and we
await its recommendations and conclusions in order to
contribute to their implementation.
Another element is the governance of natural and
environmental resources, in which, we know, women
already play a very important role. While they may be
contributors to environmental degradation, they also
have the potential to be drivers of change. They can
thus make their voices heard to promote change on
that issue. An additional element is new technologies,
their ramifications for peace and the opportunities,
but also the dangers, they present. Lastly, there is the
issue of migration, which must be dealt with not from a
perspective of exclusion, but from one of development.
I was given eight minutes to speak, and I believe
I have reached the end of my allotted time. I remain at
Council members’ disposal for any further information
or questions they may have.
The President: I thank Ms. Ndiaye for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity in the
representative of Japan.
I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Ambassador Muhammad Abdul Muhith
and Ms. Diago Ndiaye for their informative and
insightful briefings.
In every corner of the world, we face increasingly
complex challenges that make peace vulnerable
and fragile. Each situation is unique, with its own
context, and should receive equally close and constant
attention. In particular, we should raise awareness
about the various emerging risk multipliers. Those
requiring our close attention include food and energy
insecurity, health emergencies, climate change and
human rights violations and abuses, to name but a few.
We have recently witnessed how easily peace recedes
and the humanitarian situation deteriorates in some
countries and regions, despite strenuous efforts over
time. An integrated and tailored approach to build and
sustain peace, consistent with emerging risks, is more
important than ever.

23-024367/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

To take on the daunting challenges of our time, how
can we further strengthen the Council’s engagement?
Let me share the following two points.
First, the Council should play a leading role in
achieving sustainable peace through the establishment
of resilient institutions by investing in people. It is
crucial that institutions be established to ensure that
people can live in a secure environment based on the
rule of law. Institutions should be able to offer basic
socioeconomic services and development in order
to protect and empower people so that they can cope
with multifaceted challenges. Services such as health
care and education are fundamental for establishing a
resilient society and thereby ensuring human security,
as we just heard from Ms. Ndiaye. Such a society will
nurture a stronger trust of people in their Governments
and the communities to which they belong. Solidarity
built on such trust is the indispensable ingredient for
sustaining peace.
For its part, Japan’s New Approach for Peace
and Stability in Africa has placed its focus on
institution- and capacity-building. Investment in
people within all segments of society is also crucial.
In order for institutions and society to be resilient, all
national stakeholders, including women and young
people, should be able to proactively participate in
peacebuilding. We all have to keep in mind that the
people in whom we invest should be the agents to shape
and promote more effective, accountable and resilient
institutions and societies. The Council can strengthen
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations by
articulating it clearly in its resolutions. The Council can
advance such efforts by further promoting inclusivity
through thematic agendas, such as the women and peace
and security and the youth, peace and security agendas.
We believe that the concept of human security should
be mainstreamed in the work of the United Nations in
order to help to promote an integrated and coherent
approach by all relevant actors.
Secondly, the Council should make more effective
use of other United Nations entities, in particular the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Here are some
tangible proposals for enhancing the PBC’s advisory
role to the Council. It is commendable that the PBC’s
briefings and written advice to the Council have
dramatically increased over the past year under the
leadership of Bangladesh as the PBC Chair and Kenya
as the informal coordinator between the two bodies.
8/30

26/01/2023

However, the communication channel between the two
bodies has remained a one-way street. The Council
should make substantial efforts to provide feedback to
the PBC. Japan advocates for convening a meeting in
which all PBC and Security Council members gather and
engage, possibly through informal interactive dialogue.
The Council should also seek and consider the
PBC’s advice in the context of mandate renewals of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. For instance, the Council could
request the PBC to provide advice before a penholder
starts working on a draft resolution on a mandate and
could request the Head of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to brief the PBC to help it formulate advice.
The Secretariat should be further strengthened to
support the PBC’s work. It is our firm belief that
peacebuilding through resilient institutions is the best
way to prevent conflict and violence. The Security
Council and the PBC could expand their roles in the
field to convey necessary information and issue alerts
before conflicts arise. The process to develop a New
Agenda for Peace is now under way. That is therefore a
historic opportunity for the United Nations, its Member
States and all other partners to rebuild a common
vision on peacebuilding and conflict prevention and
to upgrade the United Nations toolbox to that end. We
should mobilize our collective wisdom now.
Let me conclude by reiterating Japan’s unwavering
commitment to promoting peacebuilding and sustaining
peace efforts in the United Nations and beyond.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I begin by thanking
Japan for organizing today’s open debate on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The focus of
the debate on the investment in people to enhance
resilience mirrors, in part, our signature event of
3 November 2022 (see S/PV.9181) and takes forward
the Security Council’s need for further engagement on
how to effectively address the many powerful drivers
of instability. We are grateful to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for her insightful statement
and thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Ambassador Muhammad Abdul Muhith,
and the representatives of international and regional
organizations for their perspectives.
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

With the increase in the number of incidents of
intra-State conflict since the early 1990s and the
growing threat of cross-border terrorism and violent
extremism, the international community has had to
deal with diverse and mutually reinforcing drivers of
instability, which make prevailing conflicts complex
and difficult to resolve. The dynamics of such conflicts
today are aggravated not only by the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons but also by the reach
and lethality of terrorist groups and transnational
criminal networks. Whether by forcibly taking control
of huge parts of States, launching assaults on States’
authority and presence, looting natural resources
or destabilizing society through disinformation,
radicalization and recruitment, especially of young
populations, those groups seek to displace established
States and Governments. Moreover, poor governance
deficits — including the inability of developing
countries to deliver essential public services, create
inclusive opportunities and promote participatory
governance — undermine the effectiveness of traditional
responses for addressing such conflicts. That often
leads to protracted conflicts with dire consequences,
including large-scale humanitarian situations.
As we consider the challenges related to
resolving conflicts in the Sahel, including Mali,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, Somalia and others, the Council
must recall resolution 2282 (2016) on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture and recent
reports on that subject in order to consider additional
instruments and enhanced relationships upon which it
could draw to adopt a people-centred approach towards
maintaining international peace and security. In that
context, Ghana would like to make four specific points
in relation to today’s open debate.
First, the best guarantee for sustaining peace is to
prevent conflicts and address their many underlying
drivers. The Council’s decisions should therefore seek
to reinforce actions in fragile contexts that support
programmes which build the resilience of systems,
institutions and individuals, and which incorporate
projects for economic revitalization, employment
creation and opportunities for livelihoods, in particular
for young people and demobilized former combatants.
In the Sahel for instance, the impact of climate change,
including displacement and food insecurity, as well as
endemic poverty and exclusion, low levels of education
and youth unemployment, have created fertile ground

S/PV.9250

for radicalization and recruitment by extremist
groups. In order to break the cycle of violence and the
southward expansion of terrorist activity into coastal
States, it is important to agree on urgent actions to
strengthen support for building the economic resilience
of vulnerable communities as part of nationally and
regionally led peace and security initiatives. It is
important to note that one feature of the complexity of
terrorist-driven conflicts is the interplay of physical
insecurity and insecurity fuelled by weak community
resilience. Prevention in that regard must go hand in
hand with effective Security Council counter-terrorism
support for regionally led peace and security initiatives.
Secondly, in its efforts to build peace, the Council
could work more closely with other organs and
bodies within the United Nations system to ensure
coherence and effectiveness in the implementation of
peace objectives, especially with the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), which plays an advisory role for
both the Security Council and the General Assembly.
As we have seen over the years, the PBC has a crosssectoral convening ability and has shown its ability to
create, through its work, synergies across international,
regional, national and local dimensions. In addressing
the causes of conflict in fragile countries, as well
as those in transition, the Council should leverage
the resources of the PBC in bringing the actions of
other international actors, such as the Bretton Woods
institutions and bilateral donors, closer to the objectives
of sustainable peace on the basis of locally developed
and context-specific processes. In that regard, we stress
the need for strategically timed joint meetings with the
PBC, beginning at the mandate generation phase and in
relation to common country situations that are up for
renewal in the Council. We also urge PBC consultation
with the Security Council in support of a coherent allof-United-Nations-system strategy to build and sustain
peace in fragile contexts, especially in the Sahel.
Thirdly, a lot has been said about the role of early
warning in preventing conflicts. However, we believe
early-warning mechanisms are more effective if they
are anchored in such regional arrangements as the
African Union and its regional economic communities,
for example, the Economic Community of West
African States, which are closer to the conflict settings
and usually have an institutional memory and keen
awareness of sensitivities that help to better defuse
conflict triggers.

23-024369/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

We therefore urge the United Nations to work
closely with these regional organizations and for their
capacities to be strengthened through increased funding
for early-warning analysis and assessments. This must
include supporting fragile countries in implementing
appropriate interventions to remove identified threats to
peace and security. As we have often said, a dollar spent
in preventing a conflict saves the millions required in the
phase of conflict resolution. We should therefore not only
act early to stop conflict and violence from escalating,
but also be proactive in dealing with early indicators
of conflicts and violence before they get out of hand.
Fourthly, in investing in people for resilient
societies, women’s active and meaningful participation
in peace processes, dialogues and peacebuilding efforts
remains vital to achieving just, inclusive and longterm peace. We therefore continue to advocate an equal
inclusion of women and generous embrace of youth-led
organizations in decision-making and policymaking on
peace and security at national and local levels. Youth
and women should be actively empowered through
local peace initiatives, as local ownership of peace
processes is key to the success of every peace mission.
The emphasis on the resilience of individuals
and communities is a more practical and effective
peacebuilding strategy for addressing protracted crises.
Failing to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
exposes the fragilities of countries and reinforces
the drivers of conflict. We have stated in the Security
Council before, and we repeat it today, that integrating
effective resilience-building into peace operations must
be a central priority, if we are to remain a credible
guarantor of peace and security around the world.
As a long-standing troop-contributing country,
Ghana has observed for some time now the need to
balance military approaches aimed at restoring peace
and peacebuilding measures focused on the resilience of
the conflict communities to prevent relapse into violent
conflict. As resilience involves multiple risks, sectors
and systems, we would continue to encourage coherent
actions across the United Nations system that are targeted
at the resilience-building agenda for sustainable peace.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the Japanese presidency to
convene today’s meeting. I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Ambassador Muhith
for their briefings just now. I also listened attentively
to the briefing by the civil society representative.
10/30

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding is an important part of efforts to
realize lasting peace. Under current circumstances, the
importance of peacebuilding is growing and becoming
more pronounced. China supports the Security Council
in conducting in-depth discussions on this subject
and in making joint efforts with the Peacebuilding
Commission and other relevant United Nations bodies.
In connection with today’s topic, I would like to
share the following observations.
First, peacebuilding requires insisting on giving
priority to development. In her briefing just now, Deputy
Secretary-General Mohammed deeply elaborated
on the nexus between peace and development, with
which China fully agrees. Indeed, for many developing
countries, development is the ultimate solution to the
myriad challenges they face.
Lack of development is an important root cause
for many long-lasting unresolved hotspot issues on the
Security Council’s agenda. In some extremely poor
areas of South Sudan, livestock raiding has occurred
from time to time and become a flashpoint between
communities. In the Sahel, terrorist forces have
exploited massive unemployment and poverty among
youth to spread radicalism and recruit combatants.
Many least developed countries bear the brunt of
climate change, which, in essence, is an issue of
sustainable development.
Conflict-afflicted people are eager to rebuild
their homes and long for a better life. Peacebuilding
needs to correctly identify their aspirations, prioritize
development and tilt resources in favour, inter alia,
of poverty elimination, people’s livelihoods, wider
access to education and public health. We support
industrialization and the modernization of agriculture
and infrastructure. Developed countries should truly
honour their official development assistance and
climate-financing commitments and make up for
historical deficits. International financial institutions
should fulfil their due responsibilities and be deeply
involved in peacebuilding so as to form synergies.
Secondly, we must uphold a people-centred
approach. The Charter of the United Nations begins
with the words “We the peoples”. The United Nations
is committed to promoting State-to-State cooperation.
The fundamental goal of that is to ensure everyone’s
enjoyment of the dividends of peace and development.
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
should remain committed to the original vision of the
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

United Nations Charter, our code for a people-centred
philosophy, and strive to safeguard people’s interests,
advance their well-being and support their pursuit of a
better life.
United Nations peacebuilding should fully support
the sovereignty and leadership of the countries
concerned. It should also support their in-depth
exploration of a development path suited to their national
conditions. In particular, United Nations peacebuilding
should create enabling conditions and an encouraging
international environment for a country’s development.
Thirdly, we have to do a good job in capacitybuilding. Post-conflict countries have a great deal on
their plates. An outside blood transfusion on its own is
not sustainable. We have to pivot from blood transfusion
to blood generation, so strengthening capacity-building
across the board is an imperative. China has made
tireless efforts in this regard.
China’s cooperation with Africa is always
action-oriented and aimed at supporting capacitybuilding. Since the beginning of the new century,
China has built over 6,000 kilometres of railways,
6,000 kilometres of roads, close to 20 ports, more than
80 major power facilities, and helped to build more
than 130 hospitals and clinics, more than 170 schools,
45 sports stadiums and more than 500 agricultural
projects. These projects have effectively helped Africa
to address such development bottlenecks as lacking
infrastructure and a dearth of talent and capital, and
enhanced Africa’s capacity for blood generation for
its countries’ independent growth, which has brought
tangible benefits and opportunities to the people of
the continent.
In East Africa, the Mombasa-Nairobi railway and
the Ethiopia-Djibouti railway have changed the lives
of local young people, and many people have used
the business opportunities of convenient logistics to
make a fortune. Some people, having mastered driving
skills and developed management expertise thanks to
training by China, have become their countries’ first
train conductors and flight attendants.
We also have many agricultural cooperation
projects in Africa, which have led local farmers
to develop rice plantation and, as a result, many
agricultural demonstration households have learned
advanced planting techniques. In Gabon, we established
the International Vocational Education and Training
Centre. Hundreds of young people have received

S/PV.9250

professional training in electronics and electrical
technology and machining and welding technology and
are the future mechanics and engineers of their country.
Fourthly, we must promote inclusiveness and
unity. Post-conflict countries have the important task
of ensuring that people of all walks of life participate
equally in State governance so that the people are truly
the masters of their own country. Just now, Deputy
Secretary-General Mohammed also mentioned the
situation in Afghanistan. I would like to underscore
that the right of women and girls to education and
employment should be guaranteed during the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We hope that the Taliban
authorities will make positive efforts to that end. We
also call on the international community to continue
to support the national reconstruction of Afghanistan,
which will lay the groundwork for the protection of the
rights of women and girls.
For many developing countries with internal
conflicts, while respecting diversity and inclusiveness,
all parties must overcome communal and partisan
differences to jointly maintain lasting peace and
security. External forces should play a constructive role
and refrain from recklessly interfering in the internal
affairs of other countries. Pitting one faction against
another will only exacerbate division and confrontation,
while making the situation increasingly complicated and
turbulent. China will continue to support peacebuilding
with concrete actions and contribute to the realization
of lasting peace.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her briefing. I also thank the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the President of
the Network on Peace and Security for Women in the
ECOWAS Region for their briefings.
I thank Japan for organizing today’s debate,
which raises the extremely important question about
resilience, conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
To meet those extremely complex challenges, as the
briefers quite rightly highlighted, I should like to focus
on three priority goals.
First, the Security Council must be in a position
to prevent and respond to new threats. It is therefore
important to support the peace efforts of regional
organizations. African initiatives must be supported
to prevent and resolve conflicts on the continent.
The commitment of the African Union to settling the

23-0243611/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

26/01/2023

conflict in the north of Ethiopia, the commitment of
the East African Community in the Great Lakes region
and the commitment of the South African Development
Community in Mozambique have been and remain key.
That is also why France supports financing African peace
operations from United Nations assessed contributions.

France will continue to support the Peacebuilding
Fund this year in the amount of €6.5 million. As
has been recalled, we must continue our proactive
efforts with international financial institutions in a
coordinated manner, but we must also fully mobilize
the private sector.

Secondly, the entire United Nations system must be
mobilized and coordinated to address the root causes
of conflict. Peacekeeping operations should participate
directly in those efforts by supporting public service
delivery throughout the territory and security sector
reform. In some cases, those operations must also
support the proper management of natural resources
and combat trafficking.

Preventive diplomacy, the fight against the root
causes of conflict and the building of sustainable
peace are issues at the heart of preparations for the
New Agenda for Peace. The Summit of the Future, to
be held in September 2024, will be a milestone in the
development of that Agenda. France will play its full
part in those actions.

Special political missions, which are often
tasked with supporting inclusive political processes,
must also ensure the full participation of civilians,
including women and youth, as our briefers reminded
us. The efforts of agencies, funds and programmes,
which must come together under the auspices of
Resident Coordinators, are essential in responding
to humanitarian crises, accelerating sustainable
development that benefits people and building resilient
and effective institutions.
The entire United Nations system must better
consider the impact of climate change on peace
and security. It is with that goal in mind that France
joined the Board of Directors of the Climate Security
Mechanism, which it chairs with Germany this year.
Respect for human rights and access to justice are
preconditions for the prevention of conflicts because
without justice, there will never be lasting peace. France
reaffirms its support for the efforts of institutions that
combat impunity.
Thirdly and lastly, peacebuilding must produce
tangible results. The Peacebuilding Commission has
shown that it can bring together States, civil society
and other regional actors and have them engage in
dialogue. The Commission must focus its efforts on
specific geographic locations and draft operational
recommendations to be submitted to the Security
Council. It must be present in transitional and postconflict periods and support preparations for the
drawdown of peacekeeping operations. Several cases
come to mind but, in particular this year, the transition
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
12/30

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Japan for this
opportunity to address the question of resilience in
peacebuilding. We also thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Ms. Ndiaye for their valuable insights.
We share the assessment on the need to strengthen
resilience through ownership and inclusion to better
respond to the interlocking challenges that we face in
preserving and consolidating peace. After all, peace is
our mission, our everyday job and raison d’être here
at the Organization. Because peace means life, and we
strive for life in freedom, dignity and prosperity.
History has proved, without a doubt, that those
countries that have invested in people are far better
equipped to make peace sustainable, prevent the
outbreak of conflict and achieve development and
prosperity. That is directly linked to designing and
implementing policies that take into account and protect
the basic interests of every human being. It starts by
respecting their rights — all rights — civil, political,
socioeconomic and cultural rights. Conversely, the
systematic violation of human rights is a prelude to
conflict, posing a direct threat to peace and security.
A rights-based understanding of peace and security
requires us to address injustice and discrimination, in
particular against half of world’s population — women.
Nowhere, not even in most developed and rightshonouring countries, do women enjoy full equality
with men. But there should be no comparison.
Democracies, with their freedoms and rights, dedicated
institutions, a strong and vocal civil society and a tough
and uncompromising free press seek ways to improve,
do better, correct mistakes and even hold themselves
to account.
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In other places, under the guise of local traditions
and culture, regimes systematically exclude women from
public life and participation in democratic Government,
including by going to the extreme, as is, unfortunately,
happening nowadays in Afghanistan, excluding them
from education. That is why we believe that women and
youth should be at the forefront of our efforts to empower
people to become agents of change, emancipation and
progress. That is how we increase resilience and prepare
for the future.
In my own country, Albania, we have made the
empowerment of women a priority in internal and
external policies — not because it is trendy, but just
because it is right. By ensuring their normal, full and
meaningful participation at all levels, we have seen the
real benefits of a society that knows how to harness
everyone’s energy and creativity to contribute to
development, generate progress and pursue prosperity.
That is why we strive to see their role strengthened in
international peace efforts, including in United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and will use our
time in the Council to advance their cause, which should
be our collective cause.
No country can afford to under-invest in its human
capital. Without an urgent and concerted global effort to
build human capital, millions of people, entire countries,
are in danger of being excluded from future prosperity
and the Sustainable Development Goals will not be met.
Despite the differences in context, a focus on human
capital is essential for countries at all income levels,
since the frontier for skills is continuously moving, and
the demand for better education and health is increasing
everywhere. Investing in human capital means that
children go to school, learn critical thinking, develop
their skills and are able to enter the job market as healthy
grown-ups and become good citizens and productive
adults. That is an investment in the family, society,
development and peace.
Governments have a critical role to play by investing
in human capital, which helps to reduce poverty and
fight inequality and other disadvantages and assists
everyone in becoming part of the development drive. At
a time when scientific and technological advances are
transforming our lives, we must ensure that everyone
is a net beneficiary by closing the gap among countries,
including with regard to life expectancy.
There is yet another key ingredient for peace and
development — the rule of law at both the domestic and
international levels. At the country level, a strong rule

S/PV.9250

of law, which protects human rights, helps to prevent
and mitigate crime, corruption and conflict by providing
legitimate processes for the resolution of grievances and
disincentives to crime and violence. Internationally, it
generates an enabling environment for achieving the
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and provides
the normative basis for friendly relations among States
through dialogue, negotiations, mechanisms for dispute
resolution, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement
and recourse to regional agencies or arrangements, not
through war or aggression.
Weak economic development, inequality and
human rights violations can be a trigger for tension,
violence and conflict. In that context, the principle of
the responsibility to protect, adopted by the General
Assembly in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1), remains very relevant.
That means that we must invest more, and better, in
prevention — the weak spot of multilateralism. We have
the tools, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the treaties and the resolutions. We just need to ensure
that we seriously and genuinely abide by them, not just
with words, but with deeds. That will undoubtedly help
us, individually and collectively, to invest in a better
future for all.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by welcoming Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Ambassador Muhammad Muhith, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Diago
Ndiaye, President of the Network on Peace and Security
for Women in the ECOWAS Region. I thank them for
their insightful briefings. I am also grateful to your
delegation, Mr. President, for the attention given
to peacebuilding throughout this month, beginning
with requests for the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on West Africa and Colombia and
culminating in this meeting.
We agree with the proponents of this debate that the
importance of peacebuilding is greater than ever, given
the complex challenges threatening international peace
and security. It is our view that the PBC is uniquely
positioned to bridge discussions across the various
United Nations pillars and garner international support
to tackle the root causes of conflict. Sustainable
development and security are closely interlinked,
mutually reinforcing and key to building sustainable
peace, in line with what was said by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed so eloquently today. The
Security Council must therefore adopt a comprehensive

23-0243613/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

approach to conflict by taking into account the relevant
political, economic and social dimensions of the crises
on its agenda.
Our debate today provides another opportunity
for further reflection on peacebuilding and the
collaboration between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. As Brazil underscored in
previous meetings last year, such exchanges between
the two bodies are very welcome, and they could in
fact happen more often. Furthermore, that cooperation
is necessary in order to achieve sustainable peace
vis-à-vis the complexity of the challenges before us. We
therefore believe that it is a key element to be included
in the New Agenda for Peace, which we hope will be
drafted in a transparent and Member-driven manner.
The relations of the Peacebuilding Commission
with the Economic and Social Council, the General
Assembly and, in particular, the Security Council
remain yet to be fully explored. The New Agenda
for Peace should highlight the potential benefit of
deepening those relations. That particular issue has a
priority status for most PBC members, and that is the
reason that the PBC’s relationship with other bodies
was included in its 2022 programme of work. We look
forward to constructive engagement by the Council in
that regard.
The PBC can mobilize regional organizations
and international financial institutions and can foster
South-South and triangular cooperation arrangements
in support of national peacebuilding initiatives. The
Commission can also support the implementation of
peacebuilding activities by peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, as well as help to mobilize
political support to promote reconciliation, the women
and peace and security agenda, institution-building
and other nationally defined peacebuilding priorities.
Nevertheless, if we wish to increase the impact of the
PBC’s contribution, we must strengthen its advisory
role by improving the coherence of agendas, aside from
the timeliness and the quality of the advice that the
Commission provides to the Council.
Allow me to list a few practical suggestions for
more meaningful collaboration between the two bodies:
first, consultations on issues relating to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace ahead of the formation, review,
drawdown and transition of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions; secondly, the regular
submission of written advice by the Peacebuilding
14/30

26/01/2023

Commission on issues on the agenda of both bodies;
thirdly, further alignment of the Security Council and
the PBC work programmes; fourthly, greater interaction
between the Commission and the Council penholders;
fifthly, enhancing the Council’s working methods
regarding interaction with the PBC; and, sixthly, at least
one yearly joint session, following the current practice
between the PBC and the Economic and Social Council.
Without proper peacebuilding-oriented inputs,
the Security Council will struggle to make significant
progress in conflict prevention and resolution and in
managing successful transitions to peacebuilding. In
our perspective, the PBC should be empowered by the
Council to take a prominent role in transition settings.
In conclusion, having indicated some avenues to
explore in reviewing the Security Council’s work on
peacebuilding, in particular its cooperation with the
PBC, I would like to underline the crucial need to foster
trust. However, the collaboration can prosper only if the
Council regards the Commission as a valuable partner,
alongside which it works transparently.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): Although
she left the Chamber, let me thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her presence here and for her
commitment to peacebuilding. Let me also thank Japan
for convening today’s open debate and the briefers for
their insights.
Conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding efforts are critical to responding to
shared security and development challenges around the
world. The United States takes our shared ambitions as
part of the Peacebuilding Commission (PCB) seriously.
Peacebuilding efforts can help to mitigate drivers
of fragility and instability and ensure that national
Governments and local communities are empowered
with tools to reduce the recurrence of conflict.
We have been pleased to note the increase in briefings
by the Peacebuilding Commission to the Security
Council in the past year, and we would encourage more
ambitious and structured collaboration between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council.
The PBC is ideally placed to raise awareness on regional
efforts and local communities’ expertise, as well as the
cross-border dimension of conflicts. The United States
reiterates its strong support for expanding the role of
the PBC in regional settings and cross-cutting areas,
including human rights and climate-related peace and
security risks. Such expansion includes leveraging its
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

convening power, particularly in its advisory role to
the Security Council, in order to make peacebuilding
activities integrated, coordinated and responsive. The
United States sees value in a New Agenda for Peace as
part of the Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) initiative
to ensure that the United Nations and wider multilateral
responses are able to effectively manage existing and
emerging threats to international peace and security.
One goal for peacebuilding is sustainability, and
the gains we seek cannot be fully achieved unless they
are inclusive and shared by everyone. Peace processes
are often put to the test because they lack legitimacy
among affected populations. International actors often
cannot be the architects of peace; they should support
local actors in finding their own solutions. To that end,
the United Nations should shift resources to increase the
capacity of local, national and regional peacebuilding
entities. Women, young people, local actors and
broader civil society must be actively engaged and
sufficiently empowered to have a meaningful impact on
the decision-making process. As we have highlighted
before, history has clearly demonstrated that when
women are at the table and able to participate fully and
meaningfully, such processes are much more likely to
achieve lasting outcomes for all members of society.
Similarly, engaging young people in peace processes,
as well as countering terrorism and violent extremism,
is important because many of those young people in
conflict settings are former children in armed conflict
settings. Their positive engagement also mitigates the
risk that they will be pulled back into conflict.
To that end, we encourage efforts by the
United Nations to produce more detailed impact
assessments of its peacebuilding work, demonstrating
how and in what circumstances it can contribute
to effective reductions in violent conflict. Through
those efforts, our hope is to build consensus around
a future in which the United Nations system is fully
activated and empowered to deliver in the ways
we know it can. The United States commitment to
peacebuilding is demonstrated by our implementation
of the Global Fragility Act and the subsequent issuance
of the United States Strategy to Prevent Conflict and
Promote Stability, which we see as complementary to
United Nations efforts. We hope that the Commission’s
expanding role and increased engagement with the
Security Council marks important progress towards the
goal of building and sustaining peace.

S/PV.9250

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique welcomes
Japan’s initiative to convene an open debate on this
important theme. We highly praise Japan’s presidency
for bringing to the attention of the Security Council
such an excellent selection of topics, including the
one we are discussing today. We express our profound
gratitude to Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed,
Deputy Secretary-General. We also extend our thanks
to the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and to
Ms. Diago Ndiaye, President of the Network on Peace
and Security for Women in the ECOWAS Region, for
their important briefings.
Mozambique, in its short history as a nation,
has had its fair share of experience in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that connection,
our approach to peacebuilding and sustaining peace
is based on the recognition of the critical linkages
between peace, security and development. We consider
that in order to consolidate peace, it is paramount
to address the root causes — both internal and
external — of violent conflict and instability, build a
broad vision and a national consensus with regard to
the present and future of the country, and formulate and
implement strategies to build a peaceful future. As a
peacebuilding country, the key lessons we have learned
from our own processes make clear the importance of
addressing development challenges in order to prevent
the recurrence of widespread violence. To that end,
we think it is crucial to establish comprehensive,
integrated and inclusive people-centred peacebuilding
policies and strategies, develop and sustain unwavering
national political will, and obtain the firm commitment
of the international community and sustained funding.
Equally important is building effective alignments,
complementarity and coordination mechanisms at the
local, national, regional and even international levels.
And for all the elements I have mentioned to be viable,
it is of the utmost importance to have capable and
wise national leadership that is fully committed to the
supreme interests of national unity, peace, stability
and reconciliation.
Peacebuilding efforts must essentially be aimed
at restoring and strengthening State authority and the
governance structure. They must boost the State’s
ability to deliver on the basic needs and aspirations of its
people. Therefore, the affected societies need assistance
to build their own peace architecture, reconstitute their
social fabric, strengthen the effectiveness of social
institutions and sustain investments in social cohesion.

23-0243615/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

26/01/2023

In that context, we are of the view that local communities
affected by violent conflict cannot be simply recipients
of peacebuilding measures or initiatives. They must be
fully involved and be active participants in the design
and implementation of the entire peacebuilding process.
In a nutshell, they must own the process of building
the peace. The United Nations and other international
actors must therefore engage local and national
peacebuilders in structured processes that prevent the
recurrence of violence and promote sustained peace.
We strongly believe that in all those processes, the
participation of women and young people is critical. In
that regard, we wish to highlight the gender strategy and
the strategic action plan on youth and peacebuilding,
both spearheaded by the Peacebuilding Commission to
advocate the greater engagement of women and young
people in the peacebuilding process.

restoration and development; the prioritization of
homegrown solutions and the engagement of local
communities in the prevention and resolution of violent
conflicts; a deeper understanding of the specificities
of societies affected by violent conflicts; an increase
in overseas development assistance and flows aimed at
generating greater economic growth and a focus on the
immediate needs of post-conflict States to prevent the
return to hostilities.

It is our view that, for any peacebuilding intervention
to be effective, it has to be carefully planned to take
into account the financial, administrative and logistical
needs on the ground. Furthermore, peacebuilding
requires effective institutions and must help societies
develop resilience and robustness so that they can
cope with, and adapt to, change and sustain their own
peace processes.

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
“Peace never settles permanently. It must be nurtured
every day, every moment, no matter if we are a great
politician or a simple schoolboy.”

We wish to reiterate our belief that peacebuilding
must help affected societies to tackle the root cause
of violence, repair the social fabric, rebuild affected
people’s lives and, finally, ensure that communities
possess the appropriate tools and mechanisms to resolve
conflicts peacefully and in a collaborative manner,
without resorting to violence.

These are the words of young Franco-Colombian
peace activist Léa Narjoud, delivered at the Geneva
Peace Talks, which have been held in Switzerland
annually since 2013. Ms. Narjoud illustrates three
key conditions for sustainable peace: long-term
commitment, continuous investment in trust and frank
and transparent discourse at all levels. Those three
elements have also long guided Switzerland’s work.

We all know that the United Nations political
and peacekeeping missions play a crucial role in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace
and security. That was our experience with the
United Nations Operation in Mozambique, conducted,
successfully, in our own country from 1992 to 1994.
We also know that their effectiveness and sustainability
depend critically on the availability of funding, on
the ability to address emerging threats to peace and
stability, including terrorism and violent extremism,
and on the capacity to generate long-term peace.
What we sometimes forget is that none of that would
be possible without the buy-in from key national and
local stakeholders. It is in the partnership between
international, national and local actors that the key to
success lies.

I would like to further illustrate the three elements
mentioned — time, trust and transparency — in view
of our urgent discussions in the coming months on the
Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace.

In Mozambique’s view, the New Agenda for Peace
must avoid one-size-fits-all solutions to the prevention
and resolution of violent conflict. It must be holistic,
context-specific and include, among other things,
the promotion of poverty reduction and sustainable
development; the promotion of critical investments
in human capital, especially women and youth;
the reinforcement of investment in infrastructure,

First, building sustainable peace is a longterm endeavour, as the various causes of conflict
must be addressed through a holistic approach. The
Council reaffirmed, in resolution 2558 (2020), that
“development, peace and security, and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing”. To implement
that nexus, we encourage the members of the Council to
continue constructive discussions in order to strengthen

16/30

Sustainable peace is a priority for Switzerland in
the Security Council, and I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this open debate. We welcome
the participation of Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed,
Peacebuilding
Commission
Chair
Muhammad Abdul Muhith and Ms. Diago Ndiaye in this
debate and thank them for their informative contributions.

23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the links between those elements, for example, in
the field of transitional justice or in peacekeeping
operations’ transitions.
Secondly, we need to focus on local actors and
inclusivity. That is how we can build an environment of
trust. Switzerland, which is organized according to the
principle of subsidiarity, speaks from its own federal
experience. Local communities and authorities, in all
their diversity, are always at the front lines in building
sustainable peace and preventing a relapse into violence.
We must build on their skills and capacities. Switzerland
welcomes the pioneering work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in strengthening the role of national and
local actors and encourages the Commission to intensify
such efforts, in close collaboration with the Council.
Sustainable peace also requires strong and accountable
institutions that protect and promote the rights of the
people who depend on them. If those rights are violated,
the responsible parties must be held accountable so as
to preserve trust in institutions.
Thirdly, we must promote transparency and truth as
a basis for concrete action. We face an unprecedented
complexity of factors underlying conflict. That
includes new threats to international security and risk
multipliers, from climate change to the challenges of
cyberspace. To address them effectively, the Security
Council must have up-to-date scientific information
and data at its disposal, disaggregated according to
relevant criteria, such as genre, and integrate them into
its daily work. It must take into account and counter the
threat to peace and security posed by disinformation.
During the most recent review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, in 2020, eminent experts
reminded us that “peacebuilding is the concrete
manifestation of the commitment of the United Nations
to save future generations from the scourge of war”.
That responsibility to young men and women remains
very important. With the women and peace and
security and youth, peace and security agendas, the
Council has relevant tools at its disposal and, above all,
a copious pool of peacebuilders. We should now use
that enormous potential.
By building on the achievements and experiences of
the past decades, the New Agenda for Peace must serve
as a key means for leveraging and building sustainable
peace. In these seemingly bleak times, we owe it to
all generations, everywhere in the world, to pool our
efforts together and seize this opportunity.

S/PV.9250

Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important open
debate. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, as well as the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and Ms. Diago Ndiaye, for their
insights and recommendations.
Millions of people continue to live in conflictafflicted countries. Increasing inequality, mistrust and
political divergences continue to generate devastating
wars. The world is continually faced with complex and
novel challenges, which threaten to cause new conflicts
or protract existing ones. We owe it to all civilians
across the globe, especially victims of conflict, to
reinvigorate conflict-prevention strategies and bolster
the concept of peacebuilding. We must also identify
ways to effectively implement national, regional and
multilateral peacebuilding strategies.
Malta welcomes the recent broadening of
cooperation between the Peace Building Commission
and the Security Council. Such an approach can be
extended throughout the United Nations system. In that
context, we recall General Assembly resolution 76/305,
on financing for peacebuilding, which recognizes the
crucial need for sustained financing for peacebuilding
efforts in an adequate and predictable manner.
Consistent with our belief that peacebuilding
is an integral part of our multilateral project, Malta
is contributing to the Peacebuilding Fund. Our
contribution is also aimed at underscoring the fact
that, if we all contribute to that end, we can achieve
significant results. The financing and management of
such operations require our utmost attention in the light
of changing mandates and increasing challenges.
The mere absence of violence is not the true
definition of peace. Our work for peace must be a
long-lasting solution, where attitudes, institutions and
structures are transformed into positive cooperation
and partnership. Sustainable development has an
important role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
as it empowers Governments and local communities to
realize such transformative change in their societies,
making them resilient to future shocks. It is evident that
inclusive peace processes are more durable, sustainable
and successful.
The lack of access to education for people of all
ages, but especially children, is a conflict risk multiplier.
We stress the importance of literacy as a peacebuilding
and conflict-prevention tool and highlight its holistic

23-0243617/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

ability to advance peace. That can be achieved by
ensuring the full participation in society of all persons,
promoting human rights and dignity, advancing
poverty eradication and gender equality and building
more resilient, inclusive and sustainable societies,
including in the digital sphere. We need to empower
people with the abilities to participate in democratic
systems and counter disinformation, misinformation
and violent agendas. Educational environments and the
literacy skills one develops in such environments holds
that potential and can provide marginalized people with
access to justice and legal protection, thereby reducing
the potential for conflict.
Identifying emerging threats and the early warnings
of conflict is challenging, including due to Security
Council procedures and dynamics. Informal dialogues
and synergies among United Nations bodies, the PBC,
civil society organizations and independent actors
is a way to address the shortfall. Regional actors can
serve as a strong channel of advice on peacebuilding
priorities in respective regions.
Women and children are too often the ones who
suffer the brutalities and severe socioeconomic
ramifications of conflict. They are also crucial building
blocks for peace. A society cannot have peace without
incorporating the well-being, inclusivity and protection
of the fundamental human rights of women and
children. The voices of women need to be fully, equally
and meaningfully heard for an inclusive, sustainable
road map for peacebuilding to be effectively drawn up.
In conclusion, we cannot fail to mention that, in
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), the Secretary-General
underpinned investment in prevention, peacebuilding
and the Peacebuilding Commission as one of the key
proposals of the report, aligned with the goals enshrined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is
our responsibility to strive to address the root causes of
conflict at an early stage.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Mr. Muhammad Muhith, for their
informative briefings. We also listened very carefully
to the briefing delivered by Ms. Diago Ndiaye.
We are convinced that sound policy strategies
at the national level are necessary for building
sustainable and prosperous societies. The laws of the
State must take into account the national and religious
18/30

26/01/2023

characteristics, and its institutions must effectively
protect the interests and rights of all the inhabitants of
the country, without exception. Sound public policies
that establish responsible decision-making authorities
and build equitable relationships in society are key
to ensuring the stability of States. Equally key is the
creation of sustainable, independent and competitive
economies and national health-care and education
programmes, as well as working with young people
and instilling respect for one’s history. Achievement
in those areas gives States themselves the ability to
ensure the well-being and security of their citizens in
order to overcome the effect of conflicts and to prevent
their recurrence.
It cannot be overlooked that many of the States
on the agenda of the Security Council, particularly
those from the African continent, continue to feel
the consequences of their colonial pasts. Those
tragic events disrupted the traditional process of
State-formation; borders were arbitrarily drawn, and
many peoples ended up being divided or, conversely,
arbitrarily put together into States. The long-standing
imposition of languages and customs foreign to local
populations has inevitably contributed to inter-faith and
inter-ethnic conflicts, given the fact that it has worked
against the development of cohesive societies. Some
colonial empires deliberately left behind artificial
dividing lines, hoping to maintain their influence in the
spirit of “divide and conquer”. And all of that was also
accompanied by economic exploitation.
Overall, the Security Council is probably not in
a position to make much of an impact in addressing
those underlying problems. Nothing can replace the
method of seeking political solutions and principles
for State-building on the basis of national interests and
priorities. However, the Security Council clearly has
both an opportunity and a duty to bring to an end the
most acute phases of conflicts, including through the
work of peacekeeping and political missions, which,
through their broad mandates and billions of dollars
in resources, can contribute to ending violence and
protecting civilians.
The peacebuilding activities of the United Nations
are an important tool for helping States in overcoming the
effects of conflicts and in preventing their recurrence.
In that regard, we note the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which serves as an advisory platform
for developing comprehensive post-conflict recovery
strategies and for preventing conflicts from recurring.
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It should serve as a link between peace and security
efforts and development assistance; that means it
should make recommendations not only to the Council,
but also to the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. When it comes to peacebuilding,
there can be no automatic one-size-fits-all solutions.
Each situation requires its own delicate, impartial and
assiduous approach in order to find a unique solution.
The primary responsibility for both preventing
conflicts and overcoming their consequences lies
with States themselves. International support, if
needed, should be provided only with the consent of
the host Government, in line with its priorities and
with unconditional respect for State sovereignty. It is
unacceptable for donors to set their own preferences
and make the allocation of aid conditional on political
demands. Such an approach is not conducive to
achieving peace. We are cautious about attempts to
merge the issues of peace and security, development,
human rights and humanitarian assistance under the
umbrella of “sustaining peace”. We are convinced
that despite some links among various aspects of
United Nations activities, it is advisable to maintain
a division of labour and a clear distinction between
the respective mandates of United Nations organs and
bodies. The use of human rights violations and other
arbitrary factors as a form of conflict indicator opens
the door to opportunities for abuse and interference in
the internal affairs of sovereign States. It is our view that
the political settlement of a conflict and the stabilization
of the security situation are what lay the foundations for
improving the protection of human rights and building
democratic institutions in the country concerned, and
not the other way around.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Japan for the initiative to convene this important debate
on peacebuilding and sustainable peace. I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed,
for her insightful description of the relevant challenges
and the trajectory of the international community
towards sustainable peace. I also thank the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as Ms. Diago
Ndiaye, for their enlightening briefings.
Peacebuilding and the sustainability of peace are
components of a multifaceted process involving a wide
range of actors from the international community
working together to support resilience and facilitate
the national ownership of peace, including political
processes to promote sustainable peace and well-being.

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding is the stage after a peace agreement
has been signed or widespread violence has ended.
It involves a comprehensive effort to prevent the
resumption of hostilities. In that sense, it is closely
linked to post-conflict reconstruction and the resilience
of social, political and economic capacities to counteract
the drivers of fragility.
It goes without saying that investing in education
and infrastructure, empowering local communities and
strengthening the role of women and young people are
key pillars of the sustainable peace agenda. Within the
United Nations system, the peacebuilding architecture
was established to act as a bridge to promote an integrated
and coherent approach to advancing the sustainable
peace agenda. Nevertheless, the contemporary factors
of conflict and security only compound that already
difficult task.
It is now universally recognized that peace and
security are inextricably linked to development. Indeed,
many countries experiencing armed conflict also face
obstacles to their sustainable development because
their institutional and governance capacities are easily
overwhelmed. Conversely, countries struggling with
persistent underdevelopment face security challenges
and remain prone to fractures in their social fabric,
while negative forces such as terrorism and violent
extremism, intercommunal violence and organized
crime flourish in such contexts. The emergence of
contemporary risk factors such as the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the ever-increasing
threat of climate change have added a further intractable
complexity to that difficult security landscape. Those
overlapping and interconnected challenges can be
effectively addressed only through comprehensive and
coherent strategies.
The Council bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
but in order to fulfil its mandate more effectively, it
must work closely with other United Nations organs
and bodies to address the root causes of conflict in a
holistic and systemic manner. Those root causes include
social, economic and political inequalities; economic
stagnation and decline; acute levels of unemployment
and abject poverty; weak governance structures;
health and environmental challenges; and the fears,
uncertainties and economic drivers of conflict that
emerge in crises.

23-0243619/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Given the increasing interdependence of parts
of the international community and the changing
linkages among political, socioeconomic, health and
environmental contexts, it seems irrelevant to address
the challenges of peace and security and of development
in isolation from each other. It is clear that insecurity
affects all nations and peoples to different degrees, as
the least developed countries and the most vulnerable
groups are often more prone to hardship and crisis.
The United Nations must therefore remain at
the centre of efforts to safeguard the fundamental
principles of international law, while promoting peace
and security and development for all. The Council
must find responses to the security implications of
the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity,
including pandemics and the environmental challenges
due to climate change. That must lead us to enhance the
role of the Security Council by promoting an integrated
and coherent system-wide approach to addressing those
multifaceted challenges. In that indispensable task, we
must be able to learn lessons from the complex and everworsening situations and the persistent development
challenges facing many countries, while revisiting the
tools of our collective security system.
In the light of the challenges posed by the COVID-19
pandemic, climate change and conflict-related
development deficits, it is incumbent upon the Security
Council to consider the prospects for closer collaboration
with the United Nations development system in order to
ensure that the Sustainable Development Goals remain
within the reach of conflict-affected countries. Among
the promising prospects to be explored is the closer
collaboration of the Council with the Peacebuilding
Commission and possibly also the Economic and
Social Council, which could help mobilize greater
global development responses to the urgent challenges
of conflict prevention and post-conflict peacebuilding.
In any case, and by way of conclusion, the Security
Council must be able to strengthen its integrated
approach across the entire spectrum of peace and
security, humanitarian aid and development in order to
promote human-centred solutions, without prejudice to
sovereignty or jeopardizing international peace.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I am grateful
to the Deputy Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Ndiaye for their
briefings today.
20/30

26/01/2023

As we all know, the cost of conflict is unsustainable,
both in terms of human suffering and the resources
available for peacekeeping and humanitarian aid.
The New Agenda for Peace is an opportunity to put
prevention front and centre in order to save lives and
greater costs down the line. We understand that the
concept of conflict prevention can raise sensitivities.
But nationally owned peacebuilding processes can
bolster sovereignty and strengthen State resilience.
That is at the heart of the sustaining peace framework
articulated by the General Assembly in 2016, which
emphasizes working with countries to meet their needs,
shared responsibility and a whole-of-system approach.
Fragilities are universal, and sustaining peace requires
constant work in all countries.
In working together, the United Kingdom sees
potential for greater impact in three key areas.
First, we should support efforts to strengthen
United Nations foresight capabilities to anticipate risks
and inform our responses. We can better leverage data
and technology to understand conflict risks, including
in places where climate change is exacerbating them.
And we can ensure that the United Nations has the
right mediation capabilities and wider networks to
help resolve conflicts before they escalate. Inclusive
approaches and investing in women and youth
peacebuilders is a priority because we all know the
evidence of that leading to results that are more durable.
Secondly, the United Nations family, ourselves
included, must fully implement the sustaining
peace agenda. That includes empowered Resident
Coordinators
leading
joined-up
peacebuilding
approaches to maximize the country-level impact of
development, diplomatic and other efforts. The United
Kingdom has long invested in the Peacebuilding Fund,
with its critical role in incentivizing coherence within
the United Nations and underpinning nationally owned
prevention strategies. Coherence can also be better
driven and modelled in New York, among all parts
of the United Nations system, including the agencies,
funds and programmes.
Lastly, the Council can do more to support conflict
prevention by being aware of emerging risks and
working in cooperation with relevant United Nations
bodies and regional organizations to drive integrated
responses. The Peacebuilding Commission is also
a critical part of the equation in its own right, and
through its advisory role to the Council. The United
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Kingdom strongly supports a more active role for the
Commission. And South Sudan’s active engagement is
a welcome development and a further example of the
increasing interest in peacebuilding support.
The New Agenda for Peace is an opportunity to
reinvigorate our shared commitment to sustaining
peace. I welcome Japan’s initiative today to help
move forward ideas. We all need to adapt to emerging
threats and risk multipliers, while investing in and
prioritizing prevention.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
Security Council can sometimes give the impression of
being the world’s ambulance, as it were. It rushes from
one developing conflict to another despite the fact that
prevention is the most effective and efficient way to
maintain peace and security in the world. That is why
conflict prevention is the duty of the Organization. That
is also why I thank you very much, Sir, for convening this
debate. I am also grateful for the briefings by Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed; Ambassador
Muhammad Abdul Muhith, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC); and Ms. Diago Ndiaye, the civil
society representative.
In line with the outcome of the 2020 review of
the peacebuilding architecture, we support the vision
proposed by the Secretary-General on a New Agenda
for Peace, outlined in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
which emphasizes, inter alia, reducing strategic risks
and investing in prevention for the sake of peacebuilding
and sustainable peace. The New Agenda for Peace
must include effective mechanisms to overcome the
challenges represented by non-military threats, such as
transnational organized crime, which feeds off the wake
of transition and exploits porous borders. Investing in
people is the main tool for conflict prevention, and
capacity-building is a critical part of efforts to end
conflict. Exclusion, poverty and inequalities, coupled
with other factors that degrade the social fabric, can
foster violent extremism.
We therefore must be able to rely on a
comprehensive and action-oriented approach to enable
building the capacity of countries in conflict situations.
Special political missions and United Nations country
offices in countries in conflict situations are the
appropriate partners to support national authorities
in the development of joint transition plans, together
with the use of cooperation frameworks for sustainable

S/PV.9250

development, while providing a broader approach to
strengthening national institutions.
The full, equitable and meaningful participation
of women at all stages of conflict prevention and
resolution and peacebuilding processes leads to lasting
and sustainable peace. In that regard, Ecuador stresses
the importance of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and all subsequent measures related to the
women and peace and security agenda. Accordingly,
we underscore the gender strategy and action plan of
the Peacebuilding Commission, which promote the
inclusion of the gender perspective, monitors progress
and identifies gaps. Similarly, resolution 2250 (2015)
and measures related to youth, peace and security must
be implemented, while especially taking into account
women and youths.
Activities oriented towards ensuring dialogue,
reconciliation and demobilization must be able to
rely on sufficient financial and logistical resources.
In that regard, the Peacebuilding Fund is a tool
that remains in need of strengthening. Ecuador has
supported the Secretary-General’s efforts to achieve
greater predictability and sustainability with regard
to financing the Fund, including through assessments.
More effective partnerships with regional organizations
and international financial institutions would benefit
the Fund. The fact is that countries in conflict situations
lack sufficient access to concessional loans, and we
encourage the countries providing official development
assistance to provide the necessary lines of credit to
increase their access to resources.
In that regard, we urge countries in conflict
situations and neighbouring countries to participate in
the Peacebuilding Commission, which plays a politically
supportive role and acts as a bridge between the principal
organs of the United Nations to provide coherent
advice with regard to national needs and priorities. We
value the unique advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and stress the importance of its written
and oral recommendations submitted to the Security
Council, particularly prior to mandate renewals. As
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, having
been so designated by the Security Council, Ecuador
will promote in the Commission these indispensable
efforts for sustainable peace.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
also would like to commend Japan for focusing our
attention on this timely topic, and I would like to thank

23-0243621/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, Ambassador
Muhammad Abdul Muhith and Ms. Diago Ndiaye for
their informative and insightful briefings.
Thirty-one years after the original An Agenda for
Peace (S/24111) was published, the United Nations
system is still struggling to find sustainable solutions to
prevent or even simply to address conflicts and growing
instability. We also continue to grapple with providing
adequate funding and resources for peacebuilding
projects. The resolution on financing for peacebuilding,
unanimously adopted by the General Assembly in
September 2022 (General Assembly resolution 76/305),
is a step in the right direction, but unfortunately
not enough to guarantee adequate, predictable and
sustained funding for the critical activities that prevent
conflict and related occurrences.
For the United Arab Emirates, the human element
lies at the heart of peacebuilding and its components.
We approach peacebuilding through a people-centred
lens enabled by an institutional framework that is, of
course, inclusive, responsive and adaptable to emerging
needs. This adaptability is key to fostering durable
peace and resilience. With that in mind, I would like to
share the following three recommendations.
First, to sustain peace, we need comprehensive
strategies. One of the problems we hear over and over is
the impact of piecemeal, incoherent approaches that do
not provide the kind of ambitious solutions needed by
countries facing or emerging from conflict. We do not
have to reinvent the wheel, but we do need to mobilize
the different tools at our disposal in the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. Institutions do not exist for
the sake of existing. They exist to support communities.
If we are not optimizing how we use them, we are
failing the people we are expected to serve.
Specific examples of the coordination that we
should use better include, as others have said, the
written advice of the Peacebuilding Commission to the
Security Council and the participation of the Chairs of
country-specific configurations in our discussions. We
also support convening informal dialogues between
the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
contributions can enable the Security Council to improve
its engagement and better support host Governments.
Secondly, inclusivity is the cornerstone of
peacebuilding. When local communities are empowered,
they are able to de-escalate tensions and build resilience
from the ground up. This means investing in women and
22/30

26/01/2023

youth. We have reiterated to the Council that women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation makes peace
last. As we all know, peace agreements are 64 per cent
less likely to fail when civil society representatives,
including women’s organizations, participate in those
peace processes.
Gender apartheid is a driver of conflict and
instability. This morning, the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security, which is co-chaired by
the United Arab Emirate, met to discuss the situation of
women and girls in Afghanistan. Women’s contribution
to society should never be seen as an option, but instead
as a prerequisite for security and prosperity. The evidence
is clear: inclusive societies thrive.
Prevention, however, also means moving to conflict
resolution quickly rather than accepting frozen conflicts
as the norm and thinking that peace will prevail in
such a context. The alarming news from the occupied
Palestinian territories this morning clearly demonstrates
this point. Only civilians will pay the price in the absence
of a comprehensive and sustainable peace strategy.
Thirdly, as we discussed the contours of the New
Agenda for Peace, we need to be able to respond
effectively to evolving and complex challenges, such
as climate change, extremism and pandemics. Let me
illustrate this with respect to climate. Instability and
scarcity of resources driven by climate change can
indeed amplify tensions and conflict in fragile societies.
The data does show this. Between 2009 and 2019,
weather-related events displaced an estimated 23 million
people on average each year. Studies have shown that of
the 25 countries most vulnerable to climate change, 14
are already facing conflict. We therefore need better data
and analysis to better address the security implications
of climate change. We have a window of opportunity to
integrate climate action and peacebuilding. It is critical
to seize this moment.
The new Agenda for Peace must provide a framework
that is nimble and adaptable, and funding must match
needs. Political attention does not fix the issue by
itself. It needs to be fuelled by catalytic and sustainable
funding and capacity-development programming to
promote rapid recovery and build the resilience we are
all talking about.
Finally, peacebuilding — but also conflictresolution efforts — are now undertaken more than ever
by a more diverse set of actors on the global stage. In a
world marked by global fragmentation, it is important
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to leverage their facilitation efforts and ensure that
local, national and international initiatives complement
each other.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of the United Arab Emirates to ensuring
greater resilience and sustainability in peacebuilding.
The moral argument for avoiding conflict is clear,
but it is also an economic argument. According to
the Institute for Economics and Peace, every dollar
invested in peacebuilding could, in the long run, save
$16 for humanitarian and development efforts. We look
forward to working with all partners for an inclusive
and invigorating new Agenda for Peace in preparation
for the Summit of the Future in 2024.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): I thank you, Mr. President,
for including me on the list of speakers. I would also
like to express my appreciation through you, Sir, to the
Government of Japan for convening today’s meeting
on peace, which is more timely than ever, and which,
unfortunately, is not only timely but also unique. If
we look at international political discourse today, war
is usually on the agenda, not peace. The rhetoric of
war is very loud, and the rhetoric of peace is hardly
being heard.
I represent a country that is an immediate neighbour
of Ukraine, a country that is extremely interested in
creating peace, given that the impacts of the war have
been severe immediate for us as neighbours. More
than a million refugees have entered Hungary, which
has obligated us to carry out the largest humanitarian
operation in our history.
Our national energy importation costs have
increased from €7 billion to €17 billion within a single
year. Inflation is skyrocketing, which has had a very
negative impact on food prices. Moreover, not only have
Ukrainian died in this war, but Hungarian nationals are
also dying, given that there is a Hungarian community
in western Ukraine, whose members are being recruited
into the Ukrainian army, many of whom are dying in
the war.
Hungary and the Hungarian people have already
paid a high price for this war, despite the fact that
they never wanted the war. Hungary and its people
are absolutely not responsible for this war. In our most
recent parliamentary elections, last year, the Hungarian

S/PV.9250

people made it very clear that since this is not our war,
we do not want it. We do not want to be involved in a war
against anyone. The Hungarian people made it absolutely
clear that Hungary must be left out of this war. Indeed,
everything that has been happening has come with
tragic consequences. Thousands are dying, millions
are fleeing their homes, families are being torn apart,
and the sanctions are putting tremendous challenges
in the way of European economies. I can imagine that
hundreds or thousands of kilometres away, or an ocean
away, that might look a bit different. But believe me, we
live in the neighbourhood and must underline that it is
very serious. I ask members to receive, from someone
who lives in the direct neighbourhood of the war, the
message that the war must be stopped immediately,
because we are in the twenty-fifth hour and we must
concentrate on peace. We urge the international
community to replace war rhetoric with peace rhetoric.
We also urge the international community to avoid any
decisions, measures or statements that could risk the
escalation or prolongation of the war. I ask members
not to forget that the escalation and prolongation of
the war will bring more suffering and lead to more
people dying.
We believe that instead of deploying more and
more weapons, we should now start to concentrate on
establishing a ceasefire and launching peace talks.
As I look around the table, it reminds me that the
United Nations was not created as an integration of
like-minded countries. It is a platform for discussion,
including discussion with countries that are not very
happy to be sitting around the same table. But believe
me, if channels of communication are being cut, it
means that we are giving up on our hopes for peace,
and that is a very irresponsible way of behaving. I
therefore humbly ask the representatives of large
and strong countries, the representatives of the socalled super-Powers, to sit around the negotiating
table and negotiate how peace could be created in our
neighbourhood, instead of prolonging the war, as that
would have extremely adverse impacts that I think all
of us should avoid.
Once again, I would like to express my appreciation
to the Japanese Government, which was brave enough
to put the issue of peace on the agenda. I hope that in the
future there will be more international events, platforms
and organizations with peace on the agenda — how to
finally make peace.

23-0243623/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you once again, Mr. President, on
Japan’s assumption of the Security Council presidency
for the current month and I thank you for holding
today’s pivotal debate on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. Egypt has long stressed the need to focus
on that issue because it has a special importance for
our African States. We appreciate Japan’s prominent
role in international cooperation for peace and its
active participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, while supporting efforts for peacebuilding
and reconstruction in post-conflict situations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of the three African members of
the Security Council — namely, Mozambique, Ghana
and Gabon — and by the Arab member of the Council,
the United Arab Emirates, on the need to promote the
United Nations peacebuilding system by providing
appropriate sustained financing.
Peace is not achieved when wars and conflicts
end. Instead, it requires capacity-building in States
and their institutions, while in particular prioritizing
people’s aspirations for sustainable conflict prevention.
The high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding financing, which was held in April
2022, found that we still have a dire need to focus
international efforts on peacebuilding and providing
adequate and sustained financing for it. In that context,
I would like to highlight the following points as the
basis for a future general framework for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
First, we must pay greater attention to including
the components of peacebuilding in the activities and
duties of peacekeeping operations. We must provide
sustained and adequate financing to build peace as a
precondition for ensuring success in our joint efforts.
We must look seriously at supporting options for
building peace, especially in the light of the current
challenges, for which financing allocations have
been reduced for peacebuilding programmes. That
does not provide the minimum level required to build
24/30

26/01/2023

the capacity for resilience in the countries that host
peacekeeping operations. We urge Member States
to allow peacebuilding efforts to access the assessed
contributions of the United Nations budget, including
the Peacebuilding Fund.
Second, it is important to promote the linkage
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities
in order to address the root causes of armed conflicts
and enhance peace, security and development systems.
Egypt attaches a high priority to that matter, under the
leadership of the President of the Republic of Egypt, as
he deals with the dossier of post-conflict reconstruction
and development in Africa. Cairo also hosts the
African Union Centre for Post-conflict Reconstruction
and Development
Third, we need to support the efforts of States in
building their institutions and national capacity and
promoting good governance to prevent the recurrence
of conflicts in national contexts, in which national
authorities identify, plan and implement their priorities
in order to ensure the sustainability of development,
security and stability.
Fourth, we must mobilize the necessary resources
to ensure the right environment for economic growth,
foreign investment and job creation, in line with
national priorities and the principle of the national
ownership of solutions.
Fifth, it is important to support all efforts aimed at
ensuring the participation of women and young people
in peacebuilding. Empowering women and integrating
young people in various fields must be reflected in
executive policies to overcome economic, social and
security challenges.
Sixth, it is important to promote the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), especially by holding frequent consultative and
coordination meetings between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council in order to
enhance the African vision for reforming peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations, achieving more synergy
and ensuring more coherence and complementarity
between the two Organizations.
Seventh, the Security Council must continue to
give enough attention to African issues, spare no effort
to prevent conflicts from arising in the first place and
prevent the current global geopolitical situations from
diverting attention away from African issues. Egypt
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

is at the forefront of countries that support investment
for capacity-building by establishing national
institutions that are capable of protecting peoples’
resources and promoting the national ownership of
peace-building efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of the upcoming intergovernmental consultations on
a New Agenda for Peace and the valuable suggestions
of the Secretary-General contained in his report Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982), including the promotion
of conflict prevention efforts and the sustained
financing of such efforts, with a view to developing
multilateralism and promoting its effectiveness in
sustaining peace. In that regard, we look forward to
the Secretary-General’s report to be issued in June on a
New Agenda for Peace, which will be a new endeavour
for enhancing efforts aimed at sustaining peace and
security under the auspices of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me begin by
commending Japan for organizing today’s timely and
important debate. Poland expresses its appreciation
to all the briefers for their insightful and thoughtprovoking remarks.
I would like to underscore the importance of
investing in development in order to effectively
tackle the structural drivers of conflict and unlock
the untapped potential of human capital. That can
be achieved only through resilient and accountable
State institutions, inclusive economic growth, social
cohesion and trusted connectivity.
In the light of that, I wish to mention that Poland
has initiated a formal discussion on a General Assembly
draft resolution on building global resilience through
regional and interregional infrastructure connectivity.
We strongly believe that infrastructure connectivity
can be used as a tool for building resilience to future
shocks. That will make an essential contribution to the
overall resilience of societies by ensuring that the vital
services that infrastructure provides are less vulnerable
to extreme events and disruptions. In that regard,
infrastructure connectivity constitutes an essential
component of social cohesion, and social cohesion is
central to building peace.
We must also remember that, in the aftermath
of conflicts, there can be no peacebuilding without

S/PV.9250

addressing grievances and divisions. That is why we
are convinced that the peacebuilding infrastructure
must incorporate the concept of transitional justice,
with its four pillars, namely, criminal prosecutions,
truth-seeking, reparations and institutional and legal
reforms. Full reconciliation is the only way to prevent
the recurrence of conflict and attain lasting peace
and stability.
When it comes to sustainable peace, the role played
by the young generation cannot be overstated. It is
therefore essential to constantly engage young people
in all dimensions of peacebuilding processes. The most
constructive way to empower young people and ensure
that they are not radicalized in situations of conflict is
to invest in high-quality education, vocational training
and employment opportunities. While, in times of
peace, education is generally treated as a significant
investment and fundamental right, it is unfortunately
often sidelined in times of war. Against that backdrop,
Poland continues to provide assistance to students
from developing and conflict-affected countries.
Among those is Ukraine, which continues to reel from
Russian aggression.
Speaking of that conflict and aggression, we must
remember that one day, just peace will be achieved.
When that happens, Ukraine may need reconstruction
on a similar scale to that after the Second World War.
It may also need to draw on the full range of processes
and mechanisms associated with peacebuilding in order
to minimize the risk of the recurrence of conflict.
We commend the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for its work in bringing together international,
national and local stakeholders to examine and address
complex peacebuilding challenges. We strongly
support collaboration between the PBC and various
United Nations bodies, including not only the Security
Council, the General Assembly and United Nations
missions in the field, but also the Economic and
Social Council.
Poland also endorses the work of the Peacebuilding
Fund. It has proved its unique ability to address
peacebuilding challenges and work with all relevant
actors on the ground. Being aware of the critical
importance of sustained, adequate and predictable
financing for peacebuilding processes, we welcome the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 76/305, on
financing for peacebuilding. We would like to stress our
full political and financial commitment in that regard.

23-0243625/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In conclusion, let me stress that every country
deserves peace and security. That is why conflict
prevention and peacebuilding remain among our
top priorities. We believe that investment in people,
combined with strengthening State institutions, can
truly contribute to building resilience in situations
of conflict and fragility. The Security Council can
therefore count on Poland’s active support in any
initiative aimed at advancing that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): Special thanks go to your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate, which has relevance to international peace,
stability and development.
Investing in mechanisms to sustain peace is
important, especially as we have seen how emerging and
systemic threats, such as the pandemic, can exacerbate
conflict and undermine peace. In the same context,
building and sustaining peace requires addressing the
root causes of conflicts and crises, including poverty,
exclusion, inequality and discrimination. Reacting to
cycles of violence is unsustainable.
Rwanda believes that peace is a long-term
investment. Our commitment to peacebuilding is
informed by our strong belief in our common humanity
and the dignity of all people. In that regard, lasting
peace can be built only from within.
Rwanda remains committed to sharing its experience
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace through
bilateral mechanisms and with our United Nations
family. Our journey to sustaining peace has shown
us that inclusive and effective national ownership is
key to sustaining peace. It is our view that we need to
support that, while devising future programmes for
sustaining peace. Talking about building peace and
sustaining it means nothing unless it is accompanied
by concrete steps and actions. In that spirit, fulfilling
Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, on building peaceful, just
and inclusive societies, is now more imperative than
ever before.
Rwanda’s journey to sustaining peace has focused
on a people-centred approach, ownership, inclusiveness
and accountability. Strengthening institutions has
become a core value in our system. That approach has
influenced us in designing bottom-up, home-grown
26/30

26/01/2023

solutions, such as Imihigo, or performance contracts
between local leaders and their constituencies. Such
home-grown solutions are customized to the aspirations
of citizens, ensuring that no one is left behind in
contributing to overall development.
Governments have a responsibility to protect their
citizens. When we discuss socioeconomic development,
human rights and humanitarian issues, Governments
should therefore be core actors in ensuring that their
people lead a dignified life. When Governments exhibit
political will and honour their duties and commitments,
peacebuilding and investing in peace become both
achievable and sustainable.
Sustaining peace in the Great Lakes region is
a desire of all the countries of the region, including
Rwanda. It is in that regard that Rwanda reiterates its
deep concern about the evolving security situation in
North and South Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which remains a serious threat to the hardearned peace and security of the region.
The endemic cycle of violence in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, specifically against
Kinyarwanda-speaking Congolese, results from
structural failures, with the absence of State authority
to guarantee safety and security for its people and
spillover effects to neighbouring countries. Persecution,
discrimination, insecurity, consistent threats and
violence against a section of Congolese citizens forced
almost 80,000 Congolese to seek refuge in Rwanda
and many others in neighbouring countries, including
Burundi, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania.
Resolving the refugee issue and preventing future
internal displacement crises are inextricably linked
to achieving lasting peace in the region. In order to
resolve the refugee crisis and achieve sustainable
peace, the root causes must be addressed without
delay. Disregarding the root causes of the refugee
crisis further exacerbates instability, which threatens
peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts. Indeed, to
achieve sustainable peace, the plight of the Congolese,
facing perpetual internal displacement and indefinite
exile without a viable prospect of returning home, must
be categorically and structurally addressed.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is home
to more than 130 armed groups, including the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR),
a United Nations-sanctioned armed group, which
committed genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and which wields significant authority in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As a consequence,
the FDLR and its splinter groups continue to pose
a serious threat not only to the Congolese people, but
also to the sustainability of Rwanda’s peace. Rwanda
cannot sustain its hard-earned peace with that looming
threat on its doorstep in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In that regard, the Security Council must genuinely
assist the region in bringing about lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by tackling the
root causes and the drivers of conflicts. The Security
Council should stop highlighting the symptoms of
insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
while evading the root causes. Double standards and
scapegoating only embolden those who should be
responsible for peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Rwanda believes that a holistic and
coordinated approach to promoting peace is grounded
in effective national ownership, cooperation and
partnerships. Inclusive peacebuilding requires the
empowerment and the active involvement of stakeholders
from all segments of society, including at the grassroots level. Rwanda also believes that building peace is
more than just ending conflict. It is about building trust
and harmony and strengthening the social contract
between the State and its people. Yet sustainable peace
can be achieved not only at the national level, but also
through regional and international efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): We thank Japan for
convening this open debate. We welcome the insightful
presentation of the briefers. This open debate is timely,
as we are working on the New Agenda for Peace.
Today’s global challenges have become ever more
complex. They have put great demands on the way we
address conflicts. We must adjust our approach and
alter the way we look at, manage and resolve conflicts,
including their root causes. Key to that is developing
preventive and peacebuilding measures that are
inclusive, effective and better targeted. We must also
better understand the wide-ranging impact of conflicts.
Against that background, allow me to emphasize the
following points.
First, we need to ensure a bottom-up approach
to peacebuilding. Peacebuilding efforts should place
national ownership at their centre. That approach

S/PV.9250

requires closer and inclusive engagement at the grass
roots, including empowering and amplifying the voices
and roles of women and youth. Evidence shows they can
play crucial roles as mediators and peacebuilders. Their
active participation not only supports peacebuilding
processes but is also important in cultivating a culture
of peace and conflict prevention in local communities.
Secondly, we need to build strong and resilient
institutions through good governance and the provision
of sustainable financing and resources. Building
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions would
substantially increase the chance of sustainable peace
and reduce the risk of relapse into conflict. Capacitybuilding and ensuring good governance are therefore
important. Achieving strong institutions also requires
accountable, sustainable and predictable financing.
Broadening the sources of funding, including
through partnerships with regional organizations and
international financial institutions, is key. South-South
and triangular cooperation also need to be fostered,
particularly by supporting capacity-building and
sharing best practices.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen synergy within the
United Nations system. We cannot afford to continue
to work in silos. The United Nations must continuously
strengthen an integrated strategy in peacebuilding. The
role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is central
in bridging the security aspects and development
contexts in post-conflict situations. That requires the
PBC to coordinate with the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
Strong collaboration would increase aid effectiveness
and accountability in peacebuilding.
Finally, Indonesia reaffirms its commitment to
be a true partner in supporting peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): First, I would like to thank
Japan for convening this timely debate on investment in
people to enhance resilience against complex challenges.
There can be no greater complex challenges
than modern threats to sustainable peace. Countries
emerging from or at risk of conflict must grapple with
multifaceted challenges. Those include the impacts of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, the climate crisis,
worsening food insecurity and economic shocks,

23-0243627/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

including those triggered by Russia’s illegal war
against Ukraine.
There should be no greater investment than the one
each of our countries makes in peoples’ resilience to
such challenges. One of the greatest ways that can be
done is through inclusive participation in peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding is not just the activity of select countries;
all of us are engaged in investing in our own sustainable
peace. We are constantly working to build and uphold
resilient and effective institutions, with the experience
of individuals at their core. We must invest in people
in all their diversity and ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation and leadership of women and
youth in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Sharing
the lessons we have learned and continue to learn will
be key to realizing those aims globally.
The
late
Secretary-General
Kofi
Annan
questioned: “The world today spends billions
preparing for war. Shouldn’t we spend a billion or
two preparing for peace?” (SG/SM/6149). Global
spending on peacebuilding represents only a fraction
of military spending and spending on crisis response
and reconstruction. Sustained, inclusive and targeted
peacebuilding results in lives and money saved in
the long term — the World Bank has estimated up to
$70 billion per year on average. For example, in Liberia
women peace activists started peace huts shortly after
the end of the civil war in 2003. The huts, among other
activities, mediated local disputes, monitored police
and justice services and referred victims of violence
to counselling. At $1.5 million, that local women-lead
intervention cost just 1.5 per cent of the $105 million
spent on peacekeeping, policing and the justice sector in
Liberia that year. The local police considered them key
to reducing and preventing violence in the community.
We cannot talk about investment in peacebuilding
without talking about the gap between the finances
available and those required to fulfil current needs.
Despite being a core task of the United Nations,
peacebuilding is underfunded, relying too often on a
small pool of donors for voluntary funding. Australia
firmly believes that the United Nations peacebuilding
work must be adequately, predictably and sustainably
financed. So, while we call on all States to consider
making and increasing voluntary contributions to the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), we also support assessed
contributions for the PBF. In 2022, the General Assembly
made it clear that assessed contributions could be used
to finance the PBF and encouraged the Fifth Committee
28/30

26/01/2023

to conclude its deliberations. More than 67 countries
from every region of the world have benefited from the
timely, catalytic and risk-tolerant investments of the
PBF. We encourage Member States to consider their
investment in peace. It is time to commit to the use of
assessed contributions to support the critical work of
the PBF — from election monitoring in Latin America
and mapping climate security threats in the Pacific to
supporting peacekeeping transitions in Africa.
Our commitment to United Nations peacebuilding
remains steadfast. We have been a proud supporter of
the PBF since its establishment in 2006, and we are
pleased to have, this month, committed to a further
three-year agreement with an increased contribution
of $A12 million for the PBF. That is a core part of
Australia’s peace investment portfolio.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Liepnieks (Latvia): Latvia welcomes this
open debate on peacebuilding. We appreciate Japan’s
leadership in facilitating an inclusive and timely
discussion on this important topic.
As a former member of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Latvia fully acknowledges the
key role of resilience in peacebuilding efforts. While
the overall goal must remain to prevent crises, not all
challenges can be adequately predicted and averted. In
such cases, resilience at individual, national and global
levels plays a key role in helping to absorb shocks,
manage crises and prevent further disruption.
Building resilience requires local ownership and
determination to strengthen institutions, improve
governance and address vulnerabilities. However,
the international community and the United Nations,
including the Security Council, has an important role
to play in supporting those efforts.
First, we have to acknowledge the key ingredient
of strengthening resilience, and that is trust. Trust,
in turn, can only be built upon universal respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Therefore,
to build global resilience we need full and proactive
commitment by the Security Council to protecting
human rights and promoting the equality of all groups,
including women and youth.
In that regard, I would like to highlight Latvia’s
long-standing practical experience when it comes
to investment in people, both at home and in
23-02436

26/01/2023

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

other countries, with the aim of enabling equal
opportunities. For example, for several years Latvian
non-governmental organizations have been successfully
implementing projects in countries in Central Asia
aimed at strengthening women’s participation in
democratic processes and public administration, as
well as business.
Secondly, it is important to facilitate the exchange of
best practices and build networks among peacebuilders.
There should be further efforts to strengthen interaction
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as the PBC community has unique
expertise in the field of building societal resilience.
Given the lessons learned from our discussions in
the PBC, we consider it important for the Security
Council to better address the topic of accountability.
Ensuring justice is a prerequisite for a nation — or even
a region — in a post-conflict situation to reconcile with
the past and to focus on building a resilient future.
Thirdly, the coronavirus disease pandemic
demonstrated that the information space has become
another domain that requires jointly addressing
complex challenges. Enhanced resilience is also
required in order to deal with all kinds of harmful
content — both online and offline. Strengthening
media and information literacy and working on the
global code of conduct with regard to the integrity of
public information are a few steps in this direction. It is
important to combat the spread of disinformation and
misinformation, which hamper the ability of citizens to
take informed decisions and pose a challenge to better
global governance.
Finally, we recognize that building resilience and
peacebuilding requires adequate resources. As a donor
to the Peacebuilding Fund and other United Nations
funds and programmes, Latvia supports initiatives to
achieve more sustainable financing for peacebuilding,
including through contributions from the United Nations
regular budget. We believe that this can also serve as an
important deliverable in the context of the New Agenda
for Peace initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Japan for convening this debate and
the briefers for their presentations.
The crises facing humankind have become
increasingly complex and interrelated. The coronavirus

S/PV.9250

disease pandemic and its effects on the global health
situation, the economy and development are a case
in point. Today’s conflicts and crises are fuelled by
factors as diverse as inequality and climate change,
which in turn give rise to food insecurity, competition
for resources and displacement.
For Mexico, the Security Council, as the main
organ responsible for ensuring international peace
and security, must unambiguously take into account
the effects of any phenomenon, especially root causes,
on its field of action. That includes, for example,
consideration of the impacts of climate change in
specific contexts that threaten international peace and
security, as is clearly the case in the Sahel or Somalia.
Similarly, social and developmental aspects must
also be taken into account as underlying causes if we are
to ensure conflict prevention and a transition to peace.
That was precisely one of the issues we highlighted
during the open debate led by President Andrés Manuel
López Obrador in November 2021 (see S/PV.8900).
Without investment in people, prevention and resilience,
the Council will, unfortunately, remain in a perpetual
cycle of delayed reaction and mere conflict management.
Such challenges make the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals more complex.
The response of the different principal organs of the
United Nations must be coherent and preventive in
approach. Only then will it be possible to leave no
one behind.
It is not necessary to redefine the Council and the
other organs, but to truly use the tools we already have at
our disposal. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is a
key player in this work and has vast untapped potential.
Coordination between the Council, the PBC and other
United Nations organs should be used more frequently
in order to prevent new crises and to react efficiently to
avoid relapses. In our recent experience in the Council,
we have found that the PBC’s advice to the Council
enriches the comprehensive approach we advocate.
That communication can certainly be further
improved and strengthened by broadening the spaces
for dialogue, both formal and informal, between the
various organs. Such discussions, as well as the annual
meetings between the PBC and the Economic and Social
Council, contribute to that objective, but we should not
limit ourselves to those spaces. Consideration of the wide
range of factors that lead to conflicts must be an ongoing
concern of the Security Council members themselves.

23-0243629/30

S/PV.9250

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In conclusion, I also stress the need for continued
communication between the Council and non-members
of the Council. Participation in open debates such as
this is one example. It is important to take into account
the observations and recommendations of non-member
States in the Council’s deliberations and outputs. The
Council can also improve transparency by making
information about its work, including the work of
subsidiary organs, more accessible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Sangjin Kim (Republic of Korea): My
delegation thanks Japan for convening today’s debate
on this comprehensive and important issue. I also
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the civil society
representative for their insightful briefings.
Beside the fact that peacebuilding is inherently a
nationally owned process, recent security landscapes
forged as a result of complex interactions between the
local context and diverse security threats demonstrate
that the leadership of the host Government, alongside
local communities, is the most effective way to build and
sustain peace.
Against that backdrop, I wish to stress the following
three points, which also reflects our priorities for the
New Agenda for Peace.
First, as a long-standing member of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Republic of Korea would like to
highlight the PBC’s role in addressing the complex challenges we face. My delegation welcomes the meaningful
developments made on coordination between the PBC

30/30

26/01/2023

and the Security Council, including a sharp increase in
the Commission’s written advice to the Security Council
last year. To further capitalize on the PBC’s convening
and advisory functions, we support expanding interactive communications, strengthening informal coordination between the two entities and better aligning the
PBC’s workplan with that of the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
Secondly, a more systematic and integrated approach
is needed within and beyond the United Nations to
confront emerging security threats and the risk of
multipliers, such as climate change, food insecurity and
pandemics. Since those factors are also closely related
to underdevelopment, my delegation calls for the
strengthening of the humanitarian, development and
peace nexus and expanded partnerships, including civil
society, the private sector and regional and international
financial institutions.
Lastly, echoing the Secretary-General’s call
for investing in prevention and peacebuilding, I am
pleased to announce that the Republic of Korea will
increase its contribution to the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) by more than 70 per cent this year, amounting to
$4.3 million. We also look forward to further progress
on peacebuilding financing, including the provision of
assessed contributions to the PBF.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

23-02436
