A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/109
28 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 88 (g)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/728/Add.7)]
49/109.

United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/180 of 22 December 1992, by which it decided
to convene the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)
from 3 to 14 June 1996, and to establish both a preparatory committee and an
ad hoc secretariat for the Conference,
Reiterating its gratitude to the Government of Turkey for offering to
act as host to the Conference, which is to be held at Istanbul,
Reaffirming the importance for Habitat II, inter alia, of the principles
contained in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1/ and the
objectives, basis for action, activities and means of implementation of those
activities, set out in chapter 7 of Agenda 21 entitled "Promoting sustainable
human settlements development", and in relevant provisions of chapter 28,
entitled "Local authorities’ initiatives in support of Agenda 21", 2/

1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
2/

95-76927

Ibid., annex II.

/...

A/RES/49/109
Page 2

Noting with interest the progress made so far in the preparations for
the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), as described
in the reports of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference on its
organizational session 3/ and its first session, 4/ as well as in the
report of the Secretary-General on the progress of work of the Preparatory
Committee and the ad hoc secretariat for the Conference, 5/
Also noting with interest the report of the Commission on Human
Settlements on its fourteenth session, 6/
Taking note of the recommendations relevant to human settlements
contained in the report of the Commission on Sustainable Development at its
second session, 7/
Noting with concern that the resources currently available to the
secretariat for the Conference, through voluntary contributions, among other
sources, including redeployment of resources from the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements (Habitat), remain insufficient to support the
preparatory process for the Conference on the scale envisaged by the General
Assembly in resolution 47/180, in particular with respect to the ability of
the secretariat to provide assistance to developing countries and other States
requiring such assistance in their national preparatory efforts for the
Conference,
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) on its
organizational session, held at United Nations Headquarters from 3 to 5 March
1993 3/ and its first substantive session, held at the United Nations Office
at Geneva from 11 to 22 April 1994, 4/ and endorses the decisions contained
therein;
2.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning progress in the preparations for the Conference; 5/
3.
Approves the recommendation contained in decision I/1 of the
Preparatory Committee that a third substantive session of the Preparatory
Committee, of relatively short duration, be held at United Nations

3/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 37 (A/48/37).
4/

Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 37 (A/49/37).

5/

See A/49/272.

6/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 8 (A/48/8).
7/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No. 13 (E/1994/33).
/...

A/RES/49/109
Page 3

Headquarters early in 1996 to complete the preparatory work for the
Conference; 8/
4.
Welcomes the recommendations made by the Preparatory Committee in
its decision I/2 on preparations at the country, regional and global levels,
on the draft statement of principles and commitments and on the draft global
plan of action, which is to be structured around the two main themes of the
Conference: "Adequate shelter for all" and "Sustainable human settlements
development in an urbanizing world"; 8/
5.
Notes with interest the call by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to give the Conference the dimensions of a "city summit", and
reaffirms its decision that the Conference should be held at the highest
possible level of participation; 9/
6.
Recommends that the global plan of action of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) take into account the outcome of
all relevant United Nations global conferences;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant organs,
organizations, agencies and programmes intensify their efforts and cooperate
closely to prepare for the Conference;
8.
Recommends that the inclusion of sustainable human settlements
issues, as contained in chapter 7 of Agenda 21, be given appropriate attention
within the context of an agenda for development, which is being prepared
pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 47/181 of 22 December 1992 and 48/166
of 21 December 1993, and reaffirms that the overall human settlements
objective is to improve the social, economic and environmental quality of
human settlements and the living and working environments of all people, in
particular the urban and rural poor;
9.
Expresses its sincere appreciation to those States and
organizations that have made or pledged financial or other contributions in
support of the preparatory activities for the Conference, and requests the
Secretary-General of the Conference to continue to make every effort to raise
the extrabudgetary resources required for Conference activities and
preparations;
10.
Renews its appeal to all Governments, especially those of the
developed countries and others in a position to do so, and to international
and regional financial institutions, to contribute substantially to the
voluntary funds established by the General Assembly in resolution 47/180 for
the purpose of financing preparatory activities for the Conference and of
supporting developing countries, in particular the least developed among them,
in participating fully and effectively in the Conference and its preparatory
process;
11.
Requests that the work of the Preparatory Committee and the ad hoc
secretariat of Habitat II should continue to be funded within existing United

8/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 37 (A/49/37), annex I.
9/

Resolution 47/180, para. 1.
/...

A/RES/49/109
Page 4

Nations budgetary resources to ensure that the Conference will be treated
adequately with respect to other global international United Nations
conferences;
12.
Takes note of the contributions of the United Nations
organizations, agencies and programmes and other relevant organizations active
in the field of human settlements to the work of the Preparatory Committee in
the discharge of its mandate and invites them to mobilize financial resources
to assist developing countries, at their request, in the preparation of their
national reports;
13.
Encourages all relevant interested non-governmental organizations,
particularly those from developing countries, to participate in, and
contribute to the Conference and its preparatory process, on the basis of
procedures followed at recent United Nations conferences;
14.
Also encourages the above-mentioned organizations to contribute
fully to increasing world awareness of the problems and potential of human
settlements as important inputs to social progress and economic growth, and
world leaders to commit themselves to making cities, towns and villages in
their countries healthy, safe, just and sustainable;
15.
Requests the regional commissions to include in their programme of
activities for 1995 an item on the preparations for the Conference, with
particular emphasis on preparations in their respective regions, and to submit
a report on those preparations to the General Assembly at its fiftieth
session;
16.
Calls upon all States to encourage the broad-based participation
of local authorities and all relevant actors, including the scientific
community, industry, trade unions, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector, in the national, regional and international preparatory
process and to encourage a wide exchange of information and experience in this
respect, in particular on the programmes of work and activities of national
committees;
17.
Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
consultation with the Secretary-General of the Conference, to report to the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session on the progress made in the
preparations for the Conference, including the implementation of the present
resolution;
18.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session, under the agenda item "Sustainable development and international
economic cooperation", the sub-item entitled "United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II)".
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
