A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/89
4 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 103
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/635)]
52/89.

United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/61 of 12 December 1996 and all other relevant resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,1 and further acknowledging the assistance rendered
to the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
1. Commends the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders for its efforts to promote and coordinate regional technical cooperation activities related to crime
prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa;
2. Reiterates the need for strengthening the capacity of the Institute to support a national mechanism
for crime prevention and criminal justice in African countries in view of the contribution that the Institute
can make to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme;
3. Urges the States members of the Institute to make every possible effort to meet their obligations
to the Institute;
4. Appeals to all Member States and non-governmental organizations to adopt concrete practical
measures to support the Institute in the development of the requisite capacity and in the elaboration and
implementation of programmes and activities aimed at strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice
systems in Africa;

1

A/52/327.

98-76495

/...

A/RES/52/89
Page 2

5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to mobilize all relevant entities of the United
Nations system to provide the necessary financial and technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil
its mandate;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to enhance regional cooperation, coordination and collaboration
in the fight against crime, especially in its transnational dimension, which could not be adequately dealt with
by national action alone;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to make concrete proposals to strengthen the programmes
and activities of the Institute and to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
