so

Genera) Auemb)y-Twenty-nd SenJon

( b) The cessation of all repressive action against
the people of the Territory;
( c) The release of political prisoners and political
detainees and the return of political exiles to the
Territory;
9. Appeals to all Member States to render all necessary assistance to the people of the Territory in their
struggle to obtain freedom and independence;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the situation in the Territory and to
consider the establishment of a sub-committee on Oman;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to take, in consultation with the Special Committee, appropriate measures for the implementation of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions and to report thereon to the Assembly at its twenty-third session.

1627th plenary meeting,
12 December 1967.
2311 (XXII). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Havi.ng examined the relevant reports of the
Secretary-Genera1 8 and the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial ·countries and Peoples, 9
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, and in particular paragraph 1 of
the Declaration and the fifth preambular paragraph
of the resolution,
Considering that, by virtue of the Charter of the
United Nations and in conformity with the agreements
between the United Nations and the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations shall make recommendations for the
co-ordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies,
Recalling further its resolutions 2105 (XX) of 20
December 1965, 2107 (XX) of 21 December 1965,
2151 (XXI) of 17 November 1966, 2184 (XXI) of
12 December 1966 and 2189 (XXI) of 13 December
1966, requesting the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the specialized agencies concerned to increase the economic, social and humanitarian
assistance to the refugees from colonial Territories,
Taking note of the fact that the national liberation
movemen·ts in some colonial Territories of Africa have
asked the specialized agencies for urgent assistance in
various social fields, particularly education, health and
nutrition,
8 Jbid., agenda

item 66, document A/6825.
addendum to agenda item 23 ( A/6700/Rev.l), chapter I, section VIII and annex III; chapter V, annex.

1. Recognizes that the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the international institutions associated with the United Nations
should extend their full co-operation to the United
Nations in achieving the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
to the specialized agencies which "have co-operated with
the United Nations in seeking to implement the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
3. Recommends the specialized agencies and international institutions concerned to take urgent and
effective measures to assist the peoples struggling for
their liberation from colonial rule, and in particular
to extend, within the scope of their respective activities,
all necessary aid to the oppressed peoples of Southern
Rhodesia and the Territories under Portuguese domination and to work out, in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and through it with the
national liberation movements, concrete programmes
to this end;
4. Also recommends the specialized agencies and
international institutions not to grant any assistance
to South Africa and Portugal until they renounce their
policy of racial discrimination and colonial domination ;
5. Requests all States, directly and through action
in the specialized agencies and international institutions
of which they are members, to facilitate the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider, in consultation with the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures
for the co-ordination of the policies and activities · of
the specialized agencies in implementing the f'elevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
concerned in working out appropriate measures to
implement the relevant resolutions and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
8. Requests the Special Committee to examine this
question and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session.
1631st plenary meeting,
14 December 1967.

2347 (XXII). Question of the Trust Territory of
Nauru

The General Assembly,
RecaJling the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of Nauru approved by the General Assembly
on 1 November 1947,10
RecaJling its resolutions 2111 (XX) of 21 December
1965 and 2226 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
Mindful of the relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and General Assembly r~olution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,

9 Ibid.,

10 See General Assembly resolution 140

(II).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Having considered the special report of the Trusteeship Council on its thirteenth special session, 11
1. Notes the formal announcement by the Administering Authority that, following the resumed talks between representatives of the Nauruan people and of
the Administering Authority, it was agreed that Nauru
should accede to independence on 31 January 1968 ;12
2. Welcomes the statement made in the Fourth Committee by the representatives of the Governments of
Australia. New Zealand and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the Administering Authority that the Administering Authority has
complied with the request of the representatives of the
Nauruan people for full and unqualified independence;
3. Resolves accordingly, in agreement with the Administering Authority, that the Trusteeship Agreement
for the Territory of Nauru approved by the General
Assembly on 1 November 1947 shall cease to be in force
upon the accession of Nauru to independence on 31
January 1968;
4. Calls upon all States to respect the independence
and the territorial integrity of the independent State of
Nauru;
5. Urges the organs of the United Nations concerned
and the specialized agencies to render all possible assistance to the people of Nauru in their endeavour to
build a new nation.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

•

*

•

Pursuant to Article 86 of the Charter of the United Nations,
cease to be a member of the Trusteeship
Council on the accession of Nauru to independmce on 31
//Jfluary 1968. As from that date the Council will therefore be
c<>mposed of the following Member States: AUSTRAUA, CHINA,
NEW ZEALAND will

FRANCE, LIBERIA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

2348 (XXII). Question of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolutions 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1965 and 2227 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and New Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
2. Reaffirms its previous position as set forth in General Assembly resolutions 2112 (XX) and 2227 (XXI);
3. Calls upon the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to implement without delay the
provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions.
1641st plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenfy-.serond
Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/6926.
12 Jbid., document A/6903.

51

2349 (XXII). Question of the consolidation and
integration of the sp~ial educational and
training programmes for South West Africa,
the sp~ial training programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and
the educational and training programme for
South Africans

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2235 (XXI) of 20 December
1966 concerning the question of the consolidation and
integration of the special educational and training programmes for South West Africa, the special training
programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training programme
for South Africans,
Taking note with appreci-ation of the report submitted
by the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 1 of the said resolution, 13
Considering that a consolidation and integration of
the programmes is desirable as a basis for the further
development and expansion of assistance for education
and training,
Taking note of the recommendations of the Conference on African Refugee Problems, held at Addis Ababa
in October 1967, and in particular its recommendation
for the establishment within the Organization of African
Unity of a bureau for the placement and education of
refugees,
1. Decides to integrate the special educational and
training programmes for South West Africa, the special
training programme for Territories under Portuguese
administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans ;
2. Decides further to include in the United Nations
Training and Educational Programme assistance to
persons from Southern Rhodesia, provided that this is
done only in so far as it does not interfere with existing United Nations schemes for educational assistance
for such persons and that it is done with due regard
to Security Council resolutions 216 ( 1965) of 12 November 1965 and 217 ( 1965) of 20 November 1965
relating to non-recognition of the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
study the means of promoting the further development
and expansion of the Programme and, to this end, to
continue his consultations with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the heads of other appropriate
agencies and organs, and the Administrative SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity ;
4. Decides that in the implementation of the present
resolution the United Nations shall co-operate closely
with the bureau for the placement and education of
refugees that is being set up within the Organization
of African Unity ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
Programme the granting of subventions to educational
and training institutions in Africa in order to enable
those institutions to provide places for persons who
come under the Programme and to make it possible
for those persons to be trained in Africa as far as
practicable;
18 Ibid.,

agenda items 65, 67 and 68, document A/6890.
