General Assembly-Forty-second Session

246

42/79.

Question of New Caledonia

The General Assembly.
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,n
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolution 41/41 A of 2 December
1986 by which the Assembly considered that, in the light
of the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations and General Assembly resolutions
1514(XV) and 1541 (XV), New Caledonia was a NonSelf-Governing Territory within the meaning of the
Charter,
Noting the decision adopted by the Special Committee
on the question of New Caledonia on 17 March 1987, 30 as
well as the resolution adopted hy the Special Commi1tee
on 14August 1987,3 1
Noting also the section relating to New Caledoma in the
communique issued at the conclusion of the eighteenth
South Pacific Forum. held al Apia on 29 and 30 May
1987, 32 and in particular the call for a United Nationssponsored referendum in the Territor\ consistent with the
universally accepted principles and practices of self.
determination and independenct:,
Noting further the provisions concerning New Caledonia contained in the Political Declaration adopted by the
Eighth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries. held at Harare from I to 6 September 1986, 13
Conscious ,if the responsib1hty of the administering
Power to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in respect of New Caledonia,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaming the situation in the small
Te~ritories an? considering I hat the possibility of sending
a v1s1tmg m1ss1O11 to New Caledonia at an appropriate time
should be kept under review.
I. ,1pproves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Ne\\
Caledonia;
2. R~affirms the inalienable nght oft he people of Ne\\
Caledoma to self-determ111at1on and mdependence in conformity with the Declarat10n on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countrie, and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms that an obligation exists on the part of the
Government of France to transmit information on New
Caledonia under Chapter XI of the Charter of the U111ted
Nations and requests that Government to transmit to the
Secretary-General such information as is called for under
Chapter XI and in the related decisiom of the General A,sembly;

30 Officiul Record, rf Ilic (Jcn(n1/ ,1\wmhlv Fortv-1,ecomi .)'n,w11
Suffle,ment No. 23 (A/42/21), char IX, rara _i,
•
For the text, set' Official Rfford, ,>/ the (,,•11cr,,I A11,·mhlv, Fortv
1econd.Snsion.S11ppleme111 \11 23,/\.4'.211,,hap IX.para (2X.draf1

re,olut1011 I.
32 See A/42/417, anne,
)l A/41/097-S/18.192, ,m11,·, "'' I I'""'' I~<J l'i:'

4. Regrets that the Government of France has not re~ponded to the request to submit such information and
calls upon it to do so;
5. Considers that, consistent with the principles laid
down in its resolution 1514 (XV), the peaceful transition
of New Caledonia to self-determination and independence
should be undertaken in a manner which guarantees the
rights and interests of the people of New Caledonia;
6. Declares that progress towards a long-term political
solution in New Caledonia requires a free and genuine act
of self-determination consistent with United Nations principles and practices of self-determination and independence;
7. Emphasizes that such an act of self-determination,
in which all options should be made available, should be
preceded by a comprehensive programme of political education in which all options are impartially presented and
consequences fully explained;
8. Calls upon the Government of France to resume dialogue with all sections of the population of New Caledonia in order to facilitate rapid progress towards such an
act of self-determination in which all sections of the community participate;
9. Affirms the responsibility of the administering
Power to promote economic and social development and
calls upon the administering Power to institute programmes designed to benefit all the people throughout the
Territory;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a visiting mission to New Caledonia at
an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 December 1987

42/80. Question of Anguilla
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Anguilla,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 34
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Anguilla, including in particular General Assembly resolution 41/17 of 31 October 1986,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting that the Constitutional Review Committee,
which was appointed in October 1985, held a series of public meetings in 1986 in the Territory and with Anguillians
residing in the United States Virgin Islands, and noting
that the territorial Government recognizes the need to replace the outdated edition of the laws pertaining to the
Territory.

14 Ojji,·,al Records 1>/ tlie General Assemblv. Forty-second Se.uion
Supplement llio. 21 (A/42/2.1). chap,. Ill, IV and IX.
