UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Dietr.
GENERAL
A/RES/46/27
20 December 1991

Forty-sixth session
Agenda item 49
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the First Committee (A/46/663)]
46/27.

Education and information for disarmament

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 44/123 of 15 December 1989,
Taking into account the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly, 1/ in particular paragraph 106 thereof, in which the
Assembly urged Governments and governmental and non-governmental international
organizations to take steps to develop programmes of education for disarmament
and peace studies at all levels.
Considering that paragraphs 99, 100 and 101 of the Final Document provide
for the mechanisms of a programme tomobilize world public opinion on behalf
of disarmament, including the dissemination of information and publicity to
complement the educational work,
Also considering that the World Disarmament Campaign plays an important
role in complementing the educational efforts on behalf of disarmament carried
out by Member States within their own educational and cultural development
systems.
Recognizing that, in order to achieve irreversible results, it will be
indispensable to carry out training programmes at all levels of formal
education for the purpose of changing basic attitudes with respect to
aggression, violence, armaments and war.
Noting with satisfaction the important changes that have taken place in
many systems of government throughout the world aimed at promoting freedom.

1/

91-U1Q70

Resolution S-10/2.

A/RES/46/27
Page 2

democracy, respect for and enjoyment of human rights, disarmament and economic
and social development,
1.
Expresses appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
submitted pursuant to resolution 44/123; 2/
2.
Also expresses appreciation for the valuable information contained
in the report as provided by Member States, international governmental
organizations, non-governmental organizations and educational institutions for
peace and disarmament;
3.
Reiterates that, in order to achieve the desired results, it is
indispensable to carry out training programmes at all levels of formal
éducation for the purpose of changing basic attitudes with respect to
aggression, violence, armaments and war, especially at a time when important
changes have taken place in many systems of government throughout the world
aimed at promoting freedom, democracy, respect for and enjoyment of human
rights, disarmament and economic and social development;
4.
Considers that attainment of the vital objectives set out in the
World Disarmament Campaign of informing, educating and generating
understanding of and support for the goals of the UnitedNations in thesphere
of disarmament would make a positive contribution toimplementing the
proposals contained in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly and set out in the first preambular paragraph above;
5.
Invites Member States and international governmental and non­
governmental organizations and educational institutions for peace and
disarmament to redouble their efforts to respond to the appeal made in
paragraph 106 of the Final Document and to submit to the Secretary-General a
report on their activities in this regard;
6.
Recmests the Secretary-General to submit the reports req[uested in
paragraph 5 above to the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session under
the item entitled "Education and information for disarmament".
6Sth plenary meeting
6 December 1991
2/

A/46/506.
