S/2019/305

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 April 2019
Original: English

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2429
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2019 and requested me
to report every 90 days on its implementation. The report provides an update on the
conflict, the political situation, the operational environment in Darfur and the main
challenges encountered in the implementation of the mandate of UNAMID during the
period from 4 January to 3 April 2019. It also outlines the activities undertaken by
UNAMID to support progress towards the benchmarks and indicators of achievement
for its exit and, further, provides an update on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the special report of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the strategic
review of UNAMID (S/2018/530).

II. Conflict analysis
2.
The overall security situation in Darfur remained relatively stable, with the
exception of Jebel Marra, where intermittent clashes between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW) faction, as well as
infighting within the rebel group, continued. While there was an increase in the
number of incidents of fighting between the Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA -AW
elements (from 9 episodes noted in my last progress report to 18 during the present
period), they were on a smaller scale and involved mostly hit -and-run operations. The
trend is consistent with the encirclement of SLA-AW by the Sudanese Armed Forces
in the Jebel Marra area and the increased pressure that it has applied on the
insurgency, while an uptick in low-level attacks by SLA-AW may be an attempt to
capitalize on the political and economic uncertainty since the start of the nationwide
protest movement in December 2018. Despite a slight increase since the last reporting
period, incidents of intercommunal clashes also remained low, while there was
continued violence between herders and farmers, involving cattle rustling and farm
destruction, mainly in North and West Darfur.
3.
The anti-Government protests that began across the Sudan on 19 December
2018, initially as demonstrations against the rising cost of living, have had a limited
impact in Darfur thus far. It should be noted, however, that while protests took place

19-05811 (E)

110419

*1905811*

S/2019/305

during the reporting period only in Nyala, South Darfur on 13 Januar y, and
El Geneina, West Darfur, and Ed Daein, East Darfur, on 17 January, they nevertheless
disrupted the Darfur peace process, as the Sudan Liberation Army -Minni Minawi
(SLA-MM) and the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM/Gibril) reversed their December 2018 agreement to resume talks with the
Government in January 2019. On 28 January, the President of the Sudan, Omer
Hassan al-Bachir, announced an open-ended cessation of hostilities in Darfur, South
Kordofan and Blue Nile, and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front, composed of
SLA-MM, JEM/Gibril, the Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional Council and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army-North, led by Malik Agar, reciprocated
by extending their unilateral cessation of hostilities for an additional three months,
beginning on 8 February 2019.
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups
4.
During the reporting period, the frequency of clashes between the Government
and SLA-AW increased in Jebel Marra, while the footprint of the Sudanese Armed
Forces was refocused on the urban areas of the Sudan in order to contain the protests.
5.
In Central Darfur, on 17 and 29 January, SLA-AW attacked a Sudanese Armed
Forces outpost in Manabu and reportedly killed four soldi ers, and further clashes on
29 January and 9 and 11 February reportedly resulted in the death of three SLA -AW
members and one member of Sudanese Armed Forces personnel. The exchange of fire
continued in the same area on 7 and 19 February and 3 and 5 March, killing a total of
6 SLA-AW members. In retaliation, on 5 and 24 March, SLA-AW attacked and
reportedly killed three Sudanese Armed Forces soldiers, in addition to abducting two
others from a Sudanese Armed Forces checkpoint on 25 March. Further reports of
casualties included the death of a SLA-AW member in Daya village on 30 January
and of a Sudanese Armed Forces soldier in Jadid village on 13 February. In Dorsa,
fighting between the two sides led to the death of three members of the Sudanese
Armed Forces on 26 February and 13 March and of two SLA-AW members on
14 March.
6.
In North Darfur, on 4 January, SLA-AW attacked the Sudanese Armed Forces
in Boulay, south of Sortony, which caused an unknown number of casualties on both
sides. In South Darfur, SLA-AW alleged that Sudanese Armed Forces artillery fire
burned the village of Sabun el-Fagur, in the Torong Tonga – Gur Lambung area on
24 January. UNAMID was unable to verify the incident, owing to the denial of access
by the Sudanese Armed Forces.
7.
Meanwhile, infighting between factions of SLA-AW continued in the area of
Daya village, in Central Darfur, initially triggered by one of its subgroups (led by
Salih Borsa) killing a member of another subgroup (led by Mubarak Aldouk) in
October 2018, owing to the intention of Aldouk to sign a peace agreement with the
Government. Reports indicate that, from 17 January to 26 March, 22 elements from
the Aldouk faction and 20 elements from the Borsa faction were killed in the clashes,
with injuries caused to 9 elements and 15 elements, respectively. Both groups also
attacked and abducted local Fur civilians suspected of collaborating with the opposing
faction, and five civilians were reported killed, as well as five injured and
15 abducted.
Intercommunal conflicts
8.
Four intercommunal clashes have been recorded, with 14 fatalities, mainly in
the West, Central and North Darfur States, an increase from the two incidents and
three fatalities reported during the previous period. In West Darfur, in the vicinity of
Hijleahjah village, east of El Geneina, the killing of a member of Awlad Zaid by a
2/13

19-05811

S/2019/305

member of Misseriya Jabel triggered clashes between the two groups between 15 and
17 January, reportedly causing fatalities and displacement to nearby villages and to
Chad. Sudanese Armed Forces personnel were deployed to the area to calm the
situation. In Arafah village, north of El Geneina, clashes broke out between the Awlad
Eid and Masalit internally displaced persons on 13 March over a livestock dispute,
and three Masalit internally displaced persons and two members of Awlad Eid were
killed. The West Darfur State authorities increased the security presence to prevent
further escalation and protect the Adramata camp for internally displaced persons.
9.
With the onset of the winter farming season, incidents of farm destruction were
reported, mainly in North and Central Darfur. In North Darfur, on 3 February, nomads
killed three farmers in Rekhwaa village in retaliation for injuries caused to camels.
Native administration leaders, with the support of the Sudanese police, arrested one
nomad. On the same day, in Tamel Daheash area, a group of nomads reportedly killed
three farmers when the victims tried to prevent livestock from grazing on their
farmlands. In Central Darfur, an altercation between Beni Halba and Beni Hussein
youth on 28 January, resulted in violence in the Korari area, leaving several people
injured. The disagreement was resolved peacefully, with Beni Hussein families
offering to pay for the transportation and treatment of the injured Beni Halba.
Violence against civilians, and human rights violations
10. The number of crime-related incidents against internally displaced persons and
other vulnerable civilians increased during the reporting period, with 58 incide nts
resulting in five fatalities, compared with 48 incidents and three fatalities in the
previous period. Other civilians were affected by 126 crime -related incidents leading
to 24 fatalities, compared with 111 incidents and 14 fatalities in the previous p eriod.
The most affected areas were the Golo-Rockero and Nertiti-Thur areas in Central
Darfur and the areas south-east of Kass and East Jebel Marra localities in South
Darfur, all in the greater Jebel Marra area and reflecting ongoing instability there. In
camps for internally displaced persons in the Nertiti and Golo areas, Central Darfur,
random night shooting and harassment of displaced persons was reported.
11. In Kalma, South Darfur, tensions have increased among groups allegedly
affiliated with SLA-AW and others willing to engage with the Government, resulting
in the suspension of some humanitarian activities in the camp for internally displaced
persons since January 2019. UNAMID continues to engage with both groups and the
authorities to reduce tensions and prevent violence. In West Darfur, on 17 January,
UNAMID documented attacks against returnee villages by armed men, resulting in
the displacement of at least 258 families. Six civilians were injured and others remain
missing. UNAMID raised the issue with Government authorities, and the State
General Prosecutor opened an investigation.
12. During the reporting period, UNAMID documented 59 new incidents of human
rights violations and abuses, involving 129 victims. UNAMID verified the occurrence
of 30 incidents, involving 62 victims, all of whom were female. The other
29 incidents, involving 61 victims, have yet to be verified owing to challenges
regarding access to victims and the sites of incidents. A total of 23 suspects, in 9 of
the reported incidents, were apprehended. Violations of the right to life accounted for
10 incidents, involving 16 victims; violations of the right to physical integrity
(assault) accounted for 20 incidents, involving 43 victims; arbitrary arrests and illegal
detention accounted for 11 incidents, involving 30 victims; and abductions accounted
for 3 incidents, involving 8 victims. Sexual violence, including conflict -related sexual
violence, accounted for 15 incidents and 26 victims, including seven minors, a
decrease from the 31 incidents reported in the previous period. Of the 59 documented
cases, 26 incidents, involving 50 victims, were allegedly perpetrated by Government

19-05811

3/13

S/2019/305

security forces. Three members of SLA-AW were the alleged perpetrators in two
incidents.
13. Human rights concerns during the reporting period also involved arrests and
detentions associated with the aforementioned nationwide protests. Four lawyers
were arrested on 9 and 10 January in Nyala, South Darfur, for attempting to present a
written petition to the Governor, but were released on 11 January without charge. In
Ed Daein, East Darfur, seven young people were arrested on 17 January and
subsequently sentenced to a three-month imprisonment for having organized a
peaceful march to protest against fuel shortages. That march, in which approximately
200 young people participated, was dispersed by security forces using tear gas. In
El Geneina, West Darfur, four civilians reportedly accused of using social media to
mobilize protests were arrested between 18 and 23 January. In Zalingei, Central
Darfur, a male civilian was arrested on 24 January in connection with the protests,
but was released the following day.

III. Political situation
14. In response to anti-Government protests, which had started in response to the
rising cost of fuel and other commodities but had since expanded to include demands
for sweeping political reforms, the President announced a year-long state of
emergency on 22 February, dismissing both the federal and state governments. At the
same time, the President called for an inclusive dialogue, as well as the postponement
of a parliamentary debate on proposed constitutional amendments that would extend
his candidacy to another term in the 2020 presidential elections. As part of the
measures, the incumbent Minister of Defence, Lieutenant General Awad Mohamed
Ahmed bin Auf, was appointed First Vice-President and Mohamed Tahir Aila, the
former Wali (Governor) of East Gazira State, was appointed Prime Minister. All the
Walis of the 18 States were also replaced by senior security personnel, mainly from
the Sudanese Armed Forces. On 13 March, the new Prime Minister announced a
reduced caretaker cabinet of 22 federal ministers and 18 state ministers.
15. On 25 February, President Bashir issued further decrees banning unauthorized
public gatherings, regulating the movement of hard currency and the trading of fuel
and other commodities and giving the security forces emergency powers to search
buildings, restrain the movement of people, arrest individuals and seize assets in
connection with crimes relating to the state of emergency. On 26 February, the Chief
Justice and the Attorney General established emergency courts and prosecutors to
enforce the state of emergency throughout the country. On 28 February, the President
relinquished his position as head of the ruling National Congress Party and designated
the former Governor of North Kordofan, Ahmed Haroun, as its acting chief, with
responsibility for administering the Party. At a special session, held on 11 March, the
National Assembly and the Council of States (the national legislature) approved the
state of emergency, although reducing its duration to six months.
16. Protests have continued in Khartoum and its surrounding areas, as the Sudanese
Professionals Association, which has claimed the lead in organizing the protests, and
traditional opposition parties have rejected the President ’s call for dialogue. On
1 January, the opposition Sudan Call alliance, the National Consensus Forces and the
Unionist Association signed the Declaration of Freedom and Change, demanding,
inter alia, that the President step down and be replaced by a four-year national
transitional Government. The leader of the National Umma Party, Sadiq al -Mahdi,
also criticized the perceived militarization of the administration and on 2 March
called upon the President to step down. On 20 March, the Sudan Call alliance
announced its withdrawal from the Roadmap Agreement for Ending the Conflicts in

4/13

19-05811

S/2019/305

Sudan, facilitated by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and signed
with the Government of the Sudan in 2016, saying that it would only engage with the
Government if the President were to step down.
17. On 29 January, the Government released 186 people that it had detained over
the course of the protests. On 1 March, however, following the imposition of the state
of emergency, the special courts in Khartoum sentenced 8 protesters to prison terms
of six months to five years for defying the ban on protests. On 10 March, during
protests organized by the Sudanese Professionals Association in Omdurman, dozens
of protestors, including the Deputy Chairperson of the National Umma Party and
several opposition party leaders, were arrested, brought before the emergency courts
and sentenced to imprisonment and fines. Notwithstanding a Presidential order, on
6 February, to stop targeting journalists and release those who had been detained,
restrictive measures continue to be imposed on the media.

IV. Humanitarian situation
18. The humanitarian situation in Central Darfur continues to be affected by
ongoing sporadic fighting between the Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA -AW, as well
as infighting within SLA-AW, in particular in Kwila in western Jebel Marra and the
Daya area in the northern Jebel Marra area. Clashes between factions of SLA-AW in
Daya village interrupted humanitarian activities, and access to Jokosti area was also
denied owing to insecurity. In West Darfur, an inter-agency assessment mission
conducted between 12 and 14 February to the sites of the aforementioned clashes
between members of Awlad Zaid and Misseriya Jabel in January found the need for
emergency shelter and non-food items assistance, mainly for older persons, children
and pregnant women. According to the International Organiz ation for Migration and
the Humanitarian Aid Commission, in South Darfur, approximately 550 people
arrived at the Otash camp for internally displaced persons from Feina, Gulbo and
Sabun el-Fagur villages on 5 February, owing to reported fighting between th e
Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA-AW around Deribat. Initial assistance, including
food and primary health-care kits, was provided. UNAMID and humanitarian partners
conducted an integrated humanitarian assessment of Belle el-Sereif, Laiba and Turbah
from 6 to 8 January, and an additional mission to Belle el-Sereif from 17 to 19 March.
Access to the rebel-held areas of Feina, Golol and Kutrum in South and Central
Darfur, however, continues to be restricted by Sudanese military authorities on
security grounds.
19. Humanitarian partners continued to provide assistance in Darfur, with a focus
on the provision of life-saving supplies to vulnerable groups, in particular newly
displaced internally displaced persons and those affected by conflict, through the
delivery of basic social services. In Golo and Nertiti in Central Darfur, food vouchers
were distributed to 2,500 internally displaced persons and some 2,500 vulnerable
residents. The training of community volunteers in the promotion of sanitation and
hygiene, the provision and testing of water and the rehabilitation of existing water
facilities were conducted. Nevertheless, there are still gaps, in particular in relation
to gender-based violence case management, including the need for psychosocial
support and community awareness-raising. In South Darfur, partners completed the
distribution of non-food items to 1,220 persons (288 households) in Otash internally
displaced persons settlement. Some 113 children under 5 years of age were also
screened for malnutrition, with 39 admitted for treatment, and 127 mothers received
counselling on caring for infants and young children.
20. UNAMID uniformed personnel provided 120 escorts for humanitarian partners
in support of the delivery and monitoring of humanitarian assistan ce, as well as

19-05811

5/13

S/2019/305

inter-agency verification assessment and operational activities. The provision of daily
escorts to partners for water-trucking from Kube to the Sortony internally displaced
persons gathering site, as well as regular armed escorts for humanitarian supplies
between Sortony and Kabkabiyah in North Darfur, continued. UNAMID also
provided security for the warehouses and assets of humanitarian agencies. The World
Food Programme, under UNAMID escort, distributed 25 tons of food to people in
need, including internally displaced persons, across Darfur.

V. Operating environment
Restrictions to access
21. UNAMID has continued to experience access denials and restrictions of
movement. During the reporting period, a total of six denials and one restriction of
movement were recorded, as compared with seven in the previous reporting period.
The denials prevented UNAMID from verifying reported fighting on 28 February in
Sabun el-Fagur, South Darfur, and on 2 February in the Manabu farming area, Central
Darfur. On 13 February, a UNAMID patrol to Hashaba village, North Darfur, was
denied access by a Sudanese Armed Forces commander, who claimed that the area is
a Sudanese Armed Forces operation zone. On 16 February, UNAMID was also denied
access to proceed to Koron, near Golo in Central Darfur. Another verification patrol
was planned and was eventually conducted to Koron on 20 February. On 18 February,
a UNAMID security assessment and confidence-building mission to Savanga, north
of Golo, was stopped at a Sudanese Armed Forces checkpoint and allowed to proceed
only after negotiations. A team from the United Nations Department of Safety and
Security on a road mission from Zalingei to El Geneina was denied access by the
Sudanese Armed Forces on 21 February. The Sudanese Armed Forces also refused
security clearance for a UNAMID patrol on 12 March to Manabu.
Attacks and threats of attacks targeting the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and United Nations and humanitarian personnel
22. There were 17 incidents targeting United Nations and humanitarian personnel
in Darfur during the reporting period, a decrease from the 28 incidents reported during
the previous period. Of these, 16 targeted United Nations personnel and 1 targeted
humanitarian personnel. The incidents included intrusion into UNAMID premises and
cases of break-in, robbery, theft and attempted theft of UNAMID property. On
19 January, unidentified armed men stopped a privately contracted truck hired by an
international non-governmental organization in Umharz village, 35 km north-east of
Nertiti, in Central Darfur, and robbed the organization’s national staff of its personal
belongings.
Visas and customs clearance issues
23. The Government granted 211 visas, including 15 for military personnel, 77 for
police personnel, 60 for official visitors, 52 for contractors and 3 for civilian staf f. A
total of 166 visa requests were still being processed, while 220 visa requests have
been pending beyond the normal approval period of 15 days, some since November
2018. While there has been progress towards cooperation with the Government on the
issuance of visas, 17 visas are pending for international civilian staff members,
including in the Human Rights Section. The Government has continued to release
food ration containers from Port Sudan within the applicable processing time.
Progress has also been recorded in the clearing of all shipments, with minimal delay.

6/13

19-05811

S/2019/305

VI. Progress towards the achievement of African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur strategic
priorities and exit benchmarks and indicators
Support for the Darfur peace process and the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur
24. There has been no significant progress made in the Darfur peace process since
the signing of the pre-negotiation agreement in Berlin on 6 December 2018.
JEM/Gibril and SLA-MM withdrew from the planned talks with the Government in
January 2019, in solidarity with anti-Government protests. Nonetheless, the African
Union-United Nations Joint Special Representative for Darfur has continued to
engage with the parties and other stakeholders, including Qatar, in order to unblock
the impasse. UNAMID has also engaged with civil society groups and the native
administration on issues to be addressed through the talks, once resumed, together
with the recommendations from the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation
process.
25. The implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur continued at a
slow pace, owing mainly to a lack of funding and operational constraints. On 11 and
12 January, the Darfur Land Commission, in collaboration wit h the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forests and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, organized a workshop in Khartoum on the governance of agricultural land
in the context of food security in Darfur. The Truth, Justice and Reconciliat ion
Commission submitted a funding request to the Federal Ministry of Finance for three
projects on peaceful coexistence and peace conferences. Nevertheless, the five key
commissions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur that are responsible for
voluntary returns and resettlement, land, security arrangements, justice, truth and
reconciliation and nomadic development, as well as the Darfur Reconstruction and
Development Fund, have yet to be fully established and effectively functioning in
Darfur.
Protection of civilians
26. The integrated field protection teams of UNAMID conducted 160 visits
throughout North, South and Central Darfur. In North and South Darfur, the main
protection issues continued to involve the presence of armed nomads, the fear of
possible crop destruction by livestock and the resulting tensions between herders and
nomads.
27. In Central Darfur, protection issues included killings, abductions, sexual and
gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence, robbery, assaults
and harassment, in particular in the areas of Golo, Nertiti and Zalingei. A total of
16 incidents involving some 100 civilians were recorded. They included the rape of
six women in the Fura area, near the Thur settlement for internally displaced perso ns,
on 5 January; the killing of an internally displaced man by two suspected Sudanese
Armed Forces soldiers in the North camp, Nertiti, on 22 January; the alleged
abduction of four people from the Martajalo Wadi areas by armed nomads, on 17 and
25 January; the kidnapping of five civilians from Daya village, reportedly by
SLA-AW elements, on 12 January; an attack on some villagers in the Jartanga area,
near Guldo, by suspected Rapid Support Forces elements, on 14 January, resulting in
serious injuries to five people; the shooting and injury of a woman by a suspected
SLA-AW element around Guldo, on 6 January; the assault and robbery of a group of
internally displaced women, reportedly by armed nomads in Nertiti, on 6 January; a
physical assault on internally displaced persons perpetrated by some nomads in the
Gurney, Taringa, Osajai and Dingaguray areas, western and central Jebel Marra and
19-05811

7/13

S/2019/305

Zalingei, on 19 and 23 January; and an assault on a group of women allegedly by
armed nomads who prevented them from farming in the Kolo Fugo area, on
25 January, and in the Tango area, on 26 January. The Sudanese police has been
notified of the case of the two Sudanese Armed Forces soldiers in Nertiti, while the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudanese police have engaged with community
leaders to seek accountability in the Jartanga attack. Local authorities in Guldo held
a meeting with community leaders and resolved the conflict in the Kolo Fugo and
Tango areas.
28. In South Darfur, UNAMID conducted a mission to Deribat in the East Jebel
Marra locality, from 4 to 8 February, to monitor the protection situation and the impact
of clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA-AW on the civilian
population and observed an increase in the number of returnees to the area. The
returnees and community leaders appealed for support through the provision of basic
services and infrastructure, in particular in the areas of health and education.
29. The military component of UNAMID conducted a total of 6,721 patrols, 2,250
of which were for the protection of civilians. Patrols for the protection of UNAMID
personnel and equipment totalled 4,275, made up of 3,918 routine patrols and
357 logistics and administrative escorts. A total of 1,387 visits to villages and
670 visits to camps for internally displaced persons were conducted during the
reporting period. In providing support for the physical protection of civilians,
UNAMID police conducted 3,333 patrols, including 1,300 confidence -building
patrols, to camps for internally displaced persons, and 263 patrols to protect civilians
gathering firewood or grass, 149 market patrols, 929 village patrols, 555 town patrols,
77 area of return patrols and 60 migration route patrols in order to respond to the
security needs of internally displaced persons, in particular women and children
engaged in livelihood activities outside camps for internally displaced persons.
Formed police units provided 63 humanitarian escorts to personnel from the World
Food Programme, the Office for the Coordination of Huma nitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Children’s Fund and UNAMID.
30. During the reporting period, UNAMID held a total of 42 security coordination
meetings with the Sudanese police, non-governmental organizations, international
non-governmental organizations, representatives of internally displaced persons and
community leaders. Meetings were focused on community policing initiatives and
enabling the Sudanese police to provide security in camps for internally displaced
persons and surrounding communities. On 13 January, UNAMID handed over the
newly constructed Um Kalool police station in West Darfur, and the construction of
other similar projects is ongoing in North, Central and South Darfur. In addition, the
mission held a workshop on the recycling of waste for purposes of generating income
for 25 female internally displaced women in Kutum, on 6 January, and offered four
workshops to 120 female Sudanese police officers in Zalingei, on 10 January, on the
issue of respecting human rights during arrest and detention. The meetings have
encouraged the community to support the implementation of community policing
initiatives and enhanced safety and security in camps for internally displaced persons
and the surrounding communities.
31. UNAMID continued to support the re-establishment of the criminal justice chain
in areas of return, with the rehabilitation of a rural court in Tawilla and the
construction of a district court, three rural courts, a land registry and prison
dormitories for male and female prisoners in Kabkabiyah, both in North Darfur.
UNAMID also completed infrastructure work to improve security at the prisons in
Kutum, North Darfur, and Ed Daein, East Darfur. Training was also conducted for
more than 500 law enforcement officials and social workers in th e various states of
the Sudan on the issues of child rights, justice for children and child -friendly
interviewing practices.
8/13

19-05811

S/2019/305

32. During the reporting period, UNAMID collaborated with the Sudanese judiciary
to organize mediation training for 25 rural court judges in East Darfur on the peaceful
resolution of local disputes, including intercommunal conflict. Further capacity building support was provided in collaboration with the General Directorate of
Prisons and Reform, through training on human rights and prison duties for 59 newly
recruited prison staff, including 9 women, in North Darfur. In order to promote better
police-prosecutor cooperation in the greater Jebel Marra area, with a view to tackling
crime, including violence against women, UNAMID supported a consultation with
the judiciary, the Sudanese police and the Prosecution Office in Zalingei to develop
training for police investigators and prosecutors, including prosecutors in the Office
of the Special Prosecutor for Darfur Crimes. In addition, UNA MID completed and
handed over an office building to the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Darfur
Crimes in El Geneina, in West Darfur. The mission also organized a trial -monitoring
workshop for 25 participants, including women drawn from civil society g roups in
Zalingei, aimed at strengthening their capacity to monitor criminal trials following
the departure of UNAMID. Such support will enhance their capacity for the peaceful
resolution of local disputes, including intercommunal conflicts.
33. During the reporting period, five accidents involving unexploded ordnance,
resulting in the death of 2 children and severe injury to 10 others, were recorded in
Mellit and Umm Barru, in North Darfur, Bindisi and Zalingei, in Central Darfur and
Kass, in South Darfur. In a total of 57 villages across Darfur, UNAMID mine action
teams cleared 22 hazardous areas, located and safely destroyed 2,610 items of
unexploded ordnance (including shelf-life expired ordnance) and disposed of
63,216 pieces of small arms ammunition. In addition, UNAMID provided risk
awareness information on the explosive remnants of war to 31,516 individuals,
including 4,050 women, 3,322 men, 10,893 girls and 13,251 boys.
34. UNAMID continued to provide support to strengthen the capacities of local
authorities to institutionalize and promote the national ownership of child protection
within the security forces. Accordingly, in North Darfur, 59 prison police officers,
including 9 women, were trained on child protection and child rights under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child during the reporting period. UNAMID also
continued to monitor and report on incidents of grave violations against children
under the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations against children
in situations of armed conflict pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005).
35. Sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence,
remains a serious concern for women in the greater Jebel Marra area. UNAMID has
documented incidents of the rape of four displaced minors, including those of a
15-year-old girl from the Kasab internally displaced persons camp by two Sudanese
police personnel; of two girls (16 and 17 years of age), residen ts of the Zamzam
internally displaced persons camp, and of a girl (13 years of age), from the Hamadiya
internally displaced persons camp, who was raped by two armed men, all in North
Darfur. It was also reported that, on 1 February, a 13 -year-old girl from the Rongatas
internally displaced persons camp, in Zalingei, was gang-raped by four armed nomads
at a farm. The freedom of movement for women and girls in areas of return and around
camps for internally displaced persons continued to be restricted, includ ing access to
farms and forest resources. In the Hamadiya internally displaced persons camp, in
Central Darfur, local sources informed UNAMID of six women from the camp who
had reportedly been “arrested” on 4 February by four armed nomads in the Uyor area,
near Zalingei. UNAMID increased targeted patrols as a preventive measure, focusing
on farming areas as well as firewood and water collection points, in order to protect
women carrying out livelihood activities.

19-05811

9/13

S/2019/305

Mediation of intercommunal conflict
36. The active engagement of State and local authorities and the native
administration has contributed to a significant decline in intercommunal conflict in
Darfur since mid-2015. UNAMID supported community stabilization projects that
were focused on improving access to basic services, preventing the recruitmen t of atrisk young people and promoting local capacity-building, including 24 community
projects in the Jebel Marra area with on-the-job training aimed at 1,580 beneficiaries.
37. UNAMID also continued to support mediation efforts through facilitation and
capacity-building for local authorities and communities. In support of efforts to
improve relations among internally displaced persons, host communities and the local
authorities, UNAMID conducted 28 meetings with leaders of internally displaced
persons from North and Central Darfur from 14 to 30 January and from 3 to
11 February. Meetings were also held with locality commissioners and local security
committees to discuss the security-related concerns of internally displaced persons,
in particular women and girls. Women leaders of internally displaced persons
requested more income-generating initiatives and trainings on alternative sources of
income for women in camps for internally displaced persons . Youth representatives
called for access to vocational training to prevent the recruitment of young people
into criminality as a result of high unemployment and economic hardship.

VII. Implementation of the reconfiguration of the mission
Uniformed personnel drawdown
38. In accordance with the timetable to reduce the military component from 5,470
to 4,050 personnel by 30 June 2019, the repatriation of 350 Nepalese troops was
completed in January. The size of the UNAMID police force also decreased from
2,500 to 2,283 personnel, with the force retaining 754 individual police officers and
1,529 members of formed police units. The relocation of the Indonesian formed police
unit to the temporary operating base in Golo, previously suspended owing to
construction in Golo, commenced on 27 February. UNAMID police a dvisers have
been deployed to State liaison functions established in North Darfur, South Darfur,
East Darfur, West Darfur and Khartoum and are also co -located with the Sudanese
police.
Implementation of the transition concept
39. As UNAMID continues preparations for its withdrawal in 2020 in accordance
with Security Council resolution 2429 (2018), the mission and the United Nations
country team continue to implement the mission’s transition strategy. In this regard,
$15 million was allocated to State liaison functions, in the 2018/19 UNAMID budget,
for the joint implementation of programmatic activities with 10 individual United
Nations country team entities, mainly in the areas of the rule of law, human rights and
resilience and durable solutions for internally displaced persons and host
communities. All 10 memorandums of understanding between the mission and the
individual country team entities have been signed to implement the transition plan
and allow UNAMID staff to be co-located in their offices in four Darfur State capitals.
Thus far, 40 staff members, 20 international and 20 national, have been
accommodated within the State liaison functions in El Fasher, Nyala, Ed Daein and
El Geneina, out of a total of 61 staff members, 39 international and 22 national, to be
deployed, which would include 49 substantive posts, 4 Government -provided
personnel and 8 individual police officers. State liaison function -related activities in
human rights and the rule of law have begun, including infrastructure upgrades, the
operationalization of the mobile human rights monitoring team and the conduct of
10/13

19-05811

S/2019/305

training programmes on fair trial standards and the administration of justice, for
justice, prison, police and civil society actors to serve communities in return areas.
UNAMID staff integrated into the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees have expanded protection monitoring to areas of return and areas from
which UNAMID has withdrawn. The United Nations Development Programme and
UNAMID have adjusted conflict prevention projects in order to improve the targeting
and sustainability thereof after the mission’s eventual exit. UNAMID staff members
are also supporting the United Nations Population Fund by strengthening the
prevention of, and the response to, gender-based violence, including through
community-based mechanisms.
40. Through the State liaison functions, the United Nations country team and
UNAMID have started to monitor the impact of the withdrawal of UNAMID from
10 team sites in 2018, pursuant to the mission’s drawdown plan. Monitoring will
continue, but early indications from those areas suggest a need to strengthen the rule
of law, human rights and protective mechanisms and to assess the impact of the
economic crisis on the most vulnerable segments of the population, in particular
internally displaced persons and returnees.

VIII. Observations
41. While the national dynamics in the Sudan remain in a state of flux, the trajectory
in Darfur remains relatively unchanged, with the Sudanese military and police
personnel maintaining security in urban areas, local authorities managing
intercommunal tensions and internally displaced persons gradually returning, except
for several hotspots in the greater Jebel Marra area. The trend demonstrates not only
the resilience of the communities in Darfur but also the stabilizing impact of
UNAMID. Nevertheless, the ongoing political and economic uncertainty pose a
number of challenges for a responsible exit of the peacekeeping mission and a
transition to peacebuilding, including the question of interlocutors at the national and
local levels of the government for joint planning and oversight, which will be critical
for the national ownership and sustainability of the process. In addition, the
mobilization of resources for a seamless transition, from domestic and international
sources, will be complicated under current emergency measures.
42. In that same view, I regret the impact of the declaration of a state of emergency
in the Sudan on peace talks between the Government and some of the non -signatory
movements to the Doha Documents for Peace in Darfur, which did not res ume in
January in Doha, as agreed in the pre-negotiation agreement signed on 6 December
in Berlin. This represents a missed opportunity to maintain the momentum generated
by that agreement. Similarly, the announcement of the Sudan Call alliance to
withdraw from the Roadmap Agreement for Ending the Conflicts in Sudan is also
unfortunate. The problems in Darfur can only be solved through a peaceful and
inclusive political process. I reiterate my call for the Government of the Sudan and
the non-signatory movements to redouble their efforts and commence negotiations
towards a permanent cessation of hostilities and a comprehensive peace agreement.
In this regard, I welcome the Government’s declaration of an open-ended cessation
of hostilities in Darfur and the Two Areas, as well as the three-month extension of the
cessation of hostilities by the Sudanese Revolutionary Front, but am concerned that
the recent announcement of a state of emergency throughout the Sudan could have a
negative impact on the peace process by restricting the rights of citizens to peaceful
assembly and freedom of expression.
43. Similarly, I remain concerned about the continued intermittent clashes between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the SLA-AW faction in the Jebel Marra, and the

19-05811

11/13

S/2019/305

civilian casualties and displacement that it has caused. In this context, the moderate
increase in SLA-AW attacks against the Sudanese Armed Forces and continuing
reports of infighting within the armed group during the reporting period are
unwelcome developments. I call upon both parties to abandon violence and enter
immediately into political dialogue. I repeat the calls for Abdul Wahid al -Nur to join
the peace process on the basis of the Doha Document. I also appeal to the Government
of the Sudan to ensure that access is consistently granted for UNAMID and its
humanitarian partners to deliver protection and aid to those affected by the conflict.
44. Many of the drivers of the conflict have yet to be addressed comprehensively.
While the overall reduction in serious intercommunal conflict is evidence of the
progress that has been achieved, UNAMID continues to work with national and local
authorities, as well as the United Nations country team and other partners, to facilitate
mediation and address the underlying issues regarding access to land and resources.
It is also critical that ways be found to address the plight of the more than
1.6 million internally displaced persons still living in camps throughout Darfur, and I
call upon the Government to intensify efforts to ensure the safety and security of
internally displaced persons across Darfur, while seeking durable solutions to their
long-standing displacement by creating the conditions for their safe, dignified and
voluntary return. Ongoing human rights violations, in particular sexual and genderbased violence, including those violations reportedly perpetrated by Government
security personnel, continue to be of grave concern and an obstacle to lasting peace.
45. As the African Union and the United Nations begin the transition of their
presence in Darfur from peacekeeping towards peacebuilding and development, we
rely on our partners to help us to ensure success. I am grateful to the Sudanese
authorities for their continued collaboration during the reconfiguration of UNAMID,
and it is critical that national and local ownership be central to our continuing support
for Darfur. Similarly, I am thankful for the valuable support provided by Security
Council members, troop- and police-contributing countries and other donors. As
UNAMID prepares for its exit, and as the efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations shift to address the changing needs of the Darfuri people and seek to prevent
a relapse of conflict, we call upon our partners to renew their support. I urge m embers
of the international community to step forward to ensure adequate resources are
provided for this critical work both during and after the transition.
46. In conclusion, I wish to express my gratitude to the African Union -United
Nations Joint Special Representative, Jeremiah Mamabolo, the mission leadership
and all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations country team and the humanitarian
partners for their dedicated work for peace and development in Darfur. I also wish to
commend the former President of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, the former President
of Nigeria, Abdulsalami Abubakar, and the former Commissioner of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, Ramtane Lamamra, for their continued
efforts towards sustainable peace in the Sudan.

12/13

19-05811

S/2019/305

19-05811

13/13
