SECURITY COWCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2472d

MEETING:

NEW

-

6 SEPTEMBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2472)
Adoption of the agenda

. .. ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... .. ... ... ...

1

.. .... .. ... ... .. .... .. .. .... .. ... .. ... ... ... ...

1

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 5947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Observer for the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Canada to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15951) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..‘..................

1

WPV.2472

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records ofthe Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
.:
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2472nd
Held

in New York on Tuesday,

president: Mr. Noel ‘G. SINCLAIR

MEETING
6 September

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from rLc Permanent Representative of Japan to the United NaaOns addressed to the
President of the Security Council @/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15951)

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, -Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption

1983, at 4.15 p.m.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
takkn at previous meetings on this item [247&h and 247jst
meetings], I invite the representative of Canada and the
Observer for the Republic of Korea to take places at the
Council table. I invite the representatives of Australia,
Bangladesh, Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Italy, Japan Liberia, New Zealand, Nigeria, the Philip
pines, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Spain and Sweden to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2472)

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated I September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council @/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the ChargC
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of Australia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15951)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pelletier (Canada)
and Mr. Kim (Republic of Korea) tookpIaces at the Council
table: Mr. Joseph (Australia). Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Miss Dever (Belgium), Mr. Jelonek (Federal Republic
of Germany), Mr. L..a Rocca (Italy), Mr. Kuroda (Japan),
Mrs. Jones (Liberia), Mr. Harland (Nau Zealand), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Moreno Salcedo (Philippines), Mr.
Syder (Portugal), Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. de Piniks
(Spain) and Mr. Amneus (Sweden) took the pIaces reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Colombia, Egypt, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Malaysia in which they request to be invited to
participate in, the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 4.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Pennanent Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the ChargC d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15949);

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Albdn Holgufn
(Colombia), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya) and Mr. Syed Arlr (Malaysia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
3. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I have asked to
speak again today in order to convey to the Council a
statement from the Soviet Government on the question
that we are discussing which has just been published. I
shall read the statement aloud.
1

“The TASS statement, published on September 2
of this year on instruction of the Soviet Government,
already reporte&the rude violation of the State frontiers of the Soviet Union by a plane, which on the
night of August- 3LSeptember
1 intruded into the
airspace of the USSR over the Kamchatka Peninsula
and then in the course of two hours had flown over
the Sea of Okhotsk and Sakhalin Island. It also mentioned the measures taken by the anti-aircraft defences, both ground and air ones, with the aim of forcing
the plane to land at one of the airfields on Sakhalin
Island. The subsequent investigation confirmed the
earlier mentioned data and supplemented it.

aircraft defences fulfilled the order of the command
post to stop the flight. Such actions are fully in keeping
with the law on the State border of the USSR which
has been published.
“The Soviet pilots, in stopping the actions of the
intruder plane, could not know that it was a civilian
aircraft. It was flying without navigation lights, at the
height of night, in conditions of bad visibility and was
not answering the signals. The assertions of the United
States President that Soviet pilots knew that it was a
civilian aircraft are not in keeping with reality,
“Dozens of international air routes pass over Soviet
territory. Foreign planes have been flying them for
many years and nothing has been happening to them
so far as they observe the rules.

“The intruder plane entered the airspace over Kamchatka in an area where a most important base of the
strategic m&ear forces of the USSR is located. At the
same time-and
this is now admitted by the American
side-another
spy plane of the United States Air
Force, an RC-135, that is similar to it, was in the same
area near the. Soviet border at the same altitude.

“We will continue to act in keeping with our legislation, which is fully in accord with international regulations. This wholly applies to the question of ensuring
the security of our borders. It is the sovereign right of
every State to protect its borders, in particular its airspace. This is one of the commonly recognized principles of international law on which relations between
States rest. So the United States President makes himself out as an ignoramus saying, as he did in his address
on September 5, that the Soviet Union guards its
borders in what it claims is its airspace.

“Several Soviet interceptor planes were sent aloft.
One of them controlled the actions of the American
RC-135 plane. A second flew into the area where the
intruder plane was and signalled to it that it had
intruded into the airspace of the USSR. The warnings
were ignored.

.-‘_

.

“When it was approaching Sakhalin Island the
intruder was again intercepted by fighter planes of the
anti-aircraft defences, and again attempts were made
to establish contact with it, including with the help of
the known general call signal on the international
emergency frequency of 121.5 megacycles. Contrary to
the false contentions of the -United States President,
Soviet anti-aircraft defence fighter planes are fitted out
with communication
equipment in which this frequency is fixed. So these signals had to be received by
the intruder plane, but it did not respond to them.
Neither did it respond, as it has been said earlier, also
to other signals and actions of the Soviet fighter planes.

“But the point here, of course, is not the ignorance
of one United States official or another; the point is a
deliberate pre-planned action in an area which is strategically important to the Soviet Union. The instigators
of that action could not help realizing what its outcome
would be but went ahead with a major intelligence
operation with the use, as is now becoming clear, of a
civilian plane, deliberately exposing its passengers to
mortal danger.
“Can anyone imagine anything more cynical than
Ronald Reagan’s statement that no one will ever know
how data was fed into the plane’s computer which subsequently directed the plane into Soviet airspace to
carry out its spying mission. It was not a technical
error. The plan was to carry out without a hitch the
above intelligence operation, but if it was stymied, to
turn everything into a major political provocation
against the Soviet Union.

“The Soviet radio-control services picked up short
coded radio signals transmitted from time to time, such
‘signals that are usually used in transmitting intelligence
information.
“The Anti-Aircraft Forces Command of the area,
having analyzed thoroughly the actions of the intruder
plane, its route passing also in the area of Sakhalin
over military bases, arrived at the conclusion that a
reconnaissance aircraft performing special tasks was in
the airspace of the USSR. We arrived at this conclusion
also because of the fact that the plane was flying over
strategical)y important areas of the Soviet Union. The
fighter plane made warning shots with tracer shells
along the route of the intruder plane. Such a measure is
envisaged by international rules.

“This conclusion is confirmed by all subsequent
actions of the -United States Administration.
Its leaders, including the President in person, launched a malicious and hostile anti-Soviet campaign over a very
short time, clearly using a prearranged script. Its
essence has been revealed in its concentrated form in a
televised speech of the President of the United States,
Ronald Reagan, on September 5, to try to blacken the
image of the Soviet Union and discredit its social system, to provoke a feeling of hatred toward soviet
people, to present the aims of the foreign policy of the
USSR in a distorted perspective, and to distract attention from its peace initiatives.

“Since even after this the intruder plane did not obey
the demand to fly to a Soviet airfield and tried to evade
pursuit, the interceptor-fighter
plane of the anti2

“In a situation when tensions and anti-Soviet hysteria are being whipped up, leaders of the United States
would like to evade the solution of major international
problems on which the destinies of the peoples depend.
And the moment for this provocation has been chosen
purposefully. It has been staged precisely now at a time
when the question is being solved whether the arms
race will be stopped and the threat of nuclear war
removed or whether this threat will keep growing. All
indications are, including the mentioned speech of the
American President, that the United States Administration intends to follow the road of intensifying confrontation with the Soviet Union. Ronald Reagan’s
credo, to quote him, is ‘peace through strength*.

unarmed air liner, perfectly identifiable and followed for
more than two hours, could have been forced by military
aircraft to leave the airspace. It could even have been
forced to land.
8. Clearly, the destruction of a civilian aircraft is out of
all proportion to its having intruded into Soviet airspace.
There seems to be no justification for the invocation of
the concept of self-defence as an excuse for this use of
force. We cannot imagine that in the eyes of the Soviet
Union the security interests it claimed to be defending
were so important-especially
since so many other technical means exist for risk-free collection of information-as
to call for a military attack against an unarmed civilian
aircraft, which was downed, it seems, just as it was about
to leave Soviet airspace, and thus to demonstrate such
contempt for human life.

“No amount of discourse upon ‘the moral values’,
‘the spirit of humanism*, ‘the treasure of human life’
can cover up such a policy. Can the statesmen of the
country which deprived millions of people in Indo
China of their lives in a most brutal manner, which, at
one with Israeli aggressors, is killing the Lebanese and
Palestinians, and whose conscience is burdened with
tens of thousands of deaths of Chilean and Salvadorian
patriots, speak of morality and humanism? The list of
crimes committed by American imperialism is a long
one and can be continued.

9. We should still like to believe that this was what has
been called an act of bravado on the part of an overzealous subordinate who will be appropriately punished.
We do not wish to think that the attack was covered up at
a higher level.

“The people on the plane that was used by American
special services for their dirty aims fell victim to a fresh
crime.

10. The international community’s acceptance that certain circumstances justified the action which‘has just cost
the lives of 269 men, women and children would introduce a factor of permanent insecurity into international
civil aviation.

“The Soviet Government expresses regret over the
death of innocent people and shares the sorrow of their
bereaved relatives and friends. The entire responsibility
for this tragedy rests wholly and fully with the leaders
of the United States of America.”

11. The Soviet Union must shoulder full responsibility
for the incident, guarantee facilities for on-site investigation, punish those who turn out to be responsible, and
take all measures to avoid any repetition of such
incidents.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Belgium. I invite her to take a place at the Council
table and to make her statement.

12. Otherwise, the consequences of this baleful affair
will continue to weigh heavily on the atmosphere of international relations at a time when, because of serious international difficulties and important on-going negotiations,
we have a greater need than ever for security and for at
least a minimum of mutual trust.

5. Miss DEVER (Belgium) (infer-reration from French):
I wish first of all to thank the members of the Council for
having kindly permitted Belgium to take part in this
debate. Previous speakers have used the words “indignation”, “shock”, “revulsion”, and “horror”. Those are the
very emotions felt by the Belgian public and Government
at the announcement that a civilian aircraft of Korean Air
Lines has been cold-bloodedly shot down with 269 persons on board.

13. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (interpretation from French):
My delegation cordially congratulates you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of September, a month which is beginning under
rather gloomy auspices, as though to put to the test once
more your great diplomatic talents, which are well known
to all. You may be assured that the delegation of Togo
will spare no effort to help you in your difficult work.

6. On the one hand, this is a flagrant violation of the
current rules of civil aviation, which bind the Soviet
Union as they do the other members of the international
community. On the other hand, this is an inhuman act,
and a violation of the most elementary rules of conduct
among civilized nations, which no motives can justify
without injecting an inadmissible element of cynicism into
international relations.

14. My delegation also congratulates your predecessor,
Mr. Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil, a skilled diplomat who
guided the Council’s work last month in an outstanding
manner.
15. It was with amazement and indignation that my
country learned of the horrifying news of the loss of 269
innocent human lives. sacrificed for some undefined principle and for a cause whose worth seems by no means
beyond question.

7. Even if we suppose-as it has been claimed without
the least proof-that
Soviet airspace had been violated,
other legally defensible possibilities were available. This
3

16. Did the world need this new tragedy, which has
worsened the apocalyptic situation towards which we are
being thrust by human intolerance? My delegation does
not understand, and it continues to wonder. Why this act
of violence, when the present conditions of our common
existence require a greater acceptance of man by man, a
greater tolerance, and greater co-operation
among
,,.
nations?
‘,
17. The deliberate shooting down of a civilian aircraft
carrying passengers of various nationalities is a reprehensible act, first of all because it endangers .the security of
international civil aviation and also because it disturbs
international peace and security. Even if there can be no.
doubt that the South Korean civilian aircraft had strayed
from its normal route and for a long time had been in
violation of the airspace of a great Power, my delegation
feels that the reaction of that great Power to this violation
was quite disproportionate. If it had reasons to think that
this was not‘an innocent violation, the Power whose airspace was thus violated has a wide range of means available to it to force the civilian aircraft to land for
interrogation and inquiry. That is why my delegation does
not understand the explanations provided on the circumstances of this most regrettable incident. For that reason
we associate ourselves with the wishes expressed by all
delegations that have called for a full elucidation of the
circumstances of the incident.

those countries which are more directlv involved in one
way or another, but touches upon primary interests of the
international community as a whole.
24. The tragedy which has resulted in the loss of 269
human lives in the skies of the Far East leaves us in dismay and disbelief. In expressing its sympathy to the
Government of the Republic of Korea, together with its
sorrow for the innocent victims of the air disaster, the
Italian Government has emphasized that this tragic
action, which by no means could be justified, has deeply
shocked the conscience of all civilized human beings and
raised a feeling of deep anguish ,and grave concern for the
consequences it could entail.
25. The picture emerging from the information provided by various sources allows us to reconstruct the
essential dynamics of the events leading to the shooting
down of the air liner. Nevertheless, it is clear that what is
needed today, as a matter of absolute priority, is to complete this picture in,all its relevant aspects. Therefore,.we
still believe that the Soviet Union must give further
detailed explanations in order fully to clarify the responsibilities of this tragic event. As I mentioned earlier, the
issue before us today is not an event affecting a limited
number of States but one that bears upon basic principles
and needs shared by the ‘whole international community.
26. An orderly and secure use of the skies is an essential
prerequisite for free and peaceful coexistence in our
world. Existing international regulations and standards
are aimed at achieving this end, while preserving full
respect for the sovereignty of individual States. However,
beyond any legal consideration there is a humanitarian
dimension of the situation before us that cannot be
ignored. Whatever the security requirements of States
might be-and no one intends to dismiss them-it is absolutely essential that the protection of national airspace be
assured by means which will not endanger the lives of
innocent and defenceless civilians; with a negative impact
on the system of air traffic, which is significant and instrumental to exchanges among peoples and has acquired, in
today’s world, an increasingly economic, cultural and
social relevance.

18. It is worth recalling that the Chicago Convention on
International
Civil Aviation of 7 December 1944’ contains no provision authorizing a State whose airspace has
been violated to destroy the civilian aircraft having committed such a violation. In the opinion of my delegation,
no motive at all can justify this act of deliberate destruo
tion of a civilian passenger aircraft.
19. It is absolutely essential to guarantee the security of
civilian aviation and that of the passengers. It is because
this security is disturbed Iby terrorists who hijack planes
that hijacking has been so severely and unanimously con-’
demned by the international community. For the same
reasons, my delegation believes that the international
community must take all necessary measures in order to
ensure that an incident such as this never happens again.
20. In conclusion, my delegation wishes .to offer to the
bereaved families of the victims of this incident our profound and sincere condolences on behalf of the Government and people of Togo.

27. We cannot believe that there.are no adequate procedures to effectively prevent intrusions of foreign civilian
air liners in national airspace without having to resort to
drastic and inhuman options which would compromise
the progress already achieved in regulating and protecting
international air navigation in the common interest.
z
28. In this perspective, the Italian delegation firmly
believes that the current debate must not only shed light
on the incident and lead to ascertaining fully the responsibilities for this tragedy which has deeply shocked public
opinion throughout the world; it should also be taken as
an opportunity to renew the common ‘awareness that a
strong commitment by all States is needed to prevent the
threat of tragic events, such as the one invol’ving the
Korean air liner, or other similar episodes’of the past,
from weighing uponthe freedom and safety of air traffic,

21. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Italy. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement. ;:
,

.

22. Mr. LA ROCCA (Italy): ,I should like, Sir,to offer
you my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of September and
extend to you my best wishes ‘for success in your high
:
oftice.
I.
23. Italy has asked to take“part in this debate because
the question considered by the Council concerns not only
4

under the principles of international law. Thirdly, the
Soviet Union must severely punish all those who are
responsible for the shooting down of the unarmed civilian
aeroplane. Fourthly, the Soviet Union must allow appropriate international organizations, as well as the Governments of the States whose citizens were on the plane, to
have unimpeded access to the area where the plane was
shot down by a Soviet missile so as to conduct a thorough
investigation into the criminal act. Finally, the Soviet
Union must offer effective guarantees against a similar
incident in the future.

which is an essential element for orderly and peaceful
relations among nations.
29. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Observer
for the Republic ,of Korea, on whom I now call.
30. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea): Thank you, Mr.
President, for giving my delegation an opportunity to
address the Council once again.
31. May I express my delegation’s strong confidence,
Sir, that, with your experience, judgement and courage,
you will be able to discharge your important responsibilities as President superbly and brilliantly. Indeed, this ability has already been amply demonstrated by the skilled
and most judicious manner in which you have guided the
Council’s very difficult deliberations so far.

37. I set out those demands in my first statement and
many representatives have since expressed strong support
for my Government’s position. I wish to take this opportunity to express my Government’s profound gratitude to
those nations which have extended to us their sympathy
and support in this regard. I wish particularly to express
our deep appreciation to many third-world nations for
their expressions of a sense of solidarity in this hour of
grief and moral outrage.

32. The Council has been called into session to deal with
issues raised by an incident which is at once a tragedy and
a heinous crime. It is a tragedy because 269 totally innocent lives, including men, women and children of many
different nations, were killed for no apparent reason, without any conceivable cause or understandable purpose. It
was a senseless and cruel tragedy. As President Chun Doo
Hwan of my country said, we pray for the passengers and
crew who were victimized in this tragic incident.

38. There is, however, one country which has not shown
any remorse or anguish or sense of moral regret over the
tragedy which has happened. That country, as we all
know, is the Soviet Union.’ As we have witnessed during
the past few days, the Soviet Union refuses to give an
honest and direct accounting of exactly what has hap.
pened. While the world waits for the Soviet Union to
provide a straightforward answer, the Russians have been
busy concocting flagrant lies.

33. The tragedy, as we all know, was the result of a
crime, a barbaric act of brutal, wanton violence committed against totally innocent and defenceless people who
were only looking forward to another happy landing at
Kimpo International Airport in Seoul.

39. On the afternoon of 2 September [ibid.], in the Council, the representative of the Soviet Union supplied us with
a fictional account by TASS in which the Soviet Union
makes the preposterous allegation that the Korean Air
Lines piane in question was carrying out what TASS
called “intelligence aims”. What is interesting about this
piece of Soviet fiction is that it quite faithfully betrays the
mentality of its author. The truth is that only the Soviet
Union would try “to attain special intelligence aims without hindrance using civilian planes as a cover”, as TASS
says. Only a totalitarian State whose scale of values does
not place much weight on human lives can even imagine
that one would risk jeopardizing the lives of hundreds of
innocent persons, from many different nations, “to attain
special intelligence aims”.

34. In case the representative of the Soviet Union needs
to be reminded, the crime-a cold-blooded massacre in
the air-was committed by Soviet military authorities. By
firing a heat-seeking missile into a Korean Air Lines Boeing 747 passenger aeroplane, Soviet tighter pilots murdered 269 innocent persons. By giving orders to the pilots
to shoot down the unarmed civilian aeroplane, Soviet
authorities committed the foulest and most heinous
murder in the history of civil aviation.
35. I am afraid that it is impossible to undo the tragedy:
we cannot bring back the dead. Neither can the Soviet
Union undo the crime it has committed. It cannot evade
responsibility for the crime it has committed.

40. Speaking for my country, the Republic of Korea
could not even conceive of using civilian commercial airlines to gather intelligence, let alone actually engage in
such reckless, inhuman and immoral practice.

36. To deal with the consequences of this crime and to
ensure the future safety of international civil aviation, my
Government has demanded that the Soviet Union must
take at least the following five steps which I included in
my earlier statement of 2 September [247&/r meering] but
will summarize here once more, if representatives will
bear with me. First, as Minister for Foreign Affairs of my
country emphasized on 2 September, the Soviet Union
must tell the world the whole truth concerning this clearly
illegal and savage act. Secondly, the Soviet Union must
offer a formal apology and full andimmediate compensation to the,families of the victims-and,
I should add, to
Korean Air Lines. Such measures as apologies and compensation, as we all know, are absolute requirements

41. After issuing the statement on 2 September, however, Russian propaganda specialists must have come to
realize that it would sound quite preposterous and not
believable to the outsider world, because the TASS press
agency was burdened on 4 September-two
days after
making the initial allegation-with
the task of issuing
another lie. The new lie, the new fiction-this
time attributed to General Semyon Romanov, Chief of the main
staff of the anti-aircraft defence forces-implies,
without
precisely stating so however, that the Russian pilots may
5

_‘_
_-,
_-_
_*_
_*.
,-_
,‘,
,‘_
,‘,
,‘_
,‘,
,‘_
,-_
,-_
x’,
,-,
_-,
,‘,
,‘,

have mistaken the Korean Air Lines Boeing 747 for the
RC-135 American reconnaissance plane.

airspace? The Soviet allegation
false and untrue.

42. Now, everyone knows that the Boeing 747 and the
RC-135 are of different sizes and different shapes. Unless
Soviet fighter pilots are recruited exclusively from only
those with seriously defective eyesight, it is impossible to
imagine that they could have mistaken one aeroplane for
the other.

48. What is even more curious is that once again the
Soviet authorities could not quite bring themselves to
admit explicitly in a straightforward manner that their
forces after all shot down the Korean Air Lines plane.
Instead, they once again used evasive and cowardly words
to imply, without saying so, that they did indeed shoot
down the Korean Air Lines plane.

43. But what is even more interesting to note is the fact
that the lies offered by the Soviet Union on 2 and 4 September, respectively, are in mutual contradiction with
each other. Are the TASS editors aware of the fact that, if
the Soviet pilots shot down the Korean Air Lines
aeroplane-as
they initially seemed to have impliedbecause they believed it was carrying out intelligence functions, they could not at the same time say that they
believed they were shooting down a different aeroplane,
an RC-135?

is obviously

ridiculous,

49. I wonder why Soviet offtcials are so hesitant about
using more direct, explicit and honest expressions.. I
wonder whether it may not be because even the people in
the so-called ruling circles of the Soviet Union are aware
of the fact that in the final analysis nothing, absoluteiy
nothing, can justify the cold-blooded, brutal murder of
defenceless, innocent civilians of many different nations.
50. In 1973, when an incident involving a Libyan civil
aeroplane was discussed at the nineteenth extraordinary
session of the Assembly of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) on 28 February, the Soviet
delegation referred to the incident as a “criminal act of
international terrorism”. He further stated that “ICAO
cannot remain aloof from this barbaric act”. The Soviet
representative concluded that the ICAO Assembly “must
strongly condemn this criminal act”.

44. Such logical errors, it seems to me, reflect not so
much the level of intelligence among TASS editors as the
fact that a lie, once uttered, leads to another lie and more
lies, which inevitably contradict one other, because they
are unrelated to truth. It is in the nature of a cover-up that
it cannot but be self-defeating. He who lies must lie more
and more to cover up his earlier lies until he is destroyed
by his ‘own lies. That, clearly, is the present predicament
of the Soviet Union.

51. Let us hope that the Soviet Union has not forgotten
its own words. Let us also hope that it will not only
remember its own words but apply them to its own
conduct.

45. I shall not take up more of the Council’s valuable
time listing all the lies the Russians have been busily concocting to cover up their heinous crime, because to do so
would take up too much time, and, besides, it is unnecessary, as we can all see through Soviet lies without too
much difficulty. But before I conclude, I must point out
one incredible fact and ask one central question.

52. Now, the question. The central question I should
like to put to the Soviet representative is this. Before the
Soviet Union produces more lies to justify an action it
does not have the courage to admit to having taken, it
must, first, answer these questions: Did you or did you
not shoot down the unarmed, defenceless Korean Air
Lines plane? Did you or did you not murder 269 innocent
people? Did you or did you not commit the most heinous
massacre ever committed in the air? If you say that you
did not, which my impression is that most quarters now
seem to have the courage to question, the world will know
you are simply lying. After what we heard this morning
[247Ist meeting], there cannot be any doubt in anybody’s
mind as to who murdered 269 innocent people aboard the
Korean Air Lines plane. However, if you are prepared to
admit openly, honestly, explicitly, in a straightforward
manner, sincerely, that you did indeed commit the
murder, you will at least have taken the first step in the
right direction.

46. The incredible fact is that the Soviet Union in the
last few days, including today, has been busy inventing
lies to justify an action which it does not admit to having
taken. This I can only say is a strange spectacle indeed.
Why should the Russians issue all those TASS fictions
and Government statements when they are not admitting
to having taken the action which those fictions and lies
are clearly intended to justify? Interestingly enough, the
representative of the Soviet Union kindly read to us this
afternoon a statement by his Government which, after
telling now-familiar lies about the Korean Air Lines plane
allegedly carrying out intelligence functions, declares that
the Soviet plane “fulfilled the order of the command post
to stop the flight” of “the intruder plane” Ipura. JJ and
that “The Soviet pilots, in stopping the actions of the
intruder plane, could not know that it was a civilian aircraft” [ibid.].

53. We sincerely hope that the Soviet Union will reconsider its attitude and decide to tell us the truth. We hope
so for the sake of the victims of this unspeakable, barbarous crime. The dead are now voiceless. But we, whose
lives may yet be put in jeopardy if this crime is allowed to
go unpunished, must speak up. We must do everything
possible within our power to guarantee the safety of all
future air travellers. The Council, even though its capacity
to act is often constrained, as we all know, must perform

47. The evidence presented this morning proves beyond
any shred of doubt that the Korean Air Lines plane in
question had its navigational lights on and that the Soviet
pilot saw those lights. What spy planes would have navigational lights on while intruding into another country’s
6

“It is out of this concern, the tragic loss of life and
the ever-present need to make our international community more secure, that the Government of Sierra
Leone supports the call for the Security Council to
meet and fully investigate the cause of the disappearance of the Korean Air Lines aircraft.*’

its duty as the court of decent opinion of mankind. On
this very crisis which faces the Council today, mankind
has already clearly spoken its judgement. Condemnation
of the Soviet crime is universal and unambiguous. The
world now awaits action by this body. Let us hope the
Council will discharge its responsibilities responsibly,
courageously and effectively.

59. Since this tragic incident took place, there has been
an incessant flow of evidence as to what really happened.
However, such information has remained incomplete and
in some cases confusing. A lot of questions remain unanswered. And it is in this respect and also to ensure that
such an incident does not occur in the future that my
Government feels impelled to call for a thorough investigation of the incident.

54. I must also warn the Soviet Union that the world
will never settle for lies and evasions. The words that
Soviet officials have uttered on this tragic incident
amount to an insult to the intelligence of mankind. Even
now the Soviet Union refuses to respond with any trace of
honesty and a minimum of human decency to the eloquent expressions of grief and moral outrage by the representatives of all the countries that are participating in the
Council’s discussion. I warn the Soviet Union that the
civilized world will continue to pursue the matter beyond
the walls of this chamber and press the guilty until the
Soviet authorities admit to their crime and accede to the
five demands my Government has put forward.

60. The tragedy which surrounds the Korean jet air liner
further demonstrates the need to reduce international tension through confidence-building
measures.
61. We should also like to take this opportunity to
express our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families
of those who perished in the tragedy.

55. If Moscow believes it can evade its responsibilities
by telling lies and more lies, it seriously underestimates
the powers of intelligence and conscience of mankind.
The Soviet Union will never-I repeat, never-be able to
.avoid the consequences of its crime.

The next speaker is the represen62. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Nigeria, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

56. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

63. Mr. FAFOWORA (Nigeria): As this is my first statement in a formal meeting of the Council under your presidency, Sir, I should like first of all to avail myself of this
opportunity to extend to you and to the delegation of
Guyana my warmest congratulations on your accession
to the presidency. I have particular pleasure in doing so,
not only because Guyana is a Commonwealth country
with which my own country, Nigeria, has very cordial
relations, but also because we are familiar with your considerable diplomatic skills, patience, wisdom and tact.
These qualities will be sorely tested in the difficult days
ahead when, under your guidance, the Council continues
its deliberations on this tragic event. But we are confident
that you will bring your considerable diplomatic resources to bear on the efforts of’the Council to resolve this
problem.

57. Mr. KOROMA
(Sierra Leone): Mr. President, I
wish to thank you and the other members of the Council
severally and collectively for granting my delegation the
opportunity to participate in your deliberations on the
matter before the Council-the
tragic loss of the Korean
jet air liner. But before doing so I wish to state, Sir, that
the Council is fortunate to have a diplomat of your calibre
presiding over its affairs at this moment in time. We have
had the privilege of working closely with you and can
attest to your high level of competence and impartiality
and to your ability to find solutions to difftcult issues,
qualities which the Council will surely need during this
difficult period of its deliberations.

64. The Government and people of Nigeria were deeply
shocked and stunned by the shooting down on Thursday,
1 September, of an unarmed civilian jumbo jet of Korean
Air Lines on a routine commercial flight from New York
to Seoul. We grieve and mourn the loss of 269 innocent
lives in the horrendous tragedy, which was totally unnecessary. It is incomprehensible that a civilian plane on a
routine commercial flight should have been so wantonly
destroyed. Many explanations have been given for this
tragedy and it may well be that the full facts concerning
this most unfortunate incident have not yet been fully
established. To be charitable, one might even recognize
the probability that this was the result of a simple blunder
by an air force pilot and that the Korean jet air liner was
accidentally shot down in the mistaken belief that it was a
spy plane.

58. The Sierra Leone Government, on learning about
this tragic incident, issued the following statement which,
with your permission, Sir, I will now read. The statement
reads as follows:
“Reports that a Korean aircraft on a regular scheduled flight from New York to Seoul disappeared and
wreckage was spotted over the Sea of Japan has
reached the Government of Sierra Leone with profound shock.
“The Government of Sierra Leone views this unfortunate incident with grave concern, considering, in particular, the implications and consequences it has for
international air travel.
7

65. Regardless of the circumstances and any explanation which may be proffered-and
so far the explanations
have left many questions unanswered-there
can be no
justification whatever for shooting down the unarmed
Korean civilian air liner which resulted in the death of 269
innocent passengers.

72. My delegation would also like to take this opportunity to convey our deep appreciation to your predecessor,
the representative of France, for his outstanding leader;
ship in guiding the work of the Council during the month
of August.
73. The news of the disappearance and destruction of a
civilian aircraft of the Republic of Korea with 269 passengers on board has deeply shocked the Government
and people of Bangladesh. Their feelings have found profound expression in the message of Lieutenant-General
H. M. Ershad, President of the Council of Ministers of
Bangladesh, addressed to the President of the Republic of
Korea, Chun Doo Hwan, on 2 September. In his message
the President of the Council of Ministers expressed shock
at “‘the tragic loss of innocent human lives” and extended
“heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the bereaved
families’*.

66. But this incident is a symptom of a much deeper
malaise in the international situation. The world is today
beset by a host of human tragedies, conflicts and destruction, most of which are a direct consequence of increased
international tension. In recent times, the super-Powers
appear to have embarked on confrontation and on a collision path, thereby posing a grave danger, not only to international peace and security but also to the very existence
and safety of ordinary men, women and children throughout the world who simply want to live in peace. In Africa,
the ambitions and rivalry of the super-Powers is reflected
in the series of civil wars in our continent, particularly in
southern Africa, where tension, conflict and loss of life
have become all too common. It is a totally deplorable
situation and one which calls for a deliberate and sustained
effort by the super-Powers to seek accommodation and
cooperation between themselves in-order to reduce international tension.

74. This incident is a tragedy of serious magnitude. The
destruction of a civilian aircraft causing death to 269 innocent men, women and children has deeply shocked and
saddened all peace-loving and justice-upholding peoples.
The people of Bangladesh share the grief and sorrow of
the bereaved families that have lost their near and dear
ones on board the ill-fated aircraft.

67. In the case of the Korean jet incident, the fundamental principle of air safety appears to have been grossly
violated. Airline passengers have an inherent right to
travel in safety. That right is now being placed in jeopardy
by the event of last week. :It is a very grave matter and
calls for the concern of the entire international community, for who knows what might happen next? It is not
really difficult to imagine how easily a nuclear exchange
between the two super-Powers may occur through a similar military blunder and we already have some welldocumented accounts of such horrendous near-misses. It
is intolerable that innocent lives should have been so wantonly destroyed for security reasons which, in retrospect,
may not have been well founded.

75. Every independent State has tie exclusive right to
exercise sovereignty over its airspace. Indeed, it is an internationally recognized principle. At the same time, no principle of international norms or civilized code of conduct
can justify the destruction of a scheduled plane flying over
the airspace of a third country under any circumstances,
especially when such an action endangers innocent
human lives. International conventions on civil aviation
grant safety and security to civilian aircraft overflying the
airspace of foreign countries. An incident of such a
nature, therefore, is tantamount to the violation of obligations enshrined in international conventions. This tragic
incident has made it imperative to ensure the adoption of
all possible measures to prevent the recurrence of such
disasters.

68. My Government is deeply concerned about the possible consequences of this act, which even now may not be
totally or correctly foreseen: We urge that air safety rules
be tightened so as to prevent a reoccurrence of the Korean
jet incident. It is also our expectation that in the course of
time, when the facts of the incident have been fully established, necessary financial restitution will be made to the
families of the innocent victims of that incident.

76. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Spain. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
77. Mr. de PINIl% (Spain) (inrerprezution from Spanish):
Mr. President, your well-known competence, skill and
intelligence bode well for the Council’s debates. Having
been a colleague of yours in the Council last year, I am
convinced that you will lead its deliberations to a satisfactory conclusion.

69. We ask you, Sir, to convey our condolences to all
the bereaved families.
70. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

78. On 31 August, my Government learned of -the
destruction of a commercial air liner of the Republic of
Korea that carried 269 persons, passengers and crew, over
waters near the Japanese island of Hokkaido.

71. Mr. CHOWDHURY
(Bangladesh): It is an honour
for my delegation ‘to participate in this Council debate
when you, Sir, are presiding over this body. We are cunfident that your wisdom, long ‘experience and diplomatic
skill will surely guide our deliberations in the right
direction.

79. As soon as my Government learned that.fact, it publicly stated, in a note from the Diplomatic Information
Ofice, that, were the deliberate nature of that act of
destruction to be confirmed, “that act would represent a
8

tional community in. condemning, in.the most serious
terms, this wanton act of savagery and arrogance
which is in complete disregard for human lives and
international convention and good sense. We call upon
the guilty party concerned to give a full explanation of
this unpardonable act to the worki community and to
take all necessary steps to fully redress the harm done
to the kith and kin of the unfortunate passengers.**

serious violation df international law, a blow to relations
among peoples and a grave injury to the moral conscience
of humanity.”
80. In the same note, the Spanish Government, after
expressing its heartfelt condolences to the Government of
the Republic of Korea as well as to the Governments of
the other victims who perished as a result of this tragic
incident, urged that an unequivocal and adequate explanation of the facts be provided.

88. The loss of 269 innocent lives makes the incident one
of the worst air disasters in aviation history. There can be
no justification, whatever might have been the circumstances, for the downing of the unarmed civilian aircraft serving no military purpose, even if it had strayed into Soviet
airspace.

81. My Government believes that the explanations given
so far by the Soviet Union with regard to this incident are
unsatisfactory. We therefore support the proposal submitted to the Council by other countries to ask the SecretaryGeneral to conduct an investigation into the facts and to
report to the Council on the outcome..

89. This latest incident has raised serious questions with
regard to the safety of international civil aviation. This
callous action should never have occurred and must not
be allowed to occur again. The Council should now be
seized to initiate a process to prevent a repetition of such
an occurrence.

82. Spain, as a member of the Permanent Council of
ICAO, also believes that ICAO could conduct a technical
analysis of the incident that could thus contribute to shedding some light on the facts.
83. Despite the extraordinary gravity of this incident,
one that has aroused the natural condemnation of all
peace-loving peoples, my delegation believes that the
efforts that are being undertaken to achieve detente in
international relations at various levels and in various
forums must continue. It is precisely in times of tension
that we must not lose sight of the priority goals of detente
and peace.

90. Air travel today is so extensive and the air lanes so
crowded that it is impossible to discount a navigational or
human error in operating an aircraft. My delegation is in
full agreement with the statement of the representative of
Pakistan that what is required in such circumstances is the
exercise of compassion and forbearance and the avoidance of extreme and drastic measures. In any case, there
are standard procedures to be followed if an unidentified
commercial aircraft strays into foreign airspace. But
shooting down the plane is definitely not one of the standard procedures.

84. My Government hopes that at the meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs that begins tomorrow at Madrid a
contribution may be made towards those objectives.

91. My delegation joins other members of the international community in demanding an immediate and full
accounting of the incident from the Soviet authorities.
Although there have been conjectures in this regard, we
feel they are insufficient. The Soviet Union owes the international community a full explanation of the circumstances surrounding the shooting down of the South Korean
aircraft, and we appeal to the Soviet Union to live up to
this responsibility.

85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. SYED ARIFF (Malaysia): May I at the outset
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the month of September. My delegation
is
pleased to see in the chair a person of your stature, experience and ability. Given your qualities my delegation is
confident the Council will be able to achieve constructive
results. At the same time I should like to take this opportunity to express my sincere appreciation to you and,
through you, to the members of the Council, for giving
me the opportunity to address the Council this afternoon.

92. My delegation would also like to join the intemational community
in expressing to members of the
bereaved families our deep sympathy and profound condolences on the loss of their loved ones in this tragic
incident. In accordance with the rules and practices of
international civil aviation, the Soviet Union must be
urged to compensate immediately the kith and kin of
these unfortunate victims.

87. It was with shock and indignation that the Government and people of Malaysia learned of the circumstances of the shooting of the South Korean commercial air
liner on 31 August. Subsequently my Government
issued a statement which reads as follows:

93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take
a place at the Counci! table and to make his statement.

“Malaysia
is horrified and appalled over the
reported shooting down of an unarmed Korean civilian
commercial aircraft, which was flying from Anchorage
to Seoul, by Soviet military aircraft, causing the death
of 269 lives in the aircraft. Malaysia joins the interna-

94. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (mterpretaZion from Arabic): At the outset, I should like on behalf of
my delegation to congratulate you; Sir, on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for this month. My
9

delegation is pleased to see you guiding our deliberations
since yours is a friendly and non-aligned country.
95. My delegation extends its condolences and sympathy to the families of the innocent people who lost their
lives aboard the South Korean aircraft.
96. My delegation knows very well what the situation is
like inasmuch as our country experienced a similar loss
when a Libyan aircraft on a flight from Tripoli to Cairo
on 21 February 1973 was shot down with missiles and destroyed in a piratical act on the part of air force planes
belonging to the Zionist entity. Aboard that plane were
104 civilian passengers and 9 crew members. That Zionist
act of aggression took a toll of 108 victims. They were of
many nationalities, including 39 Egyptians, 4 Syrians,
2 Britons, 4 Jordanians, 3 Lebanese, 1 American, 1 German
and 45 Libyans, as well as 2 Palestinians and the French
pilot and the French flight engineer.
97. That act of aggression was the first incident of its
kind in which a civilian aircraft was exposed to direct
aggression from the Zionist occupying forces in Sinai at
the time. Despite its well-deserved and widespread condemnation, that act was not, I am sorry to say, the object
of such an intense-although
legitimate-world-wide
campaign such as the one we are witnessing today.
98. The Zionist act of aggression against the Libyan civilian aircraft and this incident involving the South Korean
aircraft must show the whole world that there are important matters to be taken into account: first of all, the grave
risk that the use of reconnaissance planes may represent to
international civilian aviation, and the ensuing tragedies
like the one we are facing today. Reconnaissance and
AWACS planes have also been used in the Mediterranean
region to jam civilian aircraft communications and disrupt
air trafIic, and if this situation continues it will cause many
international catastrophes.

_‘_

:
‘_
:
.-

99. We must not let this terrible incident be used to
settle international scores or cast aspersions on a specific
party. Instead, we should treat it as a lesson and draw the
appropriate conclusions so as to put an end to such incidents and ensure safe international air traffic.
100. The exploitation of this human tragedy for narrow,
electoral-campaign reasons or to settle scores will only
complicate matters. It would be more worthwhile for the
Council to study the matter more objectively.
101. What were the causes of this incident and of the
aforementioned
incident involving Zionist aggression
against a Libyan aircraft? What harm is caused by the use
of reconnaissance and other aircraft to jam civilian aircraft
communications and disrupt civilian air traffic? If acts of
this sort continue, we can only expect further tragic
incidents.
102 While we draw the attention of the Council anew to
an incident that occurred years ago, we hope that what has
happened today is a lesson that should remind us of what
has happened in the past.
103. We reaffirm our keen desire to continue to contribute to the efforts to devise ways and means of ensuring the
safety of international civil aviation and to prevent trage- 1
dies that could result from violations of international laws
and norms.

?&hemeeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

NOTE
a United

Nations,

Treuty

Series,

vol.

IS, NO.

102.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your boo&ore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Lcs publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairiea et les agences deposita&
du monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous A : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes. New York ou t&n&e.
ICAK rIoJIY%iTb

H3&4ImsI

oPrAHJi3AIJKH
Hawiit~OmiO

ki3~&U~iX
0praXSf3ftl~i~i
06ae~mtemtbIx
~aratTcIgaxBOBC~paftOH~~a.HaBOLIATCQIpaanw

mrasme

mm mmme

npojWiCen3mUdi,HbK&OpKHmr

no axpecy: Opra~~3au~x

OB%~lx

HAJ@4

XYIlETbBXliH%EbIXHara3SiHaX
06~31.tamotx BBamCMSJiHXUiOM

OB~emmemrwt

Hat@,

.

Cexmm HO

~CXiCBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas esti en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Con&e a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de.Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

ia United

Nations,

New

York

00300

9O-6O205-November

1991-2.050
