General Aleembly-El1bteenth Se11lon

(XXXVI), taking into account the resources available
for housing and urban development;
3. Recommends that Governments take all necessary
measures designed to ensure the creation and execution
of low-income housin;., programmes, including the encouragement of housmg co-operatives, and to guard
against any practices, especially speculation in real
estate, which may prove detrimental to such programmes;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, the regional economic commissions, the specialized agencies concerned
and the interested inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the Committee
on Housing, Building and Planning and to assist requesting Governments in formulating· and exe~uting,
within the framework of general development and
taking into account internal resources and external aid
available for such programmes, specific action programmes in housing and environmental development'
consistent with the targets and standards recommended;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to explore appropriate methods of expanding, within the framework of
the United Nations programmes of technical cooperation and with the co-operation of interested Governments, the programme of pilot projects in housing,
building and planning as a means of facilitating the
achievement of national targets for the remainder of
the Decade;
6. Invites the Managing Director of the Special Fund
to consider the feasibility of including suitable aspects
of such pilot projects among the pre-investment activities essential for environmental development as part
of general development ;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Secretary -General to report to the General Assembly
at its nineteenth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1918 (XVIII). Capital punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1396 (XIV) of 20 November
1959, in which the Economic and Social Council was
invited to initiate a study of the question of capital
punishment, of the laws and practices relating thereto,
and of the effects of capital punishment and the abolition
· thereof on the rate of criminality,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 747
(XXIX) of 6 April 1960 concerning the procedure for
the study of the question of capital punishment,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 934 (XXXV) of 9 April 1963 relating to capital
punishment,
l. Endorses the action of the Eccnomic and Social
Council in its resolution 934 (XXXV);
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights to study the
report entitled Capital Punishment6 and the comments
thereon of the Ad H oc Advisory Committee of Experts
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders,'' and to make such recommendations on the
matter as it deems appropriate;
e United Nations publication, Sales No.: 62.IV.2.
1 Officio/

Records of the Economic and Social Council,

Thirty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 11, document

E/3724, section IH.

3. Requests the Secretary-General, after examining
the report of the Commission on Human Rights and
with the CO·Oreration of the Consultative Group on the
Prevention 6 Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
to present a report, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly not later than at its
twenty-second session on new developments with respect to the law and practice concernin{ the death
penalty and new contributions of the criminal sciences
in the matter.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.
1919 (XVIII). United Nations Children'• Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1773 (XVII) of 7 December

1962,
1. Takes note with approval of the work of the
United Nations Children's Fund which, while continuing to be devoted to the fields of child health, nutrition
and social welfare, has now been extended to include
education and vocational training as well ;
2. Recommends that Governments, when planning
their economic and social development, should take into
account the importance of meeting the needs of children
and youth and should use to the full such facilities as
the United Nations Children's Fund can provide, including aid for the training of national personnel, in
order to help prepare them for life;
3. Calls upon Member States to continue to contribute as much as they can to the United Nations
Children's Fund.
1274th plenary meeting,
5 December 1963.

1920 (XVIll). Participation of women in national
social and economic development
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance of developing human
resources in order to accelerate social and economic
progress,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
961 E (section II), F and G (XXXVI) of 12 July
1963 and 975 B and C (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963,
Considering General Assembly resolution 1777
(XVII) of 7 December 1962 concerning United Nations
assista!lce for the advancement of women in developing
countries.
Believing in the necessity of women playing their full
part, on equal terms with men, in planning for balanced
and co-ordinated economic and social development, and
in the execution of such plans,
Recognising the contribution of women to national
social development programmes, particularly those relating to community development and social welfare
and the importance of such programmes to the advance~
ment of women in general,
Affirming the importance of training women for such
participation at all levels of social and economic development by means of appropriate programmes in the
economic and social fields, including the fields of educati~n_, vocati~nal training,. eradi~at.ion ?f illiteracy,
nutrition, public health, public adm1mstratton, housing
social welfare, and urban and rural development,
'
1. Calls the attention of Governments of States Members of the United Nations and members of the spe-
