S/2021/409

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 27 April 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
transmit herewith the fifty-ninth report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from 16 October 2020 to 15 April
2021, which I received from the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you could bring the report to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-05527 (E)

140521

*2105527*

S/2021/409

Annex
Letter dated 20 April 2021 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
accordance with annex 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I transmit herewith the fifty -ninth report of
the High Representative. I would kindly request that the report be distributed to the
members of the Council for their consideration.
This is my twenty-fifth regular report to the Secretary-General since assuming
the post of High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European Union
Special Representative on 26 March 2009. The present report covers the period from
16 October 2020 to 15 April 2021.
Should you or any member of the Security Council require any information
beyond what is provided in the report, or have any questions regarding its contents, I
should be pleased to provide you with that information.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina

2/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

Fifty-ninth report of the High Representative for Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
Summary
The present report covers the period from 16 October 2020 to 15 April 2021.
After more than one year since the global outbreak of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the midst of the latest wave of
infection, with daily new cases and deaths from the virus at an all-time high,
especially in the region of Sarajevo. Restrictive measures, including curfews, have
been reintroduced in most areas. Vaccines have only been trickling in, largely through
donations, and a coordinated immunization effort is still in th e very early stages. As
at 15 April 2021, since the first outbreak in 2020, the reported total of confirmed cases
of COVID-19 infection stood at approximately 182,000, and deaths from the virus in
Bosnia and Herzegovina stood at approximately 7,250.
Although Bosnia and Herzegovina is not alone in the world in terms of
experiencing difficulties in procuring vaccines and rolling out a vaccination
programme, the pandemic nonetheless continues to reveal serious dysfunctionality in
the country, whereby political leaders and authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina too
frequently sacrifice a unified and coordinated approach to combating the pandemic
and easing its impact on the population and the economy, in favour of scoring political
points against one another. This has led to a situation in which, in the absence of
measures pursued by the relevant State-level authorities, the entities have taken
unilateral and uncoordinated measures, resulting in different solutions being
undertaken in different parts of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Frustration
among citizens has led to protests calling for an urgent effort by the authorities in the
procurement of vaccines and other measures to stem the pandemic, or otherwise to
resign.
Of concern are the recent challenges by the Republika Srpska authorities – under
the de facto leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency member and leader of
the main Serb party, the Independent Union of Social Democrats (SNSD), Milorad
Dodik – to the fundamentals of the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
including my office, the decisions of my predecessors and the appointment of my
successor, as well as to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as part of their long-standing policy aiming to roll back reforms and
reclaim competences from the State, as I have enumerated in my reports, including
my special report in 2016. In March, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska
adopted several conclusions in that regard, including a call for an end t o the military
component of the international mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina under annex 1 -A
to the General Framework Agreement for Peace. Most troubling, the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska called upon local political actors to engage in
discussions on the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and warned that, if the issue is
not tabled on the agenda soon, “talks on peaceful dissolution should be launched”.
The mention of “peaceful dissolution”, while also calling for the withdrawal of
the international military presence in the country, can only be interpreted as a threat
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and thus to the
peace and stability of the country, which is assuredly how a great many of its citizens
understood it. I must reiterate that the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
has consistently reaffirmed its unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity and
fundamental structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single, sovereign State

21-05527

3/40

S/2021/409

comprising two entities. There will be no redrawing of the map of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
While the leaders of the Republika Srpska focused their attacks against the
General Framework Agreement for Peace and the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Federation remained barely functional. A new Federation Government has still not
been appointed, two and half years since the October 2018 general elections, which
is inconceivable in a democratic State based on the rule of law, under free and fair
elections.
The sitting Government from the previous mandate is missing two ministers,
and their replacements cannot be appointed because the main Croat party, the Croat
Democratic Union (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), and the main Bosniak Party, the
Party for Democratic Action (SDA), remain mired in a stalemate over electoral
reforms, and the former has vowed not to support any new appointments in the
Federation until an agreement is reached. I deplore the fact that one of those elements
has become a precondition to discuss the other. The formation of authorities should
be an absolute priority for all political parties in democratic societies. Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be no exception. Meanwhile, the Federation Prime Minister
(SDA) and Deputy Prime Minister (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina) are embroiled in
a corruption scandal and are on trial for the dubious procurement of 100 ventilators
at the start of the pandemic, the suitability of which for critical COVID -19 cases has
frequently been disputed and is being investigated by the competent authorities.
At the State level, there is complete stagnation, evidenced by the poor legislative
output of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly. During the current mandate, apart from budget
acts, only one new law has been fully adopted. This is part of a general decline in
legislative output over the past several mandates but is nonetheless a new low.
In such an environment, it should come as no surprise that the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities have made no progress in implementing the “5 plus 2”
agenda, with the exception of the continued positive trend in Brčko District. Not only
has there been no progress on the other objectives, there are also frequent attem pts to
roll back existing reforms in crucial areas.
Incredibly enough, against this bleak backdrop, there were some positive
developments.
In November, citizens voted in the 2020 local elections for mayoral candidates
and local assemblies in cities and municipalities in the Federation and the Republika
Srpska, and for the Assembly in Brčko District. A month later, citizens of the Mostar
voted in the first elections for the Mostar City Council since 2008. The work of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Central Election Commission in successfully organizing two
consecutive elections during a pandemic, and in the face of continued political attacks
against the institution, taking appropriate safety measures into account and organizing
mobile polling teams for quarantined voters, while also reacting promptly to reports
of fraud and malfeasance, is commendable. I continue to oppose any attempt to
undermine the professionalism and legitimacy of this crucial Bosnia and Herzegovina
institution.
These recent elections have shown that goodwill in the institutions charged with
conducting elections is not enough to make up for flaws in the system. 2021
constitutes a window of opportunity for electoral reform, which must result in the
implementation of the technical recommendations by the Office of Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights following the 2018 general elections, as well as the
earlier recommendations of the Group of States against Corruption and the Council
of Europe Venice Commission. The adoption of amendments to the Constitution and
4/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina are also required to implement decisions of
the European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić and Finci group of cases and bring
an end to ethnic-based and residence-based discrimination in the electoral process.
All of those changes are crucial and must be implemented in a manner that makes the
electoral system more transparent and more open. I have made clear that changes
cannot result in further ethnic or territorial divisions in Bosnia and He rzegovina.
There is no legal reason that would justify such divisions, and I strongly believe that
the implementation of the Sejdić and Finci group of cases gives us an historic
opportunity to move the Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions away from
discrimination and closer to openness.
In October, the members of the frequently-divided tripartite Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the initialling of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Dayton, Ohio, United Stat es of America,
with a rare joint statement expressing their commitment to respecting the provisions
of the Agreement and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution and to creating a
society in Bosnia and Herzegovina tailored to all its peoples and citizens.
In December, after several public calls by me – including in my address to the
Security Council in November – for the Republika Srpska authorities to remove the
plaque bearing the name of convicted war criminal Radovan Karadžić from the
student dormitory in the town of Pale, the plaque was finally and formally removed.
December also marked the fifteenth anniversary of the establishment of the
Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, one of the most meaningful and successful
post-Dayton reforms. Members of the Armed Forces serve with distinction in
peacekeeping missions around the world.
In March, Brčko District authorities demonstrated their commitment to reforms
by adopting the Law on the Prevention of Conflict of Interest, which establishes clear
guidelines, reporting requirements and sanctions to ensure that public office holders
carry out their activities in line with the public’s interest and not their personal
interests. The enactment of the Law will accelerate other good governance reforms in
Brčko District, ensure the responsible expenditure of public funds and establish a
welcoming environment for private sector investment, all of which are good examples
of what is possible in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

21-05527

5/40

S/2021/409

I. Introduction
1.
This is my twenty-fifth regular report submitted since my appointment in 2009
as High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It contains a narrative
description of progress made towards goals outlined in previous reports, information
on factual developments, relevant citations and my impartial assessment of the degree
of implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in key areas within
my responsibility to uphold the civilian aspects of the Agreement.
2.
I continue to focus on fulfilling my mandate in accordance with annex 10 to the
General Framework Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Specifically, I continue to encourage the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
make progress on the five objectives and two conditions necessary fo r the closure of
the Office of the High Representative, which presupposes full compliance with the
Agreement. The authorities must focus on full compliance or otherwise risk
encouraging further rollback of the reforms enacted to implement the Agreement. My
office fully supports the aspirations of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards European
Union integration, as reflected in decisions adopted by the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

II. Political update
A.

General political environment
3.
On 15 November, citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina voted in the 2020 local
elections for 143 units of local self-government (municipalities, cities and the Brčko
District). On 15 December – despite various challenges in the process and allegations
of fraud – in particular concerning out-of-country voter registration and mail-in
ballots – the Bosnia and Herzegovina Central Election Commission confirmed the
results of the local elections in accordance with the deadline to do so within 30 days
following the election date. While opposition parties to varying degrees scored
electoral wins over the main ruling parties in some urban areas, most notably in
Sarajevo and Banja Luka, this development posed no immediate threat to the overall
dominance of the Party for Democratic Action (SDA), the Independent Union of
Social Democrats (SNSD), and the Croat Democratic Union (HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina), which remain the most powerful political forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
4.
Of the main parties, SDA, suffered the greatest loss, losing five mayoral races
and seven municipal councils out of the nine municipalities comprising Sarajevo
Canton to parties from the civic-oriented coalition known as “the four”, including Our
Party (NS), People and Justice (NiP), the Social Democrati c Party (SDP) and the
Independent Bosnia and Herzegovina List (NBL).
5.
In the mayoral races in the de facto Republika Srpska capital Banja Luka and
the entity’s second largest city Bijeljina, SNSD -aligned incumbents were
unexpectedly ousted by candidates from opposition parties Platform for Democratic
Progress (PDP) and the Serb Democratic Party (SDS), respectively. SNSD
nonetheless retained its dominance in most Republika Srpska municipalities, while
HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina was even less affected in Croat-majority cities and
municipalities in the Federation.
6.
The Central Election Commission registered irregularities in three Republika
Srpska units of local self-government: the municipality of Srebrenica and the cities
of Doboj and Zvornik. The Central Election Commission ultimately confirmed the
results in Zvornik, but in January it annulled the results in Srebrenica and Doboj.

6/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

Following the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court’s rejection of several appeals against
the annulments, the Central Election Commission announced repeat elections for
most polling stations in Doboj and Srebrenica in February. Objecting to the Central
Election Commission’s decision not to include allegedly approximately 1,000 mail in votes in the repeat elections, Bosniak/pro-Bosnian parties gathered under the “My
Address Srebrenica” coalition to announce their boycott. Repeat elections were held
under increased scrutiny on 21 February. Although the “My Address Srebrenica”
parties did not participate in the repeat elections in Srebrenic a, they ultimately
accepted the six municipal assembly mandates won in the polling stations in which
the results had not been annulled.
7.
In unprecedented circumstances, the victorious mayoral candidates in the
Federation municipalities of Travnik and Foča-Ustikolina both passed away due to
complications from COVID-19. In Travnik, the winning candidate from SDA actually
died on election day, prompting HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina to demand the Central
Election Commission declare its mayoral candidate, the runner-up, as the winner. The
Commission certified the results in both mayoral races and announced early mayoral
elections. HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed against the Commission’s decision
to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court, which rejected the appeal, clearing the way for
the Commission to set the early election date for 11 April in both municipalities.
8.
I must commend the Bosnia and Herzegovina Central Election Commission in
that regard for being resolute and dedicated to prevent, investigate and san ction
electoral fraud, in particular by ensuring the transparency of out-of-country voter
registration.
9.
On 20 December, for the first time in eight years, citizens of Mostar cast their
votes for a new City Council. After the appeals procedure and sever al recounts, the
Central Election Commission published the election results on 20 January. As
expected, HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina and the SDA-dominated “Coalition for
Mostar” won the most seats in the 35-seat council – 13 and 11, respectively – but with
a healthy showing by opposition parties and the first councillor elected from a joint
Serb list.
10. The Mostar City Council held its inaugural session on 5 February, electing the
Council leadership and peoples’ caucuses. Unfortunately, the City Council de cided
by a wide majority to conduct the election of the mayor by public ballot – despite the
stipulation in the Statute of the City of Mostar that the mayor is to be elected by secret
ballot – and proceeded with the first round of voting. Thus, I was force d to intervene,
and addressed a letter to the City Council advising them to remedy the situation by
adhering to the Statute and electing the mayor by secret ballot, including a repeat of
the first round accordingly.
11. Following my intervention, the Mostar City Council proceeded to elect the
mayor by secret ballot in accordance with the Statute. In the third round of voting on
15 February, the City Council elected the HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina candidate,
Mario Kordić.
12. The elections in that cycle revealed significant opportunities for manipulation
in the process and illustrated the need to implement the technical recommendations
of the Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights following the 2018 general
elections, as well as earlier recommendations of the Group of States against
Corruption and the Council of Europe Venice Commission. In addition to those
crucial reforms, the adoption of amendments to the Constitution and Election Law of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are required in order to implement decisions of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić and Finci group of cases, of which the judgment
in the eponymous case remains unimplemented after nearly 12 years.

21-05527

7/40

S/2021/409

13. To that end, and in the context of integration with the European Union, th e
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina has persistently underlined the
importance of establishing an inter-agency working group to work on amendments to
the Election Law. On 17 March, the Joint Collegium of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly adopted a conclusion on the establishment of the
inter-agency working group, to include representatives from both houses of the
Parliamentary Assembly and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, but
excluding the Central Election Commission from full participation (although it would
be invited “as needed”), due to opposition from HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina and
SNSD, despite the urging of the international community to include the Commission.
On 30 March, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives failed to support
the Joint Collegium’s proposal, instead returning it to the Joint Collegium with
additional proposals, including the inclusion of the Central Election Commission and
opposition political parties. On 15 April, the Joint Collegium agreed to include in the
inter-agency working group one member from each of the political party clubs in the
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives, thus ensuring the participation of
opposition parties, but again declined to include the Central Election Commission.
The Joint Collegium returned the proposal to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly for further consideration.
14. Parallel to those crucial reforms, when SDA leader Bakir Izetbegović and HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina leader Dragan Čović signed the agreement in June of 2020
that enabled the holding of elections in Mostar, they signed a second agreement on
principles for amending the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law, committing to
implement relevant court decisions aimed at eliminating inequality and
discrimination in the electoral process and to secure the legitimate political
representation of constituent peoples and citizens at all levels in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples, and the
Federation House of Peoples within six months and to secure the adoption of the
relevant amendments by the end of 2021.
15. Owing to the party leaders’ opposing views of the existing constitutional
arrangements in Bosnia and Herzegovina, differing interpretations of European Court
of Human Rights judgments and decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court, as well as the manner of their implementation, views on how to
proceed differ widely. HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina favours models based on
ensuring the equality of three constituent peoples, in which each constituent peoples
is equally represented by “legitimate” representatives. This would require further
ethnicization of the system by redefining electoral constituencies in the Federation on
the basis of ethno-territorial division or ethnic declaration of voters declared in the
2013 Census, while SDA favours a model whereby representation extends to others
and to citizens, in which a balance between collective rights and in dividual rights
must be ensured and the role and responsibilities of the Federation House of Peoples
should be diminished to match those of the Republika Srpska Council of Peoples.
16. Moreover, until recently, HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina maintained the po sition
that the political conditions for amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution do not exist, which limited implementation of the agreement to
amending the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law, which cannot alone implement
the judgments in the Sejdić and Finci group of cases, for which constitutional reforms
are necessary. In a letter to the international community in October, Mr. Izetbegović
said that implementing the proposals of HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina would
permanently prevent the implementation of the European Court of Human Rights
judgments.
17. As a result, unsurprisingly, the six-month deadline for reaching an agreement
passed on 17 December with no agreement.
8/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

18. HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to condition the formation of th e
Federation Government on electoral reform, while SDA has suggested that formation
of the Federation Government should precede such an agreement. Thus, at the
Federation level, the results of the 2018 general elections remain unimplemented and
a new government has not been appointed. Likewise, a new government in
Herzegovina-Neretva Canton, where the political balance between SDA and HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina is similar to that at the Federation level, has not yet been
appointed. In Canton 10, which had also been without a new government following
the 2018 general elections, the Assembly finally confirmed a new government in
December, led by Prime Minister Ivan Vukadin of the Croat National Advancement
(HNP), a breakaway party from HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina.
19. On 17 February, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska adopted a
conclusion by which it requested the High Representative to present to it a report
within 90 days on the implementation of civilian aspects of the Peace Agreement for
the period 1995–2020. In reaction to reports of the imminent appointment of my
successor as High Representative, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska
also adopted a conclusion calling on representatives of the international community
to use their authority to prevent the appointment of a new High Representative. I note
that this session was held not long after I addressed a letter to the Speaker of the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska, Nedeljko Čubrilović (Democratic
Alliance-DEMOS), in which I requested that the Assembly revoke within three
months decorations awarded in 2016 by an ad hoc committee of the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska to convicted war criminals Radovan Karadžić,
Momčilo Krajišnik and Biljana Plavšić.
20. On 10 March, in a special session convened at the request of SNSD President
Milorad Dodik, who insisted that the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska
declare its position on the reports of the imminent appointment of my successor as
High Representative, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska adopted a set of
10 conclusions that undermine and distort the fundamentals of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. Among other things, the conclusions assert that a
new High Representative cannot be appointed without the approval of the Republika
Srpska, that the appointments of the High Representatives to date, with the exception
of the first High Representative, Carl Bildt, were contrary to annex 10 to the
Agreement and that my office should be closed. Furthermore, the National Assembly
of the Republika Srpska called for an end to the military component of the
international mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina under annex 1-A, which would mean
a withdrawal of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovin a. The
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska also called on political actors to discuss
the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and warned that, if that does not happen, talks
on peaceful separation should be launched, in line with the Charter of the Unit ed
Nations. Furthermore, the conclusions call for the establishment of legal teams to
initiate legal proceedings against High Representatives and to conduct a review of
constitutional competences with the aim of restoring them to the Republika Srpska. I
note that the Republika Srpska opposition parties did not participate in the vote.
21. Regarding the position of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska that
the appointment of the High Representative requires the consent of the parties to
annex 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace, in that annex the parties
requested the designation of a High Representative, to be appointed consistent with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the first of which was resolution 1031
(1995), which was adopted one day after the signing of the Agreement. In that
resolution, the Security Council welcomed the establishment of the Peace
Implementation Council and its Steering Board and agreed to the Council’s
appointment of Mr. Bildt as High Representative in London six days earlier. A similar
21-05527

9/40

S/2021/409

procedure has been used for the appointment of other High Representatives. The
relevant Security Council resolutions do not require the consent of the parties t o annex
10. It is also clear that the “request for the designation of a High Representative”
provided for in annex 10 is made for as long as the implementation of civilian aspects
of the Agreement requires.
22. While many elements of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska
conclusions relate directly to the positions set forth in previous documents adopted
by the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska, in many ways they go beyond. By
calling into question the legality of nearly everything that has been undertaken under
annex 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace, the conclusions constitute
an extension of the Republika Srpska policy towards Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
State. The strategy reflected in the conclusions concerning annex 10 are no different
than the views that the Republika Srpska institutions have taken towards annex 4 –
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution. The views of the Republika Srpska on the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution have led to it opting out of many aspects of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution that it does not support by rejecting numerous
decisions taken by the Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions, in particular the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. Likewise, the conclusions concerning civil ian
implementation aim to allow the Republika Srpska to opt out of annex 10 by claiming
that everything undertaken since 1997 – the year the Bonn powers of the High
Representative were endorsed by the Peace Implementation Council (and affirmed by
the Security Council in 1998) – has been illegal.
23. The positions concerning the High Representative’s mandate and rejection of
decisions under that mandate not only challenge the actions undertaken on the basis
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace and Security Council resolutions
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, but have far-reaching
consequences. Rejecting past decisions of the High Representative would roll back
many reform achievements of the past 25 years, including laws regulating various
institutions, such as the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, the Mostar
City institutions, the State-level judicial institutions, many Federation and cantonal
institutions and the State Border Service, as well as various other fields, including
State symbols, Bosnia and Herzegovina citizenship and the unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces. This is a threat to the State, its
competences and institutions and their ability to take and enforce decision s.
24. While I urge the Security Council to take these threats seriously, more than
anything I urge the political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular in the
Republika Srpska in this case, to stop playing these dangerous games and instead take
seriously the responsibilities that the people have entrusted to them, as well as their
stated commitments to upholding the General Framework Agreement for Peace and
to the pathway of Bosnia and Herzegovina to accession to the European Union.
25. On 1 April, the one-year anniversary was marked of the deadline for
implementing the October 2019 decision of the European Court of Human Rights in
the case of Orlović and others v. Bosnia and Herzegovina, related to the Serbian
Orthodox church illegally constructed in 1998 on the private property of the Orlović
family in the village of Konjević Polje, near Bratunac, in the Republika Srpska. In its
judgment, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that Bosnia and Herzegovina
must take the measures necessary to ensure the enforcement of earlier decisions by
official bodies and remove the church from the property. When the judgment was
announced, Mr. Dodik publicly indicated his support for implementing the decision. 1
__________________
1

10/40

On 7 October 2019, Mr. Dodik said on FTV: “I am in favor of agreeing operationally how the
church should be relocated. I was for that five years ago. I prefer that attitude and I think the
story needs to end.”
21-05527

S/2021/409

However, as the deadline approached several months later, he reversed his position, 2
and nothing has been done since to implement the judgment. The illegally constructed
church remains in the yard of elderly Bosniak returnee Fata Orlović, a few metres
from her front porch. Again, I underline that the European Court of Human Rights
judgment in the Sejdić and Finci case has been pending implementation for 12 years.
Likewise, Ms. Orlović has been pursuing justice in her case for 20 years and does not
have another 20 years to wait.
26. In that regard, authorities at all levels continue to disregard or reject the final
and binding decisions of the judiciary, including, for example, in the Federation with
regard to decisions of the Federation Constitutional Court requiring a number of
cantons to harmonize their constitutions with the Federation Constitution in order to
ensure, inter alia, the equality of Serbs as a constituent people.
27. The Republika Srpska authorities persistently reject judgments of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court and the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court
concerning the registration of defence property and the decisions of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court regarding the 9 January “Republika Srpska Day”
holiday, observing the holiday again in 2021.
28. The rule of law is a crucial tenet of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace, and the current level of contempt for international and domestic court
decisions cannot remain unchecked without an increased risk of Bosnia and
Herzegovina sliding further towards a state of legal anarchy. It is difficult to give a
positive assessment of Bosnia and Herzegovina when its leaders persistently and
openly refuse to respect binding court rulings. Claiming respect for the rule of law is
meaningless if it is not followed with action.
29. In April, East Sarajevo (Republika Srpska) City Mayor Ljubiša Ćosić (SNSD)
addressed a letter to the Sarajevo City authorities calling for the removal of the
plaques on Sarajevo City Hall and Ferhadija Street, which he said characterized the
Serb people as criminals and aggressors. Mr. Ćosić also requested the renaming of
several streets in Sarajevo, which he said bore the names of members of fascist
movements. According to him, the plaques and street names insulted and instilled fear
in the Serb people. Recently elected Sarajevo City Mayor Benjamina Karić (SDP)
rebuffed the request but invited Mr. Ćosić to discuss development and joint projects.
30. The issues raised are worthy of discussion as an important step towards
reconciliation, which is a sorely missing element in the current public discourse.
However, an honest and open discussion of these issues cannot be one-sided and
should also address public displays that glorify convicted war criminals, such as the
plaque dedicated to Ratko Mladić at the entrance to East Sarajevo at the Vraca
Memorial Park, a protected national monument.
31. Similar issues exist in other parts of the country, and the authorities and citizens
should be open in discussing them with the aim of finding a resolution fo r each
municipality and city in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which every citizen and every
visitor may feel secure, welcome and respected.
32. In December, the plaque dedicating a student dormitory in Pale in the Republika
Srpska to Radovan Karadžić, the wartime president of the Republika Srpska who was
__________________
2

21-05527

According to the Republika Srpska News Agency, on 28 February 2020, Mr. Dodik said, when
addressing the Republika Srpska National Assembly: “I had said earlier [the church] should be
relocated, now I think it should not. There you are. Until everything is solved, there is no
solution. Until everything is clear, nothing should be done. I had said earlier publicly this should
be done, as a human being, that is, but now as a responsible official I think it should not, until w e
resolve all open issues in our mutual relations, even if it concerns the European Court; let this
European Court resolve the Sejdić-Finci issue.”
11/40

S/2021/409

convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to 40 years
of imprisonment for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, was finally
removed. I had been calling for its removal since it was unveiled in 2016, most
recently during my 5 November address to the Security Council, which may have
accelerated the removal. Following that welcome development, earlier in 2021 I
requested that the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska revoke the decorations
that one of its committees awarded in 2016 to three convicted war criminals.
33. On 13 April, the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Suffering of Serbs in Sarajevo between 1991 and 1995 released its concluding 1 ,250page report, dated October 2020. The Commission was appointed by the Republika
Srpska Government in early 2019, pursuant to the August 2018 conclusions of the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska, in which it repealed the Republika
Srpska Government’s 2004 Srebrenica report, in which the Republika Srpska
Government had acknowledged the involvement of Republika Srpska military and
police forces in the July 1995 events in Srebrenica. Despite the Commission’s claim
of independence, it is impossible to disregard the political factors behind the report,
including the challenge to the established narratives regarding the outbreak of war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992 and the attempt to establish an equivalence between
the genocide in Srebrenica and Serb victims in Sarajevo. Nevertheless, the
humanitarian issues concerning Serb individuals and families still missing 25 years
after the war warrant further review and assistance from the appropriate authorities
in bringing closure to those and all such tragic matters.
34. As a key transit country on the migration route towards the European Union,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to see a constant inflow of migrants and refugees,
nearly all of whom enter from neighbouring Serbia. At any given time, there are
approximately 6,000 to 8,000 migrants in the country. Migrants and refugees are
accommodated in the Federation, primarily in Una-Sana Canton owing to its
proximity to the Croatian border, with fewer numbers in Sarajevo and Tuzla Cantons.
While the burden of providing shelter and food assistance has fallen entirely on the
Federation, the Republika Srpska authorities remain adamant in refusing to allow the
establishment of any reception centres within their entity, again preventing the State
from exercising its responsibilities. A number of incidents involving migrants over
the past six months have further stirred tensions between the authorities, the migrants
and the local population. While the State-level authorities continue to seek the means
to return individuals who irregularly enter Bosnia and Herzegovina to their countries
of origin, including signing a readmission agreement with Pakistan in November, they
must nonetheless continue to uphold their obligations under international and
domestic law to provide access to rights, including the right to seek asylum, in
accordance with humanitarian standards.

B.

Decisions of the High Representative during the reporting period
35. Despite frequent challenges to the core principles of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace during the reporting period, I have refrained from using my
executive powers – despite increasing calls from citizens to do so – pursuant to the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board policy advocating local ownership
over international decision-making.

12/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

C.

Five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative

1.

Progress on objectives
36. My office has continued to seek progress by the domestic authorities in the full
implementation of the five objectives and two conditions established in 2008 by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board as essential for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative and the graduation of Bosnia and Herzegovina from
international supervision. The aim of setting the so-called “5 plus 2” agenda was for
the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to assume responsibility and demonstrate their
credibility; the onus remains on the authorities to deliver on progress with respect to
the agenda. With the exception of the generally positive trends in Brčko District, the
authorities elsewhere show no commitment to the “5 plus 2” agenda and have even
pursued rollbacks in many key areas.

2.

State and defence property
37. There have been some developments related to State and defence property, but
unfortunately no substantial progress towards achieving acceptable and sustainable
resolution, as defined by the “5 plus 2” agenda. As emphasized on several occasions,
only the adoption of comprehensive State-level legislation on State property, which
complies fully with legal principles established by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution and the relevant decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court, can lead to the acceptable and sustainable resolution of the issue of State
property. In the meantime, the Office of the High Representative continues to monitor
developments, including the adoption and implementation of various relevant
property-related laws and regulations, with the aim of ensuring enforcement of the
State property disposal ban, thereby protecting the property interests of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and other relevant stakeholders prior to the enactment of
appropriate State property legislation.
38. No significant progress can be reported in the process of registering prospective
defence property as under the ownership of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
particular in the Republika Srpska, that process remains completely blocked, despite
several court decisions clearly establishing that such property belongs to the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and should be registered as such in relevant public records.
As the responsible Republika Srpska authorities continue to ignore the existing legal
framework and reject the legal arguments and reasoning in the final and binding court
decisions, instead declining for political reasons to register such ownership of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, this has become a pressing issue of the rule of law.
39. On 13 November in Banja Luka, Republika Srpska Prime Minister Radovan
Višković (SNSD) and Serbian Prime Minister Ana Brnabić signed a joint statement
related to the construction of three hydropower plants in the upper Drina River basin,
in the Foča area in the eastern Republika Srpska. Ms. Brnabić stated that the
investment totalled €520 million and that Serbia had already allocated the resources
needed for the work through 2021. Meanwhile, the Republika Srpska Government
issued a decision to approve the change of ownership structure of the concessionaire
HES Gornja Drina, thereby allowing the transfer to the Serbian electric company
Elektroprivreda Srbije of 51 per cent of the shares of HES Gornja Drina, which holds
the concession to build three hydropower plants on the Upper Drina.
40. In reaction, some Federation-based, primarily Bosniak political parties issued
statements dismissing the signed joint statement and the planned construction of
hydropower plants as an attack on Bosnia and Herzegovina sovereignty, insisting that
such agreements may only be concluded with the State-level authorities. They

21-05527

13/40

S/2021/409

claimed that the construction plans were legally deficient, as they relied on Republika
Srpska legislation that designated all rivers in Republika Srpska territory a s property
of that entity, which the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court previously
declared unconstitutional and annulled. In the 7 February 2020 decision of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, in case No. U-9/19, which also refers to the
relevant jurisprudence of the Court’s 13 July 2012 decision in case No. U -1/11,
waters, as public goods, are considered State property, i.e., property of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This includes river water and riverbeds, lakes and running
water. Furthermore, the Court established that decisions concerning State property
are to be made at the Bosnia and Herzegovina State level, considering that the
decision on the status of State property is within the exclusive competence of the
State.
41. Following those developments, on 28 December, 24 members of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Representatives submitted a request to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court initiating a constitutional dispute over the planned
construction. In their submission, representatives claimed that the Republika Srpska,
primarily the Republika Srpska Government, had violated the constitutional
competencies of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, since the concession decisions
and related contracts issued and concluded by the Republika Srpska Government
constituted acts of disposing of State property. Referencing conclusions and
principles in previous Court decisions, the representatives claimed that the Republika
Srpska had violated several provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution.
In that regard, they requested the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court to
annul the relevant decisions and contracts of the Republika Srpska Government and
to issue a temporary measure suspending their implementation, considering that
continuation of related activities would cause harmful legal effects.
42. In January, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives adopted an
initiative submitted by SDA representative/Deputy Speaker Denis Zvizdić regarding
the use and disposal of non-prospective immovable military property, by which it
tasked the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers to prepare and submit to the
parliamentary procedure, within 30 days of the adoption of the initiative, a draft law
on the method of use and disposal of non-prospective immovable military property.
The initiative was based on the principle whereby certain property that is no longer
required by the Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions to exercise their constitutional
and legal competences should be assigned for use or disposal to a local self government unit in the territory where that property is situated, for the purpose of
either protecting it from further decay or reconstructing it for use in the development
of local communities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In principle, the initiative is
welcome, as it revives a public, institutionalized discussion on the issue of State and
defence property. In general, the initiative complies with the two basic principles
established by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court that: (a) the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is the titleholder of all State property, including so -called
“non-prospective defence property”; and (b) that the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly has the exclusive responsibility to regulate the issue of
(apportionment of) State property. The initiative is currently with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers, which is tasked with its implementation.
43. In February, seven Bosniak delegates of the Republika Srpska Council of
Peoples submitted to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court a request to
review the constitutionality of the Republika Srpska Law on Forests, claiming that
the contested Law violates several provisions and principle s of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution. The primary legal argument is the constitutional principle
of “continuation of laws”, on the basis of which the Law on Forests – adopted by the
former Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina – is still in force and part of the legal
14/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

system of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as it is consistent with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution and was never abolished by a competent body.
Furthermore, a legal argument was made related to State property, according to which
forests and forestland represent a public good and – pursuant to previous decisions of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court regarding succession assets,
agricultural land, waters, etc. – are a category of State property that belongs to the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. To prevent the reregistration and further disposal
of forests and forestland, as well as other harmful legal effects for this category of
property, the delegates requested the issuance of a temporary measure forbidding the
application of the Republika Srpska Law on Forests until the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court issues a final decision.
44. The submission of that request to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court was followed by harsh public statements from several R epublika Srpska
politicians, who said the appeal constitutes a direct violation of annex 4 to the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which, as they continue to erroneously claim, regulates that
property belongs to the entities.
3.

Brčko District
45. My office has continued to provide expert and technical support to the Brčko
District Supervisor in encouraging and guiding good governance, infrastructure
development and private sector growth reforms so as to achieve a functional,
sustainable and resilient District in line with the stated objectives of the Final Award.
The Supervisor, with the support of staff of the Office of the High Representative,
engaged actively with international community partners to ensure a coordinated and
results-oriented approach to help accelerate that outcome.
46. The fiscal reforms from the previous period – including the successful
completion of the fiscalization process and the adoption of a new budget law aimed
at improving fiscal discipline, transparency and responsibility in spendin g – prompted
District authorities to focus on the bylaws required for the full application of the
budget law in the 2021 budget cycle. Their adoption was finalized in mid -March.
Owing to the local elections on 15 November and the subsequent process of form ing
new authorities in the District, and the delayed adoption of the bylaws, the District
did not meet the 30 November deadline for the adoption of the 2021 budget.
Nonetheless, the continuity of financing of the District institutions was secured
through the adoption of the decision on temporary financing for the first quarter of
the year. On 31 March, the District Assembly, under the defining parameters of the
bylaws, adopted the draft 2021 budget in the amount of KM 238 million.
47. Additional good governance measures enacted in the previous reporting period –
notably the Law on Peaceful Assembly, the Law on Foundations and Associations, the
Law on National Minorities and the online registry of public sector employees and
appointees and their assets – encouraged District authorities to adopt new
complementary initiatives. The Law on Prevention of Conflict of Interest, adopted in
its final form on 24 March, is the first such law in Bosnia and Herzegovina that is in
line with international standards and best practices and will further strengthen good
governance in the District. Preparations for public administration reform are ongoing,
while improving the oversight of State-owned enterprises in the District by
monitoring their financial position and identifyin g and managing fiscal risks will
proceed in line with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) recommendations from
2020, and thus, as with the laws and public administration reform, will serve as a
model of reform for the entities.
48. Several steps were also undertaken to ensure a credible and issues-based
electoral process as key to re-establishing voter trust in elected officials, again as a

21-05527

15/40

S/2021/409

model for Bosnia and Herzegovina. This included updating the list of voters in Brčko
District, curbing the abuse of public funds for election purposes, investigating and
prosecuting allegations of election fraud, which included the arrest of the three sitting
Assembly representatives, and organizing the presence of independent observers for
each polling station in Brčko.
49. These steps helped not only to dissuade 3,000 suspicious overseas voters from
casting their ballots, but also to foster a new quality of politics and governance in the
District. A new multi-ethnic majority was formed on 23 December, just two weeks
after the certification of the 15 November elections. The agenda for its mandate has
been the rapid implementation of reforms introduced as deliverables into the issues based election campaign. On 8 April, three opposition parties in the Brčko District
Assembly, also reflecting different ethnic groups, signed an agreement on political
collaboration, with a focus on the rule of law, the fight against corruption and the
adoption of economic reforms. For the first time, the Assembly has committed to
adopting legislation in two readings and has placed opposition representatives on
committees, thus fostering transparent political and public debate on reform
legislation adopted in the District.
50. Despite being impeded by the COVID-19 pandemic throughout much of 2020,
key infrastructure projects resumed and accelerated towards the end of the year.
Preparations for the modernization of the Brčko Port and the construction of the
Brčko-Gunja Bridge were largely completed, paving the way towards commencing
construction works. The District and the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development reached an understanding on a €6.5 million project to ensure a
sustainable, clean water supply, while establishing a start date for the project in the
third quarter of 2021. The District authorities are also pursuing negotiations for an
array of infrastructure projects under the World Bank Sava and Drina Rivers Corridors
Integrated Development Programme.
51. The District also took steps towards mitigating the uncertainty of elec tricity
supply by securing a two-year electricity supply contract with the Republika Srpska
power utility company, Elekroprivreda Republika Srpska. In parallel, it moved to
diversify and strengthen its energy security by preparing legislation on electricit y,
renewable energy sources and energy efficiency to create a modern, European Union compliant legal framework for the energy sector. To further complement such efforts,
the District allocated KM 1.5 million for electricity infrastructure expansion and
commenced construction preparations, while the transfer by the District of ownership
rights over the electricity transmission facilities to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Electricity Transmission Company – aimed at ensuring continued maintenance of key
electricity transmission infrastructure and contributing to the security of electricity
supply – is expected to be completed in the second quarter of 2021.
52. While the District leadership’s efforts, with the extensive engagement of the
Supervisor and my office, in cooperation with other international organizations, are
crucial to maintain the positive reform trend in the District, there is also a requirement
on the part of the entities to facilitate the establishment of the District.
53. Regrettably, as in previous years, the commemoration of 9 January as
“Republika Srpska Day” was held in Brčko District on 10 January, organized on the
basis of decisions by the Republika Srpska authorities as part of the overall
commemoration activity for the Republika Srpska. In 2021, this included the presence
of the police band of the Republika Srpska Ministry of Interior. As such, the
commemoration organized in Brčko by the Republika Srpska authorities interferes
with the Final Award and the obligation of both entities not to e xercise any authority
within the District boundaries. On 1 February, I set out my views on the implications
of commemorating “Republika Srpska Day” on the basis of unconstitutional
16/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

legislation, including in Brčko District, to Republika Srpska President Žel jka
Cvijanović, Republika Srpska Prime Minister Višković (both SNSD) and the Speaker
of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska, Mr. Čubrilović (DEMOS),
reminding that all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly public
officeholders, are obliged to adhere to and to ensure respect for the constitutional
order of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
54. The 10 March conclusions of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska
are an attack on the constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina that build on the
previously articulated positions of the Republika Srpska authorities towards the State,
and thus are also a threat to Brčko District, given its unique status and its dependence
on the constitutional order and institutional structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina
developed over the past 25 years, including through the exercise of the High
Representative’s mandate.
55. Additional concerns over the status and powers of Brčko District arose from the
26 November decision of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, by which
it rejected the admissibility of the request of the Brčko District Appellate Court in the
case concerning the Brčko District Law on Attorney’s Profession. The Court’s
decision in the case – the first case brought before the Court under amendment I to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution – has far-reaching consequences regarding
the possibility to challenge acts that could affect the status and powers of Brčko
District, since it limits the possible applicants who may approach the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court on questions concerning the compatibility of laws
with amendment I. As such, the decision narrows the level of protection of the status
and powers of Brčko District before the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitut ional
Court. The Brčko District Supervisor has notified the presiding arbitrator of the
Arbitral Tribunal for Dispute over Inter-Entity Boundary in Brčko Area of the
substance of the decision and its implications, recognizing that the Tribunal clearly
retains its authorities to enforce or modify its Final Award if any party is in serious
non-compliance with its obligations under the Award.
4.

Fiscal sustainability
56. My office continued to follow, analyse and report on developments and
legislative actions relevant to fiscal sustainability, including monitoring and reporting
to the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board on the activities of the
Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority, in which the Office of the High
Representative is the only international community representative, and of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Fiscal Council. The trends in both institutions continue to raise
concerns over the ability of governments at all levels, particularly the State level, to
ensure the unimpeded functioning of institutions and the discharge of their
constitutional and legal obligations.
57. During the reporting period, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council held
only three sessions, all in December, in which it attempted to agree on a new three year IMF Extended Fund Facility programme. No such agreement was reached owing
to, inter alia, the continued opposition of the Republika Srpska officials in the Council
to reforms perceived as strengthening State competences and institutions. The
opposition was mostly evident in two areas singled out by IMF: promoting a single
economic space through reforms aimed at, inter alia, creating a single energy market,
and strengthening financial stability, both necessary in order to strengthen the
resilience of Bosnia and Herzegovina to an economic or financial crisis and to the
accelerated development of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its aspirations towards
European Union accession. Republika Srpska officials also opposed the reforms
needed to efficiently fight money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, such as
the establishment within the Bosnia and Herzegovina Central Bank of a nationwide

21-05527

17/40

S/2021/409

banking accounts registry for individuals. My office followed closely all
developments related to the Extended Fund Facility programme and was at the
disposal of IMF and members of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
for all inquiries and requests for political, economic and legal guidance during the
negotiations, and will remain engaged.
58. My office also continued to follow closely and report and advise on
developments related to the single indirect tax system and its institutional structure,
including activities of the Indirect Taxation Authority’s Governing Board. The Board
held four sessions, the most recent one late in March. While the sessions demonstrated
a higher degree of compliance with Board regulations, resulting in the adoption of the
indirect tax revenue allocation coefficients for the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first
quarter of 2021, other long-standing issues remained unresolved.
59. One example is the financial threat faced by the Indirect Taxation Authority as
a result of the Republika Srpska lawsuit against it for damages stemming from the
Federation debt to the Republika Srpska in 2009 and 20 10 (settled in 2011) and,
following a 2015 Bosnia and Herzegovina Court decision in its favour, the attempted
enforcement by the Republika Srpska of those damages against public revenue
accounts managed by the Authority. The consequences, which the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Court somewhat mitigated by suspending the attempted enforcement,
include financial damage to all indirect tax revenue beneficiaries, including both
entities and Brčko District, as well as recipients of value-added tax refunds and
customs insurance depositors, and are again attributed to and sought from the
Authority as the indirect tax system operator. Moreover, the lawsuit created a
precedent that opened the door to future entity lawsuits against the Authority over
their mutual debts, as well as for financial damages resulting from their enforcement.
60. Another long-standing inter-entity dispute that the Governing Board failed to
resolve in the reporting period concerns the manner of distribution of the accumulated
road toll revenue reserves (approximately KM 120 million) intended for highway and
road construction.
61. The failure to address those and similar issues burdens inter-entity relations and
affects the unimpeded functioning of and the confidence in the single indirect tax
system and its State-level institutional structure. By extension, this provides a pretext
for challenging the State’s competence for indirect taxation and for advocating the
return of this competence to the entities. Such a threat was renewed in the 10 March
conclusions of the Republika Srpska National Assembly, by which it tasked the
Republika Srpska Government to establish expert teams of national and international
experts in each area for which the responsibility has been taken away and transferred
from the Republika Srpska, and to propose procedures for the enactment of new laws
and acts in order to restore those responsibilities at the Republika Srpska level. If
pursued in the case of indirect taxation, this action by the Republika Srpska
authorities would roll back one of the most important reforms of the past 25 years,
which safeguards the macroeconomic and thus also the political stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
62. My office continued to follow closely and inform the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board of other developments relevant to the fiscal stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, including the adoption and details of 2021 budgets at all levels of
government. Particular attention was paid to developments related to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Central Bank, given its importance for maintaining the financial and
overall macroeconomic stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

18/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

5.

Issues related to the rule of law
63. The mandate of the current Director General of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Intelligence-Security Agency has expired and a new appointment must be made. The
appointment has apparently been postponed, seemingly owing to suspicion
surrounding the accuracy of the current Director General’s evidence for the education
required for the position by law. In October, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s
Office accused the Director General of abuse of office, for allegedly obtaining under
false pretences a video recording of the post office from which a criminal report
against him was mailed to the prosecutors, in order to find out who filed the report.
In February, he was acquitted, while the Prosecutor’s Office continues with other
cases against him.
64. In April, the Office of Disciplinary Counsel within the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council filed disciplinary complaints against the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Chief Prosecutor, Gordana Tadić, and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court
President, Ranko Debevec. The complaint against Ms. Tadić relates to the disciplinary
offenses of lack of commitment in office, failure to act on decisions, orders or requests
of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council without justified reasons and public
conduct damaging to the reputation of the prosecutorial function. The disciplinary
complaint against Mr. Debevec states that he intentionally provided false, misleading
or insufficient information when applying for his position, and concerns abuse of
office and the recording of private conversations with the Director General of the
Intelligence-Security Agency during his trial.
65. The Federation legislation establishing a special prosecutor and court
department for fighting corruption and organized crime, adopted in 2014, remains
unimplemented.
66. In February, the Banja Luka District Court issued a judgment that negate d the
legality of the High Representative’s authority to make binding decisions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In concluding that neither the General Framework Agreement for
Peace nor the Security Council have authorized the High Representative to impose
legislation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and that any law imposed by the High
Representative is unconstitutional and cannot be enforced by the Banja Luka District
Court, the judgment contradicts binding decisions of the Security Council, prior
decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court and the European Court
of Human Rights, as well as prior decisions of the High Representative. With the aim
of disseminating the correct information, I informed the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council of the correct legal references.
67. The adoption of amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, as well as a thorough reform of Council
regulations, is in progress, with the international community’s hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities recognize the Council as an institution essential to ensuring
that Bosnia and Herzegovina develops as a rule-of-law State, by accepting standards
of judicial impartiality and integrity. Rule of law is a priority, and I join the efforts of
the European Union and the wider international community to strengthen the integrity
of judges and prosecutors and the Council itself.
68. Following the 2019 scandal involving alleged bribery and the then -President of
the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, Milan Tegeltija, of which audio and
video was leaked to the public, and for which Mr. Tegeltija was not disciplined, in
December yet another audio recording was released, in which he appeared to discuss
the professional judicial advancement of the relative of another Council member
outside the legal framework. Following a public outcry, Mr. Tegeltija submitted his

21-05527

19/40

S/2021/409

resignation as Council President and member and subsequently became an advisor to
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency member Milorad Dodik.
69. In February, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council elected its new
leadership, raising hopes that the Council may now be unhindered in developing the
integrity, professionalism, independence, impartiality, efficiency and accountabilit y
of judges, prosecutors and the Council members themselves. There remains an urgent
need to improve the standards of the Council, primarily through changes to the Law
on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. The international community strongly
advocates technical changes to yield a properly functioning Council, while preserving
it as a State-level body with jurisdiction throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
70. The ongoing failure to appoint four missing judges to the Federation
Constitutional Court continues to have direct implications on the ability of the Court
and its Vital National Interest Panel to exercise its constitutional responsibilities. The
Court continues to operate with five sitting judges, out of the nine required under the
Federation Constitution, meaning that all five sitting judges must be present for a
quorum to exist, and that the Court requires the consensus of all five judges for any
decision to be adopted. This has also resulted in the Vital National Interes t Panel being
unable to function, as it presently has only four sitting judges and there is no quorum.
The process of filling the vacant positions in the Court has been ongoing since the
retirement of two judges in 2015 and 2016, and the retirement of anot her two in June
2019. In October 2019, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council submitted to the
Federation President and Vice Presidents candidates for three of the vacancies,
pursuant to the vacancy published in February 2019. Federation President Mar inko
Čavara (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina) has refused to proceed with the appointments,
and this process has been stalled ever since. The Council recently finalized the process
for the fourth vacancy and submitted proposed candidates to the Federation Presi dent
and Vice Presidents on 26 February 2021. Should the Federation President and Vice
Presidents finally decide to forward the nominations to the Federation Parliament, all
four judges could be appointed, and the Federation Constitutional Court could retu rn
to full functionality.
71. I must note that, in the absence of a functional Vital National Interest Panel in
the Federation Constitutional Court, I am increasingly called upon to provide legal
interpretations in the disputes involving challenges to cons titutional provisions
governing vital national interest procedures in the Federation cantons.
72. Although the Revised National War Crimes Processing Strategy was adopted in
the previous period, thereby establishing a new deadline of 2023 for the completio n
of “category A” cases (for which the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
assessed as having sufficient grounds for prosecution), the members of the new
Strategy Supervisory Board have not been appointed. The Board, which should
include representatives of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office and the
Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court, should serve to increase the speed of
prosecutorial work and the prioritization of the most serious cases, enable the efficient
transfer of cases within Bosnia and Herzegovina to allow more cases to be processed
in less time and improve regional cooperation, particularly where “category A” cases
are concerned. While I commend all efforts in war crimes prosecution, members of
the Supervisory Board must be appointed without further delay.
73. Twice in 2020, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution, the President of the European Court of Human Rights
selected replacements for departing International Judges of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Most recently, in December, Judge Helen Keller of
Switzerland replaced Judge Margarita Tstatsa-Nikolovska of North Macedonia,
whose mandate expired at the end of November. Earlier, in April, Judge Angelika
20/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

Nuβberger of Germany replaced Judge Giovanni Grasso, whose mandate expired the
same month.
74. While I recognize that there will come a time in the future when the
Constitutional Court comprises entirely domestic judges, it is my assessment that the
country has a very long way to go before that should happen. In any case, political
leaders and, above all, citizens, demand “more Europe” and more European values.
Therefore, the presence of the international judges heralds the shape of things to come
and to welcome. Their presence remains highly beneficial.
75. To assess the perception of the situation in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
judiciary, in March, my office commissioned a public opinion poll that showed that
two thirds of Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens over the age of 15 considered the
current situation in the judiciary unsatisfactory and believed it was necessary to return
to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court and Prosecutor’s Office those international
judges and prosecutors who worked in those bodies until 2009. Their mandates were
not extended thereafter. It is clear that the judiciary remains ineffective and that strong
international engagement remains desirable to accelerate changes in that respect. I
have long supported the notion of having international judges and prosecutors again
in key domestic institutions.

D.

Challenges to the General Framework Agreement for Peace

1.

Challenges to the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its territorial
integrity, competences and institutions
76. In addition to the challenges raised in the conclusions of the National Assembly
of the Republika Srpska, statements challenging the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued, with Mr. Dodik again being the most
frequent exponent of such proclamations, including renewed threats to organize a
referendum in the Republika Srpska on secession, 3,4 and more recently the notion of
a “peaceful dissolution” of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 5,6 He frequently predicts the
eventual demise of Bosnia and Herzegovina 7 and, despite publicly supporting the

__________________

On 25 October 2020, Mr. Dodik said on RTV Pink: “How are we going to leave? Of course, the
international context is important here. We, the people in the Republika Srpska, we are
absolutely living the Republika Srpska as our state, we are staring at Serbia, none of that is
unknown. Formally speaking, I often hear from foreigners, from the High R epresentative, that it
is not written anywhere that the Republika Srpska can hold a referendum and determine its
status.”
4
On 21 January 2021, Mr. Dodik said on RTRS “Why then is my proposal not legitimate when I
say that the Serbs will go to a referendum one day, they will decide where they want to go and
what they want to do. Decide on their status, whether they are going to stay in Bosnia, etc. Why
is this not legitimate, if we say it?”
5
On 29 March 2021, Mr. Dodik said on RTRS: “Only the parties, the two parties that can decide
what to change in this country are exclusively the Republika Srpska and the Federation as
entities. And no one else. No High Representative. And that is why Bosnia was brought before
the collapse. Here, too, it is sought and I suggest a peaceful separation.”
6
On 13 April 2021, Mr. Dodik said on RTRS: “The Republika Srpska is not thinking of gaining its
independence in a way that would be a war conflict. And that is why we are persistently waiting
for the moment when we will make this dissolution real in a peaceful way. In any case, until
then, it is quite realistic that the option of a peaceful dissolution should be one of them and that it
can be discussed equally.”
7
On 31 October 2020, Mr. Dodik said on TV Kurir: “[Bosnia a nd Herzegovina] will certainly fall
apart and you will see that it will be without war. It will simply collapse and only that what can
work will function, and the only thing that can function on its own in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
Republika Srpska. Not Bosnia and Herzegovina, nor the Federation.”
3

21-05527

21/40

S/2021/409

pathway of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards accession to the European Union, has
also disparaged that initiative. 8
77. At least one Croat political leader, HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina 1990 President
Ilija Cvitanović, raised the spectre of resurrecting “Herzeg -Bosnia”, 9,10 the wartime
Croat proto-state within Bosnia and Herzegovina, much of the leadership of which
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia convicted in 2017 for,
inter alia, participating in a joint criminal enterprise to “cleanse Bosnian Muslims
from areas claimed to be Herzeg-Bosnia”. While I acknowledge that Mr. Cvitanović
sometime later offered an apology for his remarks, 11 the damage was already done.
2.

Glorification of war crimes
78. Nationalist leaders continue to deny war crimes, glorify convicted war criminals
and lead divided commemorations that perpetuate the notion of group victimhood
while ignoring or downplaying empathy and compassion for the suffering and loss of
others. The attitude and behaviour of political leaders gives a green light to the general
population that such behaviour is acceptable, when in reality it only prolongs the
suffering of all peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina and further dampens the prospects
for meaningful reconciliation in the country.
79. On 7 March, a banner was placed above the main crossroads in Bratunac, on the
road to Srebrenica, congratulating convicted war criminal Ratko Mladić and
Mr. Dodik, on their upcoming birthdays. In 2017, the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia convicted Mr. Mladić for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide in Srebrenica.
80. On 29 November 2020, a Croat cultural association in Mostar organized a
commemorative display dedicated to convicted war criminal Slobodan Praljak, and
on the same date a candlelit vigil in Mr. Praljak’s honour was organized in Kiseljak.
On the same date in November 2017, the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia upheld Mr. Praljak’s conviction for war crimes, including crimes
against humanity, immediately after which he proclaimed his innocence, drank poison
and died.
81. On 27 January 2021, a public rally was held in support of Sakib Mahmuljin, the
former commander of the Third Corps of the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, whom the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court convicted and sentenced in
the first instance on 22 January to 10 years in prison for failing to prevent Islamic
volunteer fighters from torturing and killing Serb prisoners. Earlier, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Minister for Foreign Affairs, Bisera Turković (SDA), hailed
Mr. Mahmuljin as a defender of Bosnia and Herzegovina and denounced the Court’s
ruling.

__________________

On 31 October 2020, Mr. Dodik said on TV Kurir: “You know, I admit that I was a man who was
in favour of the European Union and I thought we should be there and I was a big fan. But that
was 15 years ago. Today everything has changed, the European Union has changed.”
9
On 22 March 2021, Mr. Cvitanović was quoted in Bild as saying: “We know that 30 June is sort
of a deadline and that [the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law] should be amended by then. If
that doesn’t happen, Croats have but one option left – Herzeg-Bosnia. Are we ready?”
10
On 22 March 2021, Mr. Cvitanović was quoted in Bild as saying: “If [SDA President Bakir
Izetbegović] wants Bosnia and Herzegovina as a state of three constituent peoples equal in
everything, then it is necessary to accept Croat proposals of amendments to the Election law. If
he wants Herzeg-Bosnia, he will have it!”
11
On 1 April 2021, Mr. Cvitanović said on Federation TV: “If I have offended anyone, which was
not my goal, I never have a problem apologizing. My goal was never to hurt anyone, but to show
the seriousness of the situation we are in.”
8

22/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

3.

Genocide denial
82. The denial of the genocide in Srebrenica, particularly by the Republika Srpska
authorities, remains another stumbling block on the path to reconciliation. While I
face increasing calls to use my authority to impose a law on genocide denial, such a
law would have more meaning and value if it were the result of a domestic initiative.
In that regard, I regret that, on 8 April 2021, when the Bosnia and Herzegovina House
of Peoples had the opportunity to consider such a proposal, in the form of amendments
to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal Code, it rejected the proposal through the
opposing votes of all present Croat delegates and most Serb delegates.

III. State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
A.

Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
83. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency was minimally active throughout the
reporting period but maintained its regular protocol duties, including receiving
dignitaries, ambassadors and delegations, making official visits abroad and jointly
marking the twenty-fifth anniversary of signing of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace. The Presidency held only two regular sessions while holding an unreported
number of extraordinary sessions via telephone, focused on the COVID -19 pandemic,
the migrant crisis, the European Union integration process and regional cooperation.
The Presidency took other decisions within its competencies relating to the adoption
of reports and information and the conclusion and ratification of international
agreements. Serb member Mr. Dodik has been Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
Chair since November, assuming the position from Bosniak member Šefik Džaferović
(SDA) in accordance with the eight-month rotation between the three Presidency
members.
84. In December, a scheduled meeting of the Presidency, under the chairpersonship
of Mr. Dodik, with the Russian Federation Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey
Lavrov, which had been originally scheduled for October but was delayed owing to
COVID-19 measures, exposed existing divisions within the Presidency. Presidency
members Mr. Džaferović and Željko Komšić (Democratic Front (DF)) boycotted the
meeting, which they said was owing to Mr. Lavrov’s remarks regarding the aspirations
of Bosnia and Herzegovina of joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), and the continued presence of the Office of the High Representati ve
following his private meeting the day before with Mr. Dodik. A meeting between
Mr. Lavrov and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Ms. Turković, took place as scheduled.
85. In early March, the Presidency greeted Serbian President A leksandar Vučić at
the Sarajevo Airport to formally receive a donation of 5,000 COVID -19 vaccines from
Serbia to the Federation. Later that month, the Presidency considered the draft 2021
budget of the Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions in its capacity as formal proponent
and decided to return it to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers for
reconsideration.
86. In April, Presidency member Mr. Komšić sent a non-paper to the European
Union institutions in Brussels, complaining about the increasing level of interference
of Croatia and Serbia in Bosnia and Herzegovina internal affairs. Mr. Komšić further
warned of a growing threat by the Russian Federation to the pathway to NATO
membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also cautioned about the lack o f
leadership and coordination by the European Union and the United States in the
electoral reform processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina and what he characterized as

21-05527

23/40

S/2021/409

their “worrisome servitude” towards the demands of SNSD and HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

B.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
87. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers met regularly throughout the
reporting period, holding 16 regular and 17 urgent sessions. The Council of Ministers
adopted only one new law (the Law on Protection of Right to a Trial in a Reasonable
Time Frame before the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court) and three amendments to
existing legislation, including to the Law on Public Procurement (as one of the 14
priorities from the European Commission Opinion), the L aw on Litigation Before the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Court, and the Law on Excise Tax.
88. In its 2020 work programme, the Council of Ministers planned for the adoption
of 49 laws, yet in the same time frame the Legislative Office of the Council of
Ministers issued opinions for only 13 draft laws. In fact, throughout the entire current
mandate of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly, not including budget acts, only one new law
has been fully adopted, which is part of a general downward trend in legislative output
over the past several mandates, but which represents a new low. This suggests
stagnation on the part of the ministries of the Council of Ministers in terms of
submitting legislative proposals and poor leadership in terms of insisting that the
ministries live up to their obligations. The failure of the Council of Ministers to
propose new legislation has been the cause of persistent criticism by representatives
in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly. Defending himself against
such criticism, the Chair of the Council of Ministers, Zoran Tegeltija (SNSD), has
stated that, without political consensus, there is no point in proposing legislation
destined to fail.
89. In February, the Council of Ministers adopted the draft law on budget of
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and international obligations for 2021, and
forwarded it to the state-level Presidency, which is the official proponent of the law
to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly. The Council of Ministers
adopted the draft without consensus, as all ministers from the Republika Srpska voted
against it, owing to the exclusion of funds to mitigate the consequences of the
COVID-19 pandemic. As anticipated, the Presidency returned the draft to the Council
of Ministers, which adopted a new draft on 25 March, this time with funds to address
the pandemic, and returned it to the Presidency.
90. In the absence of an adopted budget, the Council of Ministers adopted tw o
decisions on temporary financing of the State institutions and on its international
obligations at the level of the 2020 State budget. The most recent decision on
temporary financing was adopted on 17 March and covers the period from April to
June.
91. In March, the Chair of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Tegeltija, took a decision
on the removal of the Minister for Human Rights and Refugees, Miloš Lučić
(Democratic People’s Alliance (DNS)), and submitted it to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly for approval. The removal was the direct result
of DNS leaving the Republika Srpska ruling coalition, as the seat previously allocated
in the Council of Ministers as part of the so-called Republika Srpska Serb quota was
to be substituted with a member of SNSD.
92. On 24 February, the Council of Ministers agreed to establish the Commission
for Cooperation with NATO, changing the Commission’s name from the Commission
for NATO Integration, in keeping with the Serb parties’ opposition to Bosnia and
Herzegovina joining NATO, and installing voting rules that resemble those of the

24/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

Council of Ministers itself. NATO integration remains an issue for which political
consensus is lacking, despite it being a component of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Law on Defence, which has not been changed.

C.

Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina
93. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly met on average less than
once a month and with very little output. The Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Representatives held five regular sessions, and the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples held four regular sessions and one urgent session. Only two laws were
adopted, which were amendments to existing laws, while six laws were rejected.
94. In all cases, legislative initiatives were lacking, owing to the failure of the
Council of Ministers to exercise its capacity to propose legislation, as outlined in the
previous section. Continued disputes between key political stakeholders, including
between the parties forming the governing State-level coalition, do not justify the
absence of adoption of legislation by the Parliamentary Assembly, which is its key
responsibility under the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution.
95. Agendas in both houses mostly consisted of various delegates’ initiatives,
requests and conclusions, primarily from opposition parties but i ncluding some from
the ruling coalition, which aimed to pressure the Council of Ministers, which was a
frequent target of criticism owing to its failure to propose legislation, address the
pandemic and migrant crisis and engage in the fulfilment of the con ditions needed for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to acquire European Union candidate status. This led to
formal calls for the removal of the Council of Ministers as whole, as well as individual
ministers and deputy ministers, none of which succeeded.
96. In February, in an effort to expedite the purchase of COVID -19 vaccines, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives unanimously adopted amendments
to the Law on Public Procurement and the Law on Medicines and Medical Devices.
However, the House of Peoples subsequently rejected the amendments, with delegates
from SNSD claiming the amendments were unnecessary, and insisting that the
Republika Srpska authorities had succeeded in purchasing vaccines within the
existing legal framework and that the Federation authorities should follow their
example.

IV. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
97. As a new Federation Government has still yet to be appointed following the
2018 general elections, the Government from the previous mandate (2014 –2018)
remains in place, albeit reduced from 16 to 14 ministers (from SDA, HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Union for a Better Future of Bosnia and Herzegovina (SBB)),
following the death of one minister and the departure of another in 2020 and the lack
of any political agreement on their replacements. In addition, the Federation Minister
for Interior, Aljoša Čampara, left SDA in September 2020 and is now independent,
leaving SDA in a weakened position with only three ministers, compared with four
from its rival, the mostly-Bosniak party Union for a Better Future (SBB) and six from
HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina.
98. Regarding the non-implementation of the 2018 General Election results at the
executive level in the Federation, in February, Mr. Čampara – in his capacity as the
Federation House of Peoples Deputy Speaker, having been elected in 2018 to the
Sarajevo Cantonal Assembly and subsequently to the House of Peoples – requested
the three caucuses of the constituent peoples in the House of Peoples to submit their
21-05527

25/40

S/2021/409

candidates for Federation President and Vice Presidents. In his request, Mr. Čampara
underscored that the Central Election Commission cannot legally affirm that the 2018
general elections results are implemented until the Federation President and Vice
Presidents have been appointed.
99. As a further complication, the Federation Prime Minister, Fadil Novalić (SDA),
and Federation Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Jelka Miličević
(HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), have been under criminal indictment since late la st
year. In December, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Court confirmed the earlier
indictment by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office against Mr. Novalić,
Ms. Miličević and others for their roles in the controversial May 2020 KM 10 million
procurement of 100 ventilators and KM 3 million procurement of protective medical
equipment from China during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. Mr. Novalić
is accused of abuse of power, influence peddling, money -laundering and document
forgery, while Ms. Miličević is accused of negligence. They, and the others accused,
have pleaded not guilty. The Court has twice rejected the motions of the Prosecutor’s
Office to prohibit Mr. Novalić and Ms. Miličević from performing official duties
while their trial, which began on 24 February, is ongoing.
100. The case recently took a new turn. When the ventilators in question arrived in
May 2020, medical experts with the Federation Crisis Headquarters assessed them as
unusable for COVID-19 cases. Several months later, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Institute of Metrology assessed the respirators as being of high quality and suitable
for COVID-19 treatment. However, in early April 2021, medical staff at the main
hospital in Sarajevo renewed the claim that the ventilators were unsuit able and that
their use had resulted in the deaths of COVID-19 patients, prompting the Sarajevo
Canton Prosecutor’s Office to open a new investigation.
101. Nevertheless, the Federation Government continued to meet regularly, holding
24 regular and 26 urgent sessions. Both houses of the Federation Parliament, however,
met infrequently, with the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives holding
five regular sessions and one extraordinary session, while the House of Peoples held
only two regular sessions. Legislative output remained poor, with the adoption of only
two new laws and four amendments to existing laws.
102. In addition, the collegiums of both houses remain incomplete. The House of
Peoples has not appointed the Deputy Speaker from the Serb peo ples since its
inaugural session, while the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives has
also been without a Deputy Speaker from the Serb peoples since a reshuffling of the
parliamentary majority in July 2019.

A.

Failure to appoint members of the Securities Commission
103. On 4 March, the Federation House of Peoples rejected the issuance of an
approval for the decision on the appointment of members to the Federation Securities
Commission. In accordance with provisions of the Federation Law on the Securities
Commission, the decision on appointment was originally taken on 24 June 2018 by
Federation President Čavara (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina) with the consent of Vice
Presidents Melika Mahmutbegović (SDA) and Milan Dunović (DF) and submitted to
the Federation Parliament for approval. Although the Federation House of
Representatives adopted it on 18 December 2019, when it finally considered the
decision almost 15 months later, the Federation House of Peoples ultimately did not
support it, owing to the objection of the Serb Caucus over the lack of a candidate from
the ranks of the Serb people and the Caucus’ view that the candidates did not possess
the required professional qualifications and experience.

26/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

104. As the 2018 decision on appointment has reached the end of the legislative
procedure, it is now the responsibility of the Federation President, with the consent
of the Vice Presidents, to reinitiate both the selection and the appointment of members
of the Securities Commission and to submit the new decision to the Federation
Parliament for approval. To that end, on 6 April, the Special Representative of the
European Union, the Ambassadors of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States and I met with the Federation President and
Vice Presidents to urge them to ensure an expedient process in full accordance with
the Law on the Securities Commission. Our interlocutors reported that the vacancy
notices had been published the previous week and their tasks in the process would be
fulfilled within two months, after which it would again fall to the Federation
Parliament to finalize the appointments.
105. Meanwhile, the Securities Commission has no quorum for decision -making and
cannot meet its key responsibilities, thus, inter alia, blocking joint stock companies
from increasing or decreasing their capital, registering management changes and
issuing shares. As a consequence, the capital market in the Federation and by
extension the overall economy face serious problems.

B.

Reshuffling of Sarajevo and Tuzla Canton Governments
106. Late in 2020, the civic-oriented coalition known as “the four” (NS, NiP, SDP
and NBL), most of whose representatives had formed the majority in the Sarajevo
Canton Assembly following the 2018 general elections and had led the Sarajevo
Canton Government until being ousted by an SDA-led majority earlier in the year,
again took majority control and ousted the SDA-dominated Sarajevo Canton
Government, appointing the new Government in January. “The four” would go on to
have the majority in the Sarajevo City Council following the 2020 local elections but
did not hold together long enough to elect their preferred candidate as Sarajevo City
Mayor in April, after NBL exited the coalition, leaving “the four” as “the three”.
107. Similarly, a coalition led by SDP in the Tuzla Canton Assembly ousted the
SDA-led Tuzla Canton Government in January.

C.

Appointment of Federation Chief Prosecutor
108. In October, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council decided to delay for 60
days the appointment of a new Federation Chief Prosecutor. The Council President
said that the vacancy for the position had been issued in 2018 and that, before the
final selection was made, certain dilemmas about the constitutionally mandated ethnic
representation in key Federation offices must be resolved. According to the
Federation Constitution, the six key positions in the Federation Authority Structure –
the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Speaker of the
House of Peoples, the President of the Constitutional Court, the President of the
Supreme Court and the Chief Prosecutor – cannot be filled by more than two
representatives of any one constituent people or the group of others.
109. The implementation of the provision of the Federation Constitution governing
the assignment of the six key functions in the Federation Authority Structure follows
the election of the Federation Legislature and the appointment of the Prime Minister.
However, since the Federation Government has been functioning under a technical
mandate, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council decided to consult with the
Federation Constitutional Court and my office before engaging in the final stage of
selection of the Federation Chief Prosecutor. Relying on my stance that only those
positions allocated after the 2018 general elections could be counted in this quota,

21-05527

27/40

S/2021/409

and that the relevant provisions of the Federation Constitution must be interpreted
and applied in such a way that ensures the functionality of the competent institutions
and makes the exercise of their constitutional and legal responsibilities possible,
including by upholding those provisions guaranteeing the independence and
autonomy of the judiciary, the Council appointed in December Munib Halilović as
the top-ranked candidate for the position of Chief Prosecutor of the Federation
Prosecutor’s Office.

D.

Failure to adopt the Law on Forestry
110. No progress has been made in addressing the issue of adoption of the Federation
Law on Forestry, which the Federation has been without since 2009. The adoption of
the Law is not only crucial to the development of the forestry sector, but also
represents a legal obligation to a ruling of the Federation Constitutional Court from
2009. The Federation Government attempted to address the issue through a decree,
but in March 2010 the Federation Constitutional Court determined that the
Government had neither the constitutional nor legal basis to regulate the field of
forestry by decree. The Court instructed the legislative bodies to regulate it within six
months, which still has not been done.

E.

European Court of Human Rights ruling on discrimination against
Serbs in the Federation
111. On 8 December, the European Court of Human Rights ruled on the issue of
discrimination against Serbs residing in the Federation through their ineligibility to
run for the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency. The Court delivered its judgment in
the case of the late Svetozar Pudarić, a Serb residing in the Federation and senior
official of SDP, who in 2018 had not been allowed to stand for election to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency. Although Mr. Pudarić died in March 2020 while the case
remained pending before the Court, his widow, as his heir, informed the Court of her
wish to continue to pursue the case.
112. In its judgment, the Court recalled previous case law on the subject, mentioning
Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina and in particularly Pilav v. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which concerned the ineligibility of the applicant, a Bosniak residing
in the Republika Srpska, to stand for election to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, in which the Court confirmed discrimination against the applicant.
Accordingly, the Court determined that, in the case of Mr. Pudarić, article 1 of
protocol 12 of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms had been violated.
113. In its judgment, the Court also noted that the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution itself did not expressly make the exercise of passive electoral rights
conditional on residency requirements, and that such a condition had been introduced
by the Elections Act in 2001, reiterating that no legal provision of domestic law
should be interpreted and applied in a manner incompatible with states’ obligations
under the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, particularly if it would be inconsistent with the prohibition of
discrimination and more broadly with the principles underlying the Convention.

F.

Constitutional equality of Serbs in the Federation cantons
114. The 2002 decision of the High Representative enacted amendments to th e
Federation Constitution to implement the earlier decision of the Bosnia and

28/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

Herzegovina Constitutional Court on the equality of constituent peoples, which
determined that all three constituent peoples were equal in the Federation, that the
official languages of the Federation were Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian and that the
official scripts were Latin and Cyrillic. The cantons remain obliged to harmonize their
constitutions with the Federation Constitution. In 2018, the Federation Constitutional
Court determined that several provisions of the constitutions of Posavina,
Herzegovina-Neretva and West Herzegovina cantons did not conform to the
Federation Constitution in that regard and ordered their assemblies to amend them
accordingly. West Herzegovina recognized Serbs as constituent peoples but did not
recognize the Serb language or the Cyrillic script, while Posavina and Herzegovina Neretva Cantons have not taken any steps in that regard.
115. The non-implementation of the Federation Constitutional Court deci sion
continues, and I urge those cantons to harmonize fully their constitutions with the
Federation Constitution and provide for the constitutional equality of all three
constituent peoples.

G.

Expiration of four-year mandates of the heads of municipalities
and city mayors
116. On 29 October, I received a letter from the Federation Association of
Municipalities and Cities concerning the problems related to the expiration of the
four-year mandates of the Heads of Municipalities and City Mayors in the Fe deration
due to the postponement of the 2020 local elections. Since the applicable legal
framework does not explicitly regulate the rights and duties of directly elected heads
of municipalities and mayors in the Federation in the period following the expir ation
of their four-year mandates, I issued a legal opinion restating my office’s consistent
view that, in situations such as this, and in the absence of explicit provisions to the
contrary, the principle should be that the authorities, at least those exer cising
executive functions, should continue to function beyond the expiration of their
mandate until they are replaced in their position. My legal interpretation was well
received, as it clarified a situation that could otherwise have had serious
consequences.

H.

Expiration of the mandate of the Mayor of the City of Sarajevo
117. On 9 March, I received a letter requesting my legal opinion concerning the rights
and duties of the Mayor of the City of Sarajevo in the period between the expiration
of the mandate and the date when the newly elected City Mayor of Sarajevo assumes
duty. Considering the urgency of the matter, I replied with my legal interpretation on
10 March, reiterating my opinion provided earlier to the Federation Associat ion of
Municipalities and Cities that, in situations such as this, and in the absence of explicit
provisions stating otherwise, the principle of continuity of public office should apply
and therefore that the functioning of the executive power and the exer cise of its
functions in the City of Sarajevo as the local self-government units must be secured
at all times.

I.

Crisis in Tuzla Canton
118. Late in 2020, a crisis emerged in Tuzla Canton in which a power struggle
between the two coalition blocks – the former SDA-led majority and the new SDP-led
majority – resulted in a series of actions and decisions by both sides in defiance of
the constitutional and legal framework. This included an attempt by the new majority

21-05527

29/40

S/2021/409

to convene and hold a “parallel Assembly session” to remove the Tuzla Canton
Assembly leadership and the Tuzla Canton Government, and a declaration of a state
of emergency by the Government to assume the decision-making authorities of the
Assembly and adopt, inter alia, the 2021 budget. To prevent an escalation of the crisis
and its far-reaching implications, and following numerous requests from both blocs,
on 8 January, I addressed a letter to the leadership and members of the Tuzla Canton
Government and Assembly with my legal interpretation of the actions and decisions
taken by both sides, while providing a path towards unblocking the situation. As a
result, on 15 January, the Tuzla Canton Assembly held a session in which the peaceful
transfer of power between the two blocs was conducted and k ey decisions restoring
functionality were adopted within the constitutional and legal framework.

V. Republika Srpska
119. While SNSD continued to lead the Republika Srpska ruling coalition, a rift
between SNSD and the new leadership of long-time coalition party DNS led to the
exit of that party from the coalition in November. The exit of DNS also reduced the
ruling majority’s seats in the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to below
two-thirds – which, inter alia, is required to support a veto raised by the Serb member
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency. Furthermore, one DNS minister in the
Republika Srpska Government was replaced by a candidate from coalition leader
SNSD.
120. Nonetheless, the Republika Srpska Government met regularly thro ughout the
period, holding 26 sessions, while the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska
held three regular sessions and two special sessions.
121. In February and March, SNSD, prompted by its leader Mr. Dodik, initiated
discussions in the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska on the Office of the
High Representative. Both sessions resulted in the adoption by the National Assembly
of conclusions calling into question the competences of the High Representative and
the validity of the High Representative’s decisions, as well key aspects of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, including the presence of international military
forces under annex 1-A.
122. The conclusions of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska are
consistent with frequent public statements by Mr. Dodik, as well as Republika Srpska
President Cvijanović and Republika Srpska Prime Minister Višković (both SNSD)
and other leading ruling majority politicians over the past several years. SNSD also
publicly pursued the adoption of a new Republika Srpska Constitution to be adopted
by a referendum, which would eliminate the Republika Srpska Council of Peoples, an
institution under the current Republika Srpska Constitution that exists to protect the
vital interests of the constituent peoples in the entity.
123. While SNSD was the overall victor in the 15 November local elections, the party
lost mayoral races to opposition candidates in the two biggest Republika Srpska
municipalities, Banja Luka – significantly, the de facto entity capital, where its
candidate was the long-time incumbent – and Bijeljina.

A.

David Dragičević case
124. The new Mayor of Banja Luka, Drasko Stanivukovic (PDP), and his
administration launched an anti-corruption campaign and focused on civil freedoms,
particularly the freedom of assembly, allowing “Justice for David” activists to protest
freely in the city centre. For three years, the activists have protested in relation to the

30/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

unsolved mysterious death in March 2018 of Banja Luka student Davi d Dragičević,
but have been increasingly pushed out of public view and harassed by the Republika
Srpska authorities. Although the Republika Srpska Ministry of Interior continues to
refuse to grant permits to the protestors, for the time being police are no t interfering
with the protests in the city centre, owing at least in part to the attitude of the new
city administration.
125. Possibly as a result of the increasing profile of the protests, in February the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor’s Office requested that the Dragičević case file
be transferred to it from the Banja Luka Prosecutor’s Office, which has issued no
indictments in the case. The transfer was made in March. Closure for David’s parents
is long overdue.

B.

Criminal indictment against the Republika Srpska Minister
for Interior
126. On 26 March, the Banja Luka District Prosecutor filed a criminal indictment
against the Republika Srpska Minister for Interior, Dragan Lukač (SNSD) , for
endangering security in connection with the criminal off ense of physical injury
inflicted against Drasko Stanivukovic during a December 2019 session of the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska, when Mr. Stanivukovic was a
representative in the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska. During the session,
Mr. Lukač allegedly punched Mr. Stanivukovic in the face. To proceed to trial, the
Banja Luka Basic Court must confirm the indictment.

C.

Srebrenica
127. The November 2020 local elections in Srebrenica were preceded by a heavy
voter registration drive. As in previous cycles, local political actors grouped along
ethnic lines, with each side backing a joint mayoral candidate. While both the Serb
and Bosniak political blocs facilitated the registration of supporters in Srebrenica,
enabling them to vote, each bloc accused the other of attempting election fraud. As a
result, the voter registry in Srebrenica was inflated with Serb voters residing in Serbia,
and with Bosniak voters residing in the Federation.
128. Due to numerous reports and allegations of suspected fraud before and during
the election day in Srebrenica, the Central Election Commission delayed the
confirmation of the election results and eventually annulled the results from 26 out of
28 polling stations, announcing that repeat elections would be held on 21 February
2021. The Bosniak/pro-Bosnian coalition “My Address Srebrenica” filed numerous
appeals during the process, claiming fraud by the Serb side and procedural violations
by the Commission. Faced with the rejection of their appeals, “My A ddress
Srebrenica” opted for a boycott of the repeat elections.
129. While the boycott was successful in terms of a lower turnout of Bosniak voters
for the repeat elections, it also as expected led to poor results and a lower level of
Bosniak participation within the Srebrenica municipal institutions. Even with the
boycott of the repeat election, on the basis of the confirmed results from the
15 November election, Bosniaks won 6 of the 21 mandates in the Srebrenica
Municipal Assembly. Despite calls by some coalition representatives to reject those
mandates, the “My Address Srebrenica” coalition eventually accepted them in order
to participate in decision-making in the municipality.
130. Bosniak representatives walked out of the inaugural session of the Srebr enica
Municipal Assembly in late March, owing to a lack of agreement on the appointment

21-05527

31/40

S/2021/409

of the Municipal Assembly Secretary. However, in mid -April, the Bosniak and Serb
blocs signed a coalition agreement defining the distribution of positions and finally
completed the inaugural session. Almost immediately, the two parties who benefitted
most from the agreement, SNSD and SDA, came under attack from other parties. As
at the end of the reporting period, the coalition agreement nonetheless still stood.

D.

Non-cooperation with the High Representative
131. Consistent with its now 17-year practice, the Republika Srpska Government
continued actively to refuse access by my office to official information and
documents, as required under article IX of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace and annex 10 to the Agreement, which obliges all authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to cooperate fully with the High Representative. Repeated calls by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board reminding the Republika Srpska
authorities of their obligations in this regard have so far had no impact.

E.

Commission on the Sufferings of Serbs in Sarajevo
132. On 13 April, the Independent International Commission on the Sufferings of
Serbs in Sarajevo Between 1991 and 1995 issued its final report, dated October 2020.
The Republika Srpska Government appointed the six members of the Commission in
February 2019.
133. According to the general conclusions outlined in the report, 800 Serbs were
reported missing from Sarajevo and 260 have yet to be found. The authors suggest
that the numbers may be higher and that entire families disappeared with no one to
report them missing.
134. The report comprises seven chapters, which, apart from the chapter on Sarajevo
Serbs, are devoted to the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Ottoman and
Austro-Hungarian Empires, the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, the Second World War and
post-Second World War period, and role of radical Islamists in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina conflict.

VI. Public security and law enforcement, including
intelligence reform
135. The practice of improper political interference in operational policing has not
diminished during the reporting period.
136. In October 2020, the Brčko District Assembly adopted, in an urgent procedure,
significant changes to the Brčko Law on Police that were determined to undermine
the existing transparent, merit-based and open competition procedures and rules for
appointing the police chief, deputy police chief and members of the ind ependent
board. The amendments also extended those mandates without the prescribed legal
processes and appeared to violate the Brčko District Statute in several instances. The
Brčko District Supervisor, with technical support from my office, the United Sta tes
Embassy, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union delegation, pointed out the shortcomings to the Brčko authorities,
while also underscoring that the changes were out of synch with the new reform
approach adopted in the District. The authorities subsequently drafted legislation to
be submitted to the Brčko District Assembly in late April to repeal the changes
adopted in October and restore the Brčko Law on Police to the previously existing
state of affairs.
32/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

137. In October, the Federation Government (serving a technical mandate since
2018) adopted a long-dormant update to the Federation Law on Police Officials.
Subsequent analysis showed, inter alia, a new provision stating that the Federation
Police Director and Federation Deputy Police Director cannot be from the same
constituent peoples, which differed from the draft law endorsed by my Office in July
2017. In December 2020, the Federation Government withdrew the law from the
parliamentary procedure owing to objections by the Federation-level police union.
138. In December, the Zenica-Doboj Canton Assembly adopted amendments to the
Zenica-Doboj Law on Internal Affairs which, yet again, led to the postponed
implementation of a separate police budget necessary to buttress police independence
and accountability, over the strident objections that I and the United States
Ambassador made in a joint letter sent prior to the Assembly session. Implementation
of the separate police budget has been pending since the passage of the provision in
2017.
139. In March, a representative in the Zenica-Doboj Canton Assembly introduced,
under expedited procedure, proposed amendments to the Zenica-Doboj Canton Law
on Internal Affairs that would seriously undermine police professiona lism and usher
in political interference in professional policing. In a joint letter, the United States
Ambassador and I asked that the amendments be withdrawn and further considered
by a body of experts.
140. In January, the new ruling majority in Sarajevo Canton publicly issued its plan
of activities, which entails the full implementation of the Sarajevo Initiative adopted
in June 2020 by the Sarajevo Canton Assembly. The Initiative encompasses far reaching reforms of the public security arrangement in the Canton by eliminating the
Sarajevo Canton Ministry of Interior, while the Sarajevo Canton Police
Administration remains in place. In January, in a joint letter addressed to the Sarajevo
Canton authorities, the United States Ambassador and I emphasized th e importance
of achieving the Sarajevo Initiative.
141. The Posavina Canton authorities failed to insert a required provision in the
relevant police law required by the letter of the President of the Security Council of
2007 on police denied certification by the former United Nations International Police
Task Force, despite repeated assurances from canton authorities.
142. Controversial appointments and dismissals of police commanders and
independent boards continued to be strong indicators of improper poli tical
interference in operational policing.
143. The Herzegovina-Neretva Canton authorities have not yet appointed a new
independent board, police commissioner, public complaints bureau or police board.
The Canton has not had a duly appointed police commissioner since October 2018,
nor a functioning independent board since March 2017.
144. The Federation Government has not yet appointed the Federation police
director, despite the fact that the Federation Independent Board completed the
selection process for that position in April 2019. In February, the Federation Minister
for Interior forwarded the top-ranked candidate selected by the board to the
Federation Government, which sparked media controversy. In March, the Federation
House of Representatives Security Commission called for the cancellation of the
appointment process and reissuance of a vacancy announcement. The security
commission does not have a role in the selection and appointment process.
145. In February, the Tuzla Canton Government reinstated Dževad Korman to the
position of police director following a Tuzla Canton municipal court ruling that the
January 2020 dismissal of Mr. Korman had not been in compliance with the law. Prior
to Mr. Korman’s return to his former position, my Office and the U nited States
21-05527

33/40

S/2021/409

Embassy criticized the dismissal as improper political interference in professional
policing.
146. In December, the West Herzegovina Canton Assembly appointed a new
independent board, and in February the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary
Assembly appointed a new independent board for overseeing the work of the directors
of the State Investigation and Protection Agency, the Border Police and the
Directorate of Police Coordination. The mandate of the previous board had expired
in March 2018.
147. The Council of Ministers has not yet appointed the next Director General of the
Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The mandate of the current
Director General (serving a technical mandate) expired in November 2019.
148. In March, the Heads of the European Union Delegation, the Council of Europe
and OSCE, the Ambassadors of the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom and
the United States and I sent a joint letter to all Ministers for Interior in Bosnia and
Herzegovina encouraging them to initiate the procedure aimed at advancing
legislation governing the enjoyment of freedom of peaceful assembly in their
respective jurisdictions by using the model of the new Brčko District Law on Peaceful
Assembly adopted in July 2020, as it is in line with European and international human
rights standards.

VII. Economy
149. The COVID-19 pandemic has seriously disrupted the Bosnia and Herzegovina
economy. In its February 2021 report on macroeconomic indicators for January to
October 2020, the Council of Ministers’ Directorate for Economic Planning notes a
3.7 per cent decline in the gross domestic product (GDP) of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the first half of 2020 compared with the same period in 2019, while IMF and the
World Bank forecast the GDP decline for 2020 at 5.5 per cent and 3.2 per cent,
respectively. Industrial production in the period decreased by 7.5 per cent, while
exports and imports decreased by 8.5 per cent and 13.4 per cent, respectively. At the
annual level, Bosnia and Herzegovina registered deflation. The price level in 2020
decreased by 1.6 per cent over the previous year.
150. According to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Agency for Statistics, the number of
employed persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina in December was 813,942 , which is 2
per cent lower than December 2019. At the same time, the number of unemployed
persons was 413,627, which is 2.9 per cent higher than a year earlier. The registered
unemployment rate in December was 33.7 per cent. Unemployed young people
represented an estimated 60 per cent of the total number of unemployment persons.
The number of pensioners now totals 699,121 persons, an increase of 1.7 per cent.
151. The average net salary of KM 988 and the average pension of KM 415 remain
significantly below the average basket of goods price of KM 1,998 for a four-member
family, suggesting that even those with a steady income struggle to make ends meet,
in particular pensioners with the lowest pension payments. The COVID -19 pandemic
has further aggravated the poverty levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In its report
entitled “Economic and Social Impact of COVID-19”, the World Bank forecasts that,
depending on whether the crisis lasts one or two quarters, about 35,000 to 85,000
individuals are likely to fall into poverty. While the number of poor in Bosnia and
Herzegovina before the pandemic was 600,000 to 700,000 persons, this is now
estimated at 800,000 persons.
152. The negative trends apply also to corruption levels. In its Corruption Perceptions
Index 2020, Transparency International ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina as 111th of
34/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

180 countries, which is 10 places down from 2019 and significantly below the ranking
of its neighbours (Croatia is 63rd, Montenegro is 67th and Serbia is 94th). During the
pandemic, the country experienced numerous violations of human and labour rights,
as well as discrimination in economic aid distribution and alleged unlawful
procurement of medical equipment.
153. The COVID-19 pandemic has also had a negative effect on foreign direct
investments. Preliminary estimates indicate a decline of over 10 per cent in 2020 and
forecast a further decline of 5 to 10 per cent in 2021. The estimates are especially
worrisome considering that the 2020 decline is calculated in comparison with 2019,
when foreign direct investments totalled a modest KM 699 million and were already
26.6 per cent lower than in 2018.
154. Under the circumstances, the March affirmation of the credit rating of Bosnia
and Herzegovina by Standard & Poor’s rating services (B, with a stable outlook) is
positive news. Likewise, although the commercial banking sector recorded a profit
decline of almost 40 per cent in 2020, it is still assessed as generally stable and liquid.

A.

Fiscal issues
155. The COVID-19 pandemic has not disrupted debt servicing or regular monthly
budget payments, largely owing to continuous indirect tax revenue inflows and
domestic borrowing. Although indirect taxes remained the vital revenue source for all
levels of government and thus the backbone of their budget stability, their inflows
have declined significantly. For the first time since the 2009 global financial crisis,
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Indirect Taxation Authority recorded a decrease in the
collection of indirect tax revenues. In 2020, the gro ss collection totalled
KM 7.23 billion, 9.5 per cent less than in 2019.
156. Domestic borrowing contributed not only to budget stability in the reporting
period, primarily at the entity level, but also to the country’s overall indebtedness.
According to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Finance and Treasury, the
overall Bosnia and Herzegovina public debt at the end of 2020 totalled
KM 12.1 billion, of which 71.3 per cent was foreign debt and 28.7 per cent domestic
debt. The Federation share of the debt was 51.1 per cent, while the Republika Srpska
share of the debt was 47.9 per cent. Compared with 2019, the overall Bosnia and
Herzegovina public debt at the end of 2020 increased by 8.5 per cent, with foreign
debt increasing by 6.4 per cent and domestic debt increasing by 14 per cent.
157. Bosnia and Herzegovina did not benefit from international budget support
during the reporting period. An agreement on a new three-year IMF Extended Fund
Facility programme was not reached owing, inter alia, to the conti nued opposition of
the Republika Srpska authorities to reforms that it perceived as strengthening the
State competences and institutions. This was mostly evident in two areas singled out
by IMF: promoting a single economic space and strengthening financial stability, both
necessary to strengthen the resilience of Bosnia and Herzegovina to an economic
and/or a financial crisis, and for its accelerated development and its aspirations
towards accession to the European Union.
158. The reforms opposed by the Republika Srpska authorities also included those
needed to efficiently fight money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. The
persistent views of the Republika Srpska on the aforementioned matters, as well as
the subsequent lack of progress on other measures within the original Extended Fund
Facility programme – including, inter alia, the failure of the State authorities to ensure
the timely adoption of a State budget for 2021 and the failure of the Federation
authorities to appoint a new Securities Commission – signal little prospect for a
prompt agreement between Bosnia and Herzegovina and IMF.

21-05527

35/40

S/2021/409

159. As for the 2021 budget process, the State institutions and one Federation
canton – Una-Sana – still operate on temporary financing, while both entities and t he
other nine cantons have 2021 budgets in place.
160. It has become the practice that the 31 December deadline for the adoption of a
State budget for the following year is not met, with the State institutions consequently
forced into temporary financing as of 1 January. Despite expectations that the 2021
budget would be adopted prior to the end of the first quarter of 2021, this did not
happen, as on 11 March the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency denied support for
the draft budget previously adopted by a majority vote in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Council of Ministers. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency objected to the absence
of funds for mitigating the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and –
disregarding all other options – instructed that the funds for this purpose be taken
from those planned for adjustments of the employee salary base that would revert the
base to the 2012 level. Although such adjustments would still keep the salary base
below the 2009 level and would be crucial to narrowing the gap between State-level
salaries and salaries at lower levels of authority and to address capacity deficiencies
of the State institutions and support their functionality, political party calculations
prevailed. This was condemned by employees of the State institutions – including
those in the Bosnia and Herzegovina security sector – and was followed by employee
protests and threats of strikes. On 25 March, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of
Ministers unanimously adopted a new draft 2021 budget of KM 1.87 billion, including
KM 21.7 million for mitigating the consequences of the pandemic. The draft is still
subject to consideration by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency. The
uninterrupted financing of the State institutions – albeit on the basis of temporary
financing – is provided for through 30 June.
161. The 2021 Federation budget was adopted by the Federation House of
Representatives on 29 December and by the Federation House of Peoples on
11 January. The budget amounts to KM 5.48 billion, a 0.5 per cent decrease from the
2020 rebalanced budget. Total domestic revenues are projected in the amount of
KM 4 billion, an increase of 6 per cent, and include, inter alia, indirect tax revenues
of KM 1.44 billion (approximately the same as 2020), revenues from pension
contributions of KM 1.99 billion (a 13 per cent increase) and non -tax revenues of
KM 499.1 million (a 1 per cent decrease). The budget shows a deficit of
KM 1.36 billion, a 1 per cent decrease compared to the rebalanced 2020 budget, to be
covered by short-term domestic borrowing (KM 410 million), long-term domestic
borrowing (KM 210 million), loans received through the State (KM 640.9 million)
and receipts from financial assets (KM 100 million). For expenditures, the budget
foresees, inter alia, KM 252 million for gross salaries (a 5 per cent increase),
KM 107.8 million for material and service expenditures (a 10 per cent decrease) and
KM 3.67 billion for current transfers (a 5 per cent decrease), which include transfers
for social welfare and veterans, pension funds, transfers for economic stabilization
and transfers to lower levels of government. The Federation debt payment in 2021
totals KM 1 billion (an 8 per cent increase), of which the foreign debt payment is
KM 486.3 million.
162. In December, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska adopted the
second rebalance of the 2020 Republika Srpska budget. The original budget foresaw
a budget surplus of KM 20 million based on the estimated 3.5 per cent GDP growth
in 2020 but, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, the rebalanced budget instead
foresaw a deficit of KM 394 million. The budget deficit was covered from the IMF
Rapid Financing Instrument and from additional borrowing from the local capital
market, amounting to KM 244 million and KM 157 million, respectively. Owing to
the pandemic, borrowing by the Republika Srpska more than doubled in 2020,
increasing from KM 315 million to KM 716 million.
36/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

163. The 2021 Republika Srpska budget was adopted by the National Assembly of
the Republika Srpska on 17 December. It amounts to KM 3.8 billion, a 4 per cent
increase over the rebalanced 2020 budget. More than half of the budget funds are
planned for pension payments and civil servant salaries. The main budget
beneficiaries are the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Labour and Veterans and
the Ministry of Interior. To cover budgetary needs, the 2021 budget foresees
KM 834 million from long-term borrowing and KM 224 million from short-term
borrowing.
164. The long-term borrowing sources are local and foreign capital markets, as well
as international financial institutions, while short-term borrowing is planned through
the issuance of treasury bills on the local capital market. In the same session, the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska adopted the 2021–2023 Economic
Reform Programme, projecting annual economic growth between 2.6 and 3.2 per cent.
The programme also projects borrowing of KM 3.1 billion. Both the budget and the
reform programme are focused on mitigating the negative consequences of t he
COVID-19 pandemic in the Republika Srpska.
165. Fiscal challenges at the entity level arise mainly from the continued absence of
agreement on the IMF Extended Fund Facility programme, the underperformance of
domestic revenue and/or a lack of interest in government securities. Any deterioration
of fiscal stability at the entity level, manifested primarily in suspended or delayed
budget payments, poses serious risks to overall political stability, as it inevitably
opens the door to inter- and intra-entity disputes and challenges to the State
institutions and competences, especially those transferred by the entities to the State.

B.

International obligations
166. Following its eighteenth session, on 17 December, the Ministerial Council of
the Energy Community – an international organization comprising the European
Union and the neighbouring countries from South -East Europe – suspended several
rights enjoyed by Bosnia and Herzegovina under the Energy Community Treaty,
specifically the participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in decision-making on
matters of budget and enforcement. The Council decision is due to the persistent
failure of Bosnia and Herzegovina to comply with the requirements of the Second
Energy Package in the gas sector, the Sulphur in Fuels Directive and the Third Energy
Package in the electricity and gas sectors. The suspension is for two years, unless
Bosnia and Herzegovina rectifies the breaches. Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
under Energy Community sanctions since 2015, when it was first sanctioned for its
non-compliance with Energy Treaty requirements in the natural gas sector. This
breach remains unresolved and stems from a long-standing entity dispute over
regulating aspects of the gas sector at the State level, which continues to p revent the
requisite adoption of State-level legislation.
167. The mandates of members of the management and the management board of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Electricity Transmission Company expired three years ago.
The management board consists four members from the Federation (two Croat and
two Bosniak members) and three members from the Republika Srpska, all of whom
are subject to confirmation by the Council of Ministers. In December, the Federation
Government nominated two Croat and two Bosniak member s to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Electricity Transmission Company’s management board, but the
Council of Ministers decided on 29 December not to proceed with a partial
appointment and invited the Republika Srpska to also nominate its three members, so
that all members of the Company’s management board could be confirmed at the same
time. Further delays in those appointments could also complicate decision -making on
issues of relevance for the Company and electricity transmission in general. They

21-05527

37/40

S/2021/409

could also provide a pretext for renewed challenges to the Company, which was
established by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law Establishing the Electricity
Transmission Company adopted in 2004 by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly, following a June 2003 agreement of the entities on the
establishment of a transmission company and independent system operator, and
concluded on the basis of article III (5) (b) of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution.
168. After the unilateral withholding by the Republika Srpska of contributions to the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Railways Corporation in 2016 and 2017, which
deprived the Corporation of funds equivalent to one Republika Srpska annual
contribution, the Federation – wishing to compensate for the difference in funds paid
to the Corporation by the two entities – decided not to provide funding for the
Corporation in its 2020 budget. While the Republika Srpska 2020 budget included an
allocation for the Corporation, the entity again withheld payment and only in the fir st
quarter of 2021 transferred the remaining 40 per cent of the budgeted amount. At the
same time, an adequate entity transfer by the Republika Srpska to the Corporation for
2021 has not yet been secured, while the Federation Government secured adequate
funds for the Corporation only at its 1 April session. This uncertainty of funding poses
a risk to the sustainability of the Corporation, which is the only State -level
corporation established under annex 9 to the General Framework Agreement for
Peace. In addition, it jeopardizes the only mechanism for a harmonized approach to
the reconstruction of railway routes, which would benefit the railway companies of
both entities, all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the country’s economy.

VIII. Return of refugees and displaced persons
169. The return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes of origin, a right
guaranteed under annex 7 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace, requires
the authorities at all levels to establish on their territorie s political and socioeconomic
environments conducive to voluntary returns and the integration of returnees into the
communities.
170. Returns have been negatively affected by the divisive rhetoric mentioned
elsewhere in the present report, as well as the p ersistent, unresolved issues relevant
for returns in general. Thus, despite the return of Bosniak children from Liplje near
Zvornik in the Republika Srpska to classes last October, the issue of the official name
of the Bosnian language within the Republika Srpska educational remains unresolved.
171. The glorification of war criminals and the promotion of controversial narratives
related to historical events remain an open source for provocation. Despite its intrinsic
controversy, as well as an ongoing court case against the Ravna Gora Chetnik
Movement for inciting hatred during their March 2019 gathering in Višegrad, in
February of 2021 the local assembly in the Republika Srpska town of Bijeljina
supported the construction of a bust dedicated to the Second World War Chetnik
commander Draža Mihailović in a central square of the city.
172. In that regard, throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina there are streets, squares and
public buildings, including schools, named after Second World War Nazi
collaborators and supporters, as well as signs and plaques honouring convicted war
criminals, which are not only intimidating to those in the minority, including
returnees, but also a trend of historical revisionism that is not only contrary to
fundamental European values but also to basic human decency.
173. Religious property has also been targeted by wanton attacks. On 18 February,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)

38/40

21-05527

S/2021/409

World Heritage-listed Aladza Mosque in Foča in the Republika Srpska was damaged,
possibly by firearms. The incident is under investigation.

IX. Media developments
174. The Public Broadcasting System remains heavily politicized. Years of
obstruction in the implementation of the relevant legislation has led to the
abandonment of the system of joint collection of radio and television taxes and the de
facto establishment of three completely separate and competitive public broadcasters.
The appointment of the members of the broadcasters’ governing boards is either
carried out exclusively by the relevant parliament and serves the parliamentary
majority, as is the case with Republika Srpska broadcaster Radio Television of the
Republika Srpska, or is obstructed by appointed authorities who oppose the proposed
candidates, as is the case with Bosnia and Herzegovina Radio Television and Radio Television Federation. On 11 February, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Communications
Regulatory Agency Council decided to readvertise positions for all four members of
the Governing Board of Bosnia and Herzegovina Radio Television, since the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly failed to app oint the new governors from
the list submitted by the Council on 4 January. There is a lack of activity on the part
of the Federation Parliament, with only of four members of the Radio -Television
Federation Governing Board still working, and his mandate ex pired seven years ago.
175. Attacks and pressure on journalists continue to pose a threat to unhindered
reporting. In the reporting period, the free media helpline of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Union of Journalists, functioning as a local project to provi de support
and assistance to journalists in their work, registered 23 cases of violations of the
rights of journalists and 25 cases of free media violations, ranging from physical
attacks, political pressure, different threats and verbal assaults. There is also a
growing number of incidents of gender-based violence and attacks against female
journalists.
176. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Press Council, a self-regulating body for print and
online media, has seen a marked increase in registered cases, in partic ular complaints
against commentaries on web portals. To date in 2021, the Council has registered 135
such cases and 89 complaints against printed stories. The latest concerning trend is
orchestrated cyberattacks against online media portals, which are ill -equipped to
prevent or fend off such attacks. International organizations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have condemned such attacks and called upon the relevant Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to strengthen their networks and ability to detect, deter and
investigate all attacks on media websites.
177. Although the licenses for analogue broadcasting for public broadcasting
services expired in April of last year, the public broadcasters have neither fulfilled the
obligation to establish a joint legal entity to enable digitalization nor purchased the
equipment necessary for its introduction. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
Communications Regulatory Agency extended for an additional five years the
licenses for broadcasting public service programmes, stipulating that a ll transmitters
that interfere with the digital radio frequency spectrum both within and across the
Bosnia and Herzegovina border will be disabled if there are reports of interference.
178. The licenses of commercial broadcasters for analogue broadcasting expire in
December of 2021. Those broadcasters announced their transition to the digital
platform Multiplex C, which was initiated and approved by the Communications
Regulatory Agency at their request.

21-05527

39/40

S/2021/409

179. On 4 February, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly adopted
an audit report on the effects of the digitalization of the television signal in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, issued by the Audit Office of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
institutions, and instructed the competent Bosnia and Herzegovina Min istry of
Communications and Transport to implement the auditor’s recommendations.
Specifically, the competent ministry is expected to determine a plan of activities, with
deadlines and steps to be taken to finalize the process of digitalization in Bosnia a nd
Herzegovina.

X. European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina
180. The European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with its
continued executive mandate, is vital to supporting the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to maintain a safe and secure environment, which enables my office and
other international organizations to fulfil our respective mandates. The mission’s
presence in the field, including its liaison and observation teams, undoubtedly
contributes to stability and security and provides an early warning system for
potential security issues, which is particularly crucial in the current turbulent political
climate.

XI. Future of the Office of the High Representative
181. Fundamentally, policy considerations regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina must
form the basis for assessing the resource requirements of the Office of the High
Representative. As the present report demonstrates, there is still considerable work to
be done to move the country forward. My office continues to streamline its operations
responsibly. At its peak in 2002, the budget of the Office of the High Representative
was €25 million, with around 700 staff, compared with the current €5.3 million budget
and only 89 staff.
182. During my tenure as mandate holder, the budget of the Office of the High
Representative has decreased by 53 per cent and the staff by over 58 per cent.
However, while the organization has faced substantial reductions in staff and funding,
its tasks have largely remained the same. As the budget decreases over time, it
becomes exponentially more difficult to further reduce costs without cutting essential
expertise and capacity. Given the numerous challenges, the Office of the High
Representative must retain the effective capacity to mitigate risks to stability and
encourage irreversible progress. Staff reductions pose a greater risk for the
organization, which relies on its human capital, institutional memory, expertise and
long-standing contact networks. The diminishing of financial res ources only
exacerbates the issue.

XII. Reporting schedule
183. The present report is submitted in keeping with the practice of submitting
regular reports for onward transmission to the Security Council, as required by
Council resolution 1031 (1995). I would be pleased to provide additional information
or clarification at any time, should the Secretary-General or any member of the
Council require it. The next regular report to the Secretary -General is scheduled for
October 2021.

40/40

21-05527
