152

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th p/enary meeting
8 December 1986

41/201.

Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its resolution 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December
1971, by which it established the Office ofthe United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and, inter alia, recognized the need to ensure prompt, effective and efficient responses, in times of natural disaster and other disaster
situations, that would bring to bear the resources of the
United Nations system, prospective donor countries and
voluntary agencies,
Recal/ing a/so its resolution 36/225 of 17 December
1981, by which it reaffirmed the mandate of the Office of
the Co-ordinator, called for the strengthening and improvement of the capacity and effectiveness of the Office,
and stressed the need to ensure prompt delivery of concerted relief through an efficient and effective coordination system of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance,
Recalling further its resolution 37 /144 of 17 December
1982 and other relevant resolutions and decisions, including Economic and Social Council resolutions 1983/47 of
28 July 1983 and 1984/60 of 26 July 1984, in which the
Assembly and the Council, in ter alia, stressed the need to
strengthen and improve the capacity and effectiveness of
the Office of the Co-ordinator in order to attain an effective co-ordination system ofhumanitarian and disaster relief assistance, and recognizing that, as a result of those
resolutions and decisions, there is now in place a workable
system to promote, facilitate and co-ordinate, on a worldwide basis, relief activities carried out by the United Nations system, in co-operation with Governments and
voluntary agencies, including the collection and dissemination of information on disaster assessment, priority
needs and donar assistance,
Convinced that there is a clear distinction between immediate humanitarian emergency response and longerterm development assistance and that there is a need to resp~md to these i!1 a co-ordinated manner, and noting in
th1s regard the d1fferent nature and functions of the Office
ofthe Co-ordinator and the United Nations Development
Programme,
Noting that the number of disasters to which the United
Nations system was called upon to respond has increased
from twelve in 1980 to fifty-three in 1985,
Recognizing, in this connection, the importance of the
contribution of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and other competent voluntary and non-governmental
organizations,
Recognizing a/so that the primary responsibility for administration, relief operations and disaster preparedness
lies with the Governments of affected countries and that
the major part of the material assistance and human effort
in disaster relief comes from the Governments of those
countries,
Deeply concerned about the additional economic burden
placed upon the developing countries by devastating natural disasters and other disaster situations, as well as the
disruption of the development process in those countries,

Appreciating the contributions made by donors to support international relief operations, including those made
to the Trust Fund of the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Recognizing that shortage of resources has been one of
the major constraints on an effective response of the
United Nations to disaster situations and continues to
hamper the full achievement of the aim of a rapid and effective response to the needs of countries affected by disasters and that, if the shortage is to be overcome, efforts will
be required by the intemational community to provide
both funds and assistance in kind,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 35/107 of
5 December 1980, in which it reaffirmed the necessity of
ensuring a continued sound financia) basis for the Office of
the Co-ordinator,
Noting with appreciation that the agreements between
the Office of the Co-ordinator and other organizations of
the United Nations system, including the United Nations
Development Programme, which define areas and means
of co-operation, have helped to strengthen the collective
response of the United Nations system to disasters,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator58 and of the statement made by the Co-ordinator before the Second Committee on 21 October 1986;65
2. Reaffirms the sovereignty of individual Member
States, recognizes the primary role of each State in caring
for the victims of disasters occurring in its territory and
stresses that all relief operations should be carried out and
co-ordinated in a manner consistent with the priorities
and needs of the countries concerned, and that the
material and other assistance provided by the international community should be appropriate to the particular
needs of the populations of the disaster-affected areas;
3. Recognizes the importance of disaster preparedness
and prevention activities, and calls upon the Office of the
Co-ordinator, Governments and organizations concerned
to ensure that due priority attention is given to them;
4. Reaffirms the mandate of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, established by the
General Assembly in resolution 2816 (XXVI) as the focal
point in the United Nations system for disaster relief coordination, and calls for the reinforcement and improvement of the capacity and effectiveness of the Office, without prejudice to any decision taken by the General
Assembly in the context of the review of the efficiency of
the administrative and financia) functioning ofthe United
Nations;66
5. Affirms that the Office of the Co-ordinator plays an
active role in executing United Nations Development Programme-assisted projects in the field of disaster preparedness;
6. Reitera tes its cal/ to all Governments and competent
organs and organizations to co-operate with the Office of
the Co-ordinator in arder to improve, in particular, the
flow of information to Governments and organizations
concerned, so that a more complete picture of relief activities, assistance received and further requirements may he
provided to ali concerned;
7. Calls upan those contributing assistance in kind to
provide, when appropriate, special grants to cover the
65 Official Record., of the General Assembly. Forty-jir'1 Session, Second
Commillee. 18th meeting, paras. 28-32.
66 I/,id, Forty-jirn Sessio11, S11ppleme11t No. 49(A/41 /49).

V.

Resolutlons adopted on the reports of the Second Commlttee

costs of transport and distribution of the assistance to and
within the affected country;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to intensify their efforts
to mobilize additional voluntary resources to meet the
needs arising from disaster and emergency situations;
9. Appeals to Governments to make urgent voluntary
contributions, directly or channelled through the Trust
Fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator, to enable the Office to cover contingency expenses in connection with disaster relief operations;
1O. Recommends that, as the Co-ordinator phases out
bis responsibility for disaster relief co-ordination in a
given country, he should contribute to ensuring the necessary transition to the rehabilitation and reconstruction
phase by passing on relevant data to competent organs and
agencies of the United Nations system;
11. Emphasizes the essential need for the work of the
Office of the Co-ordinator to be placed and kept on a
sound financia! basis, and calls upon the international
community to respond positively and expeditiously to the
appeal of the Secretary-General for contributions to the
Trust Fund to meet the needs arising from natural disasters and other disaster situations;
12. Welcomes the decision ofthe Secretary-General by
which a working group was established to review the
emergency response of the United Nations system in relation to the emergency situation in Africa;
13. Stresses, in this regard, the need to take into account the experience gained by the United Nations in responding to the emergency situation in Africa and other
disaster situations, in strengthening the functioning and
capacity of the United Nations in the area of emergency
assistance;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the implementation ofthe present resolution, including
a comprehensive review and assessment of the existing
mechanisms and arrangements within the system for
disaster and emergency assistance and co-ordination, to
the General Assembly at its forty-second session, through
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1987.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/202.

Strengthened international economic cooperation aimed at resolving externa! debt
problems of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 40/474 of 20June 1986, and the
questions listed therein,67
Recalling Trade and Development Board resolutions
165 (S-IX) of 11 March 197868 and 222 (XXI) of 27 September 1980, 69
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "International debt situation in mid-1986", 70

67 Ojjicial Records ofthe General Assembly. Fortieth Se.ssion. A1111exes.
agenda item 84. documents A/40/989/ Add.14. paras. 7. 11 and 12, and
A/40/989/ Add.3, para. 66.
68 /bid., Tlúrty-third Se.,sion. Supplcment No. /5 (A/33/15), vol.[,
part two, annex l.
69 //,id .. 71,irry-fifih Sl'\sion. Supplemcnt No. 15 (A/35/15), vol. 11,
annex l.
70 A/41/643.

153

Taking note of the statements made by Member States
under this agenda ítem, particularly in the meetings held
in the plenary and the Second Committee of the General
Assembly during its fortieth and forty-first sessions, 71
Recognizing that debt servicing problems constitute a
severe and continuing burden which restricts the economic and social development of many developing countries,
1. Agrees on the following elements and invites ali
those involved to take them into account in addressing the
problems of externa! indebtedness of developing countries,
with a view to reaching equitable, durable and mutually
agreed solutions, taking into account the particular circumstances of each country:
(a) Externa! indebtedness, viewed in an overall perspective, should be tackled within the framework of a
strengthened and improved strategy of co-operation of the
intemational community for sustained world economic
growth and development, particularly for developing
countries;
(b) Recognizing the competence of the multilateral financia! institutions, as well as that of the relevant specialized agencies, organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system within their respective mandates,
the interrelated issues of debt, money, finance, resource
flows, trade, commodities and development should be addressed in the context of their close interrelationship;
(e) In a spirit of common commitment and mutual cooperation, stronger growth and development in developing countries should be encouraged, involving the participation of ali countries concemed, particularly creditor
developed countries and debtor developing countries,
multilateral financia! institutions and international private
banks, in addressing the debt problems of developing
countries;
(d) A lasting solution to the debt problem also requires
simultaneous and complementary actions in the areas of
economic policy that are mutually supportive, and includes:
(i) Effective national adjustment processes and structural changes, pursued within national development
priorities and objectives, which should be growthoriented; due regard should be paid to the economic,
social and development needs of each country in the
application of conditionality;
(ii) Supportive policies that encompass, inter afia, the
dismantling of protectionism and expansion of intemational trade, increased financia) flows, lending
programmes by the international financial institutions and commercial banks in support of growthoriented measures, lower real interest rates, and improvements in commodity markets;
(iii) Coherent and co-ordinated policies on the part of
industrialized countries, including strengthened
multilateral surveillance, that promote a supportive
international economic environment conducive to
sustained and non-inflationary growth and adjustments addressing the imbalances in the world
economy, including the reduction of trade imbalances and the promotion of greater foreign exchange market stability;
71 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session.
Ple,wry Meetings, 119th and 133rd meetings; ibid., Second Committee,
31st, 41st, 45th and 52nd to 56th meetings; ibid., Second Committe<'.
Sessional Fascicle. corrigendum: ibid., Forty-first Session. Plcnary
Meeting.,, 100th meeting; and ibid., Second Committee, 10th to 13th,
15th, 16th and 36th meeting, and corrigendum.
