General Assembly-Thirty-third Session,

14

Recalling also the contents of the relevant paragraphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 10
1. Invites all States to continue to consider the
convening, at an appropriate stage, of an international
conference or conferences, under the auspices of the
United Nations system, aimed at promoting international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear
energy in accordance with the objectives of General
Assembly resolution 32/50;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to urge all
States to communicate to him their views, observations
and suggestions on such a conference and requests
him to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
42nd plenary meeting
2 November 1978
33/9.

Credentials of representatives to the thirtythird session of the General Assembly

A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee.11
43rd plenary meeting
3 November 1978

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.12
99th plenary meeting
24 May 1979
33/15.

Question of Cyprus 13

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and its subsequent resolutions,
Greatly concerned over the prolongation of the
Cyprus crisis, which continues to constitute a serious
threat to international peace and security,
Deeply regretting that the resolutions of the United
Nations on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
. Exp~essing deep concern over the lack of progress
m the mtercommunal talks,
Deploring the continued presence of foreign armed
forces and foreign military personnel on the territory
of the Republic of Cyprus and the fact that part of
its territory is still occupied by foreign forces,
Deploring also all unilateral actions that change the
demographic structure of Cyprus,
10 Resolution

S-10/2.

11 Official Records of the General Assembly Thirty-third
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/33/350.
12 Ibid., document A/33/350/ Add.I.
18 See also sect. I, foot-note 4, and sect. X.B.3 decision
33/402.
'

Mindful of the need to settle the question of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations,
1. Reiterates its full support for the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and calls once again for
the cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
2. Demands the immediate and effective implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX), unanimously
adopted by the General Assembly and endorsed by
the Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974) of
13 December 1974, and of the subsequent resolutions
of the Assembly and the Council on Cyprus, which
provide the valid basis for the solution of the problem
of Cyprus;
3. Demands the immediate withdrawal of all foreign armed forces and foreign military presence from
the Republic of Cyprus;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between
the representatives of the two communities;
5. Calls for respect of the human rights of all
Cypriots and the instituting of urgent measures for
the voluntary return of the refugees to their homes
in safety;
6. Calls for the urgent resumption in a meaningful
and constructive manner of the negotiations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General between the representatives of the two communities, to be conducted
freely on an equal footing on the basis of comprehensive and constructive proposals of the parties concerned with a view to reaching as early as possible
a mutually acceptable agreement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
7. Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from
any unilateral action which might adversely affect the
prospects of a just and lasting solution of the problem
of Cyprus by peaceful means and to co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General in the performance of his
task under the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council as well as with
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus;
8. Recommends that the Security Council should
examine the question of the implementation, within
a time-frame, of its relevant resolutions and consider
and adopt thereafter, if necessary, all appropriate and
practical measures under the Charter of the United
Nations for ensuring the implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations on Cyprus;
9. Decides to include the item entitled "Question
of Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fourth
sessi~m and requ~sts the Secretary-General to follow up
the implementation of the present resolution and to
report on all its aspects to the General Assembly at
that session.
49th plenary meeting
9 November 1978
33/17.

Third United Nations Confereiwe on the
Law of the Sea14

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
14 See also

sect. X.B.7, decision 33/405.

II,

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3483 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10 December 1976 and 32/194 of 20 December 1977,
Noting the letter dated 26 September 1978 from
the President of the Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea to the President of the General
Assembly 15 regarding the decisions reached at the
seventh session of the Conference, held at Geneva
from 28 March to 19 May 1978 and in New York
from 21 August to 15 September 1978,
Having considered the decision of the Conference,
as conveyed in the letter from its President, that its
eighth session should be convened at Geneva on
19 March 1979 for a period of six weeks and that
the Conference should be empowered to decide at the
end of its eighth session to hold further meetings in
1979 under arrangements to be determined in consultation with the Secretary-General, should the Conference feel at that stage that a decision to that effect
would enable it to advance its work,
Taking into account the recommendation made by
the Conference that the General Assembly should
again study measures to ensure stability and continuity
for the secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference,
l. Approves the convening of the eighth session
of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea at Geneva for the period from 19 March
to 27 April 1979 and empowers the Conference, if
the progress of its work warrants, to decide at that
stage to hold further meetings under arrangements
to be determined in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to make available appropiate facilities to that end;
3. Reiterates its authorization, originally given in
paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 31/63,
to the Secretary-General to continue to make the
necessary arrangements, provided under paragraph 9
of Assembly resolution 3067 (XXVIII), for the efficient and continuous servicing of the Conference in
1979 and of subsequent activities as may be decided
upon by the Conference, as well as to take appropriate
measures to ensure stability and continuity for the
secretariat personnel recruited for the Conference.
51st plenary meeting
10 November 1978
33/18.

Observer status for the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation in the
General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the Agency for Cultural and
Technical Co-operation for co-operation between the
United Nations and the Agency,
l. Decides to invite the Agency for Cultural and
Technical Co-operation to participate in the sessions
and the work of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.
51 st plenary meeting
JO November 1978
15 A/33/270 and

Corr.I.

33/27.

15

Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity, 16
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion
of co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity and the practical measures taken for their implementation, in particular resolution 32/19 of 11 November 1977,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth
ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 18 to
22 July 1978,11
Taking note especially of the statement made by
the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at the 10th plenary meeting of the General
Assembly, on 27 September 1978, 18 particularly on
matters of concern to the two organizations,
Taking further note of the meeting between the
General Secretariat of the Organization of African
Unity and the secretariats of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system on assistance to liberation movements, held at
Geneva in August 1978, and particularly of the recommendations adopted at that meeting,
Noting with satisfaction the excellent co-operation
that has developed between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity in areas of common
endeavour,
Aware of the special needs of the newly independent
African States, particularly with regard to the consolidation of their national independence, their endeavours towards social and economic betterment and
the adverse impact on their economies of the current
international economic situation,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southern Africa arising from the continued domination of the people of the area by the minority racist
regimes, and conscious of the need to provide increased assistance to the peoples of the region and to
their liberation movements in their struggle against
colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Aware of its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa to help them to cope with
the situation caused by the acts of aggression against
their territories by the apartheid regime in South Africa
and the illegal racist minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia,
Recognizing the importance of taking effective steps
to give the widest possible dissemination of information relating to the liberation struggle of the peoples
in southern Africa,
Recognizing the need for continuous liaison, exchange of information at the secretariat level and
technical co-operation on such matters as training and
16 A/33/253 and Corr.1 and 2.
17 See A/33/235 and Corr.I, annex II.
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-third
Session, Plenary Meetings, 10th meeting, paras. 2-63.
