United Nations

S/PV.4873

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4873

rd meeting
Monday, 24 November 2003, 4.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Angola)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Chungong Ayafor
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Cheng Jingye
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. von Ungern-Sternberg
Mr. Fall
Mr. De Alba
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Konuzin
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Atieh
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-62823 (E)

*0362823*

S/PV.4873

The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ghana, Nana Akufo-Addo.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Nana AkufoAddo and the delegation of the Economic
Community of West African States took seats at
the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana, as well as to His Excellency
Mr. Mamadou Bamba, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. François Lonsény Fall, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guinea, Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria and Mr. Cheikh
Tidiane Gadio, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure His
Excellency, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council I extend a warm
welcome to the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, and invite him to take a
seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting, and I give him the
floor.

2

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): May I
first of all commend the leaders of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and in
particular Presidents Kufuor and Obasanjo on their
tireless efforts to find a solution to the crisis in Côte
d’Ivoire. I also wish to thank all of those countries that
have provided contingents to the ECOWAS mission in
Côte d’Ivoire. They are fulfilling their mandate in
extremely difficult conditions, but thanks to them and
to the French forces of the Licorne operation, an
escalation of the conflict has, thus far, been avoided.
However, I am deeply concerned by the current
political stalemate created by the withdrawal of the
Forces nouvelles from the Government of National
Reconciliation on 23 September. Unless urgent steps
are taken to resolve that impasse, the tenuous security
situation in the country could deteriorate still further.
Already, there are signs that the situation in some
parts of the northern provinces controlled by the Forces
Nouvelles is degenerating into lawlessness. Tension
between the Forces nouvelles and the Forces armées
nationales de Côte d’Ivoire is also escalating. In that
context, the Forces nouvelles has declared a state of
emergency in areas under their control, and accused
President Gbagbo of preparing to attack their positions.
There is clearly a danger that Côte d’Ivoire could slip
back into conflict.
I was pleased to note, however, that, during the
summit of seven ECOWAS leaders held in Accra on 11
November, President Gbagbo and Prime Minister
Diarra worked closely together to ensure that the
Government of National Reconciliation is able to
function and to implement the work programme
developed by the Government last May. It is indeed
essential that the Government be able to carry out the
tasks assigned to it under the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement with the necessary means and authority.
The undertakings made by the President and
Prime Minister in Accra must be matched by deeds. In
this regard, all parties concerned must demonstrate
genuine political will to honour their commitments and
implement the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement in good
faith.
In order to jump-start the stalled peace process,
the parties must tackle the fundamental issues behind
the deadlock. As indicated in my latest report to the
Security
Council,
issued
on
4
November,

S/PV.4873

implementation of the key provisions of the LinasMarcoussis Agreement must begin without delay.
I urge the Ivorian parties to take the key measures
identified in that report immediately. Those measures
include the following: the Forces nouvelles must rejoin
the Government of National Reconciliation without
delay; all parties must accept the Government of
National Reconciliation as fully constituted after the
appointment of the Defence and Security Ministers on
12 September; all militias must begin to disband
immediately; the armed groups must be cantoned and
disarmed as soon as possible, while at the same time
the country’s security forces are restructured; the de
facto partition of the country must end at once; and the
National Assembly must adopt, as soon as possible, the
reforms proposed in the Government’s work
programme.
The United Nations reaffirms its commitment to
continue to work closely with ECOWAS in the pursuit
of peace in Côte d’Ivoire and to help implement the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. I intend to send an
assessment mission to Côte d’Ivoire soon to review the
situation on the ground, so that I can prepare
recommendations for the consideration of the Council,
pursuant to resolution 1514 (2003), which requested
me to report on how efforts of the United Nations
Mission in Côte d’Ivoire to facilitate peace and
stability in Côte d’Ivoire might be improved, including
through the possible reinforcement of the United
Nations presence in the country.
Finally, let me appeal once again to all the
members of this Council, and to the international
community as a whole, to remain engaged in Côte
d’Ivoire and to provide the necessary support to enable
the ECOWAS forces to continue their useful work in
that country.
The President: At this meeting, the Security
Council will hear briefings by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana and the current Chairman and the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, respectively.
Thereafter, the Security Council will hold a private
meeting with the ECOWAS delegation at which
Council members may ask questions.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana, His Excellency Mr. Nana AkufoAddo.

Mr. Akufo-Addo (Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ghana): I must begin first, Mr. President, by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of November
and to thank you and members of the Security Council
for receiving once more a ministerial delegation of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mediation and Security Council on such
short notice. That is yet another sign of the support and
concern of the Security Council for matters concerning
ECOWAS and we are grateful for that.
Today’s delegation from ECOWAS is composed
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Mamadou Bamba; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Guinea,
Mr. François Fall; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Ambassador Olu
Adeniji, an old friend of this Organization; the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States, Mr. Mohamed Chambas; and
myself, Nana Akufo-Addo, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Ghana and Chairman of the
ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council. The
delegation is fortified by the presence here in the
Council Chamber of Mr. Albert Tevoedjre, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Côte
d’Ivoire and Chairman of the Monitoring Committee
(Comité de Suivi), Ambassador Raph Uwechue, Special
Representative of the ECOWAS Executive Secretary in
Côte d’Ivoire and member of the Monitoring
Committee, and Colonel R. O. Sackey, Deputy
Commander of the ECOWAS Mission in Côte d’Ivoire
(ECOMICI).
We are here today to brief the Security Council
on current developments in the peace process in Côte
d’Ivoire. You may recall that earlier this year a
ministerial delegation of the ECOWAS Mediation and
Security Council that I was privileged to lead had the
honour of addressing this august body on the situation
in Côte d’Ivoire. Since then ECOWAS has continued to
benefit from the support of the United Nations in
general, and that of the Security Council, in particular,
by its endorsement of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
in resolution 1464 (2003) of 4 February 2003 and the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in Côte
d’Ivoire (MINUCI) by resolution 1479 (2003) of 13
May 2003. Since then, some of the terms of the LinasMarcoussis Agreement were subsequently clarified by
the provisions of the Accra II Accord.

3

S/PV.4873

Significant progress has been made towards the
restoration of peace in Côte d’Ivoire, notably by: the
joint declaration of a cessation of hostilities by the
National Armed Forces of Côte d’Ivoire and the Forces
nouvelles and the establishment of a Joint
Reunification Committee; the formation of the
Government
of
National
Reconciliation;
the
promulgation of the amnesty law by the National
Assembly; the progressive re-establishment of State
authority in several parts of the country; the
elaboration of draft laws relating to the various issues
addressed by the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement; and the
setting up of a National Committee for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration.
Despite this progress, the peace process has faced
certain difficulties such as disagreement over the
appointment of certain Government officials and heads
of Government corporations; concerns over the
personal safety of members of the Government of
National Reconciliation; the persistence of provocative
demonstrations and inflammatory statements by the
various parties; the delay in the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process; the delay in returning the country to normality
as a result of the continued de facto partitioning of the
country; and the non-delegation to the consensually
chosen Prime Minister of the required executive
prerogatives for the implementation of the LinasMarcoussis Accord. These difficulties have resulted in
the suspension by the Forces nouvelles of their
participation in the Government of National
Reconciliation, the Council of Ministers and the DDR
programme.
It has, therefore, become imperative to find a
rapid solution to these difficulties to ensure that there
is no further deterioration of the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire. The social and economic development of the
country may then be compromised, the suffering of the
people unduly prolonged and the stability of the West
African region again jeopardized. There is, thus, a need
to reinforce initiatives aimed at facilitating and
accelerating the implementation of the confidencebuilding measures provided in the Linas-Marcoussis
and Accra Accords and thereby creating a momentum
for the implementation of these agreements.
Concerned by this situation, the Chairman of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the President of the Republic of Ghana,

4

His Excellency John Agyekum Kufuor, convened in
Accra on 11 November 2003, a consultative closeddoor meeting of some Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS, comprising President Mathieu Kérékou
of Benin, President Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso,
President Laurent Gbagbo of Côte d’Ivoire, President
Tandja Mamadou of Niger, President Olusegun
Obasanjo of Nigeria and President Gnassingbé
Eyadema of Togo in order to consider the security
situation in West Africa, and in particular the situation
in Côte d’Ivoire.
The Heads of State emphasized the need for the
President and the Prime Minister of Côte d’Ivoire to
work closely together to ensure that the Government of
National Reconciliation is able to function as a team
and implement the programme of work drawn up; the
need to guarantee the security of the members of the
Government of National Reconciliation by immediate
strengthening of the ECOWAS Mission in Côte
d’Ivoire (ECOMICI) VIP Protection Unit; the
responsibility of the Ivorian political class for the
excesses of the media and the need for the class to
contribute effectively together with civil society to the
reinforcement of the process of national reconciliation;
and the need for close and harmonious relations among
the States of West Africa to enhance the security of the
region and help hasten the peace process in Côte
d’Ivoire.
The Heads of State concluded with the view that
the presence of a robust peacekeeping force, capable of
securing the entire national territory, would contribute
greatly to the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Accord. ECOWAS, unfortunately, does not dispose of
the means required to raise and maintain such a force.
It had, thus, become necessary for the United Nations
to consider the transformation of the ECOMICI into a
full-fledged United Nations peacekeeping force.
The meeting, involving a frank exchange of
views, ended on a positive note, which permitted three
days later the Ivorian Prime Minister, Seydou Diarra, to
go to Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso, to
meet with the Faso President, His Excellency Blaise
Compaoré. The meeting was successful. This process
of rapprochement has to be warmly welcomed and
encouraged for it represents the best way to peace and
stability in the region. It is in the same vein that, given
the assurances and undertakings that flowed from the
meeting, we anticipate the imminent return of the
Forces nouvelles to full participation in the

S/PV.4873

Government of National Reconciliation, an event
which will give greater impetus to the implementation
of the Linas-Marcoussis Accord.
It is worth reiterating that insecurity in Côte
d’Ivoire has remained the real threat to the peace
process. Various sources have alleged that the various
parties are strengthening their positions militarily in
the eventuality of a resumption of hostilities. It is vital
for peace in Côte d’Ivoire that dialogue,
accommodation and reconciliation, and not the resort
to force, remain for the parties the means for the
resolution of the crisis. All measures should be taken in
order to continue to secure the ceasefire and to
implement the security provisions of the LinasMarcoussis Accord. ECOWAS, for its part, continues
to work closely with the French troops of Operation
Licorne to secure the line of separation between the
belligerents. ECOWAS has also decided to deploy
immediately 80 additional policemen to augment the
personal security of the Ministers of the Government of
National Reconciliation. These efforts need now to be
supported by a stronger and wider engagement of the
international community.
I wish to renew once again our sincere
appreciation to the Security Council for all its efforts
and attention to the West African region and request
that the Security Council consider the possibility of
establishing a United Nations peacekeeping force in
Côte d’Ivoire and of transforming the ECOWAS
mission in Côte d’Ivoire into part of this United
Nations peacekeeping force. We strongly believe that
this step will be decisive for the peace process in Côte
d’Ivoire. Indeed and in addition, there appears to be
virtual unanimity amongst the principal actors of the
Ivorian crisis from the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Laurent Gbagbo, and the Prime Minister,
Seydou Diarra, through to the former President of the
Republic and leader of the Parti démocratique de Côte
d’Ivoire (PDCI), Henri Konan Bedie, the former Prime
Minister and leader of the Rassemblement
démocratique africain (RDA), Allasane Ouattara, and
the Minister of State and leader of the Forces
nouvelles, Guillaume Soro, about the need for such a
step. Once again, the region is ready to contribute to
this peacekeeping force and work closely with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
implementation of its mandate.
I cannot end without appealing to the proverbial
sense of humanity and solidarity of this great

institution, the Security Council of the United Nations.
Despite the current difficulties confronting them, the
peoples of West Africa are determined to be part of the
global movement for democracy, respect for human
rights and the rule of law. They need your patience and
assistance at this critical juncture of their history, and I
am confident that, in the end, they will not disappoint
you.
I wish to thank you, President and Members of
the Security Council, for your kind attention.
Mr. Ibn Chambas (Economic Community of
West African States): I wish to join Hon. Nana AkufoAddo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, in
expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
to the other members of the Security Council for
granting us another opportunity to address you on the
crisis in Côte d’Ivoire, a matter of grave concern to
peoples of the West African subregion.
I wish to underscore the economic consequences
of the war for Côte d’Ivoire and the other countries of
the subregion, and particularly the social and economic
dimension of the dangers posed if the crisis continues.
Since the outbreak of the crisis on 19 September
2002, the economic and social situation in Côte
d’Ivoire and the neighbouring countries has continued
to deteriorate. The gross domestic product (GDP)
growth of Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger
has fallen as trade amongst those countries has been
disrupted. The economy of Côte d’Ivoire, which is the
second largest in the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) subregion after Nigeria,
represents approximately 13 per cent of the GDP of
West Africa. The country has a population of about
16.6 million, with a 27 per cent immigrant component
originating mainly from neighbouring countries. Côte
d’Ivoire exports agricultural, agro-industrial and
manufactured goods to its neighbours and is a major
destination for livestock products from the countries of
the Sahel. It is the leading world producer of cocoa and
one of the major producers of coffee, hevea and palm
oil.
At 30 per cent of the total volume of trade with
ECOWAS countries, Côte d’Ivoire dominates intraregional trade. In 2001, exports to other ECOWAS
countries represented 33 per cent of total export
figures, while imports represented 27 per cent. This is
in comparison to an average intra-ECOWAS trade of
about 15 per cent. Its port network of infrastructure and

5

S/PV.4873

geographical position have combined to make Côte
d’Ivoire a transit corridor for goods and travellers
within the West African subregion. The country also
plays host to a substantial number of West African
workers and traders, who transfer a considerable
volume of funds to their home countries.
These are compelling reasons why the restoration
of peace and stability to Côte d’Ivoire is a sine qua non
for the stability and development of the rest of the
subregion, and in particular the consolidation of the
fledgling democracies in West Africa. The continuing
unrest in Côte d’Ivoire is a cause for legitimate concern
to both the leaders and peoples of the West African
subregion.
Despite the considerable efforts deployed within
the subregion by ECOWAS, the fact remains that the
crisis rumbles on and, indeed, there are troubling signs
that the situation is deteriorating. The existence of
bands of armed groups, whose activities extend beyond
the Ivorian borders and threaten the successful efforts
of the international community to bring peace to Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire, should galvanize us
all to act decisively to curtail their activities.
There is, therefore, a need to secure Côte
d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone as a single
undertaking. We should adopt a comprehensive
regional approach to the crisis in those countries.

ECOWAS is therefore calling on the Security Council
to work with us in a concerted effort to restore peace
and stability to Côte d’Ivoire, thereby consolidating the
gains made in Sierra Leone and, lately, in Liberia. For
this, we need to back political action by the presence of
a robust peacekeeping force in order to create an
enabling
environment
for
dialogue,
national
reconciliation and the speedy and full implementation
of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, which remains for
us the sole framework for the resolution of the crisis.
ECOWAS is confident that it can, as usual, rely
on the support of the Security Council in its efforts to
secure a lasting peace in Côte d’Ivoire and will
appreciate any initiatives that the Council might wish
to take in order to revive the peace process in Côte
d’Ivoire.
Peace in Côte d’Ivoire is inextricably linked to
lasting peace in Sierra Leone, Liberia and, indeed, all
of West Africa. Once again, we thank the Council for
its deep interest in the preservation of peace and
security in West Africa and for the honour done us in
giving us the opportunity to address this body.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to a private meeting to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

6
