General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

188

9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of the Commission on Human Rights, the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities and the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and also to
transmit the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee to these bodies;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights;
11. Welcomes the measures already taken by the
Secretary-General to improve the publicity for the work
of the Human Rights Committee and encourages the
Committee to continue its consideration of this question;
12. Urges the Secretary-General to take all possible
steps to ensure that the Division of Human Rights of the
Secretariat is able to assist effectively the Human Rights
Committee and the Economic and Social Council in the
implementation of their respective functions under the
International Covenants on Human Rights, taking into
account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX) of
I 7 December 1975 and 31 /93 of 14 December 1976:
13. Requests the Secretary-General to make appropriate arrangements, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 / 140 of 17 December 1976, for
the holding of meetings of the Human Rights Committee in developing countries, and to report in this regard
to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
35 / 133.

International Year of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 31 / 123 of 16 December 1976,
by which it proclaimed the year 1981 International Year
of Disabled Persons,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/ 133 of 16 December
I 977, by which it established the Advisory Committee
for the International Year of Disabled Persons, 33 / 170
of 20 December 1978 and 34/ 154 of 17 December 1979,
Recalling further resolution 2, entitled "Improving the
situation of disabled women of all ages", adopted on
30 July I 980 by the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women,"'
Recognizing that the International Year of Disabled
Persons should promote the realization of the right of
disabled persons to participate fully in the social life and
development of their societies and to enjoy living conditions equal to those of other citizens, as well as an equal
share in the improvements in living conditions resulting
from social and economic development,
Bearing in mind the importance of co-ordination at
the national, regional and international levels in the
programming for the prevention of disability and the rehabilitation of disabled persons.
"'See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-J0 July
/980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.J and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. B.

Convinced thut the International Year of Disabled
Persons should give the impulse for the establishment of
a long-term world plan of action to follow up the activities of the Year.
Recognizing that the International Year of Disabled
Persons should contribute to a greater awareness of the
magnitude and complexity of the incidence of physical,
sensorial and mental disabilities through, inter alia, effective public information activities,
Having considered the offer of the Government of
Argentina"' to act as host to the action-oriented international symposium of experts on technical assistance in
the field of disability and technical co-operation among
developing countries, to be convened during the International Year of Disabled Persons,
Concerned about the need to provide the secretariat of
the International Year of Disabled Persons with the
resources necessary for the implementation of the Plan
of Action for the Year"' and its follow-up,
l. Notes with satisfaction the steps already taken in
the implementation of the Plan of Action for the International Year of Disabled Persons by Member States,
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system and non-governmental organizations, and encourages them to intensify their action and coordination during the Year:
2. Recommends that, in their efforts to promote the
full participation of disabled persons in all aspects of
life, Member States and organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system should pay particular attention to the participation of disabled persons
themselves and of their organizations in the activities
undertaken in connexion with the International Year of
Disabled Persons and its follow-up:
3. Invites Member States which have not yet done so
to establish national committees or similar bodies for
the International Year of Disabled Persons:
4. Urges Member States to give higher priority to
development assistance projects in developing countries
in the fields of rehabilitation services, technical aids and
training of appropriate personnel, including disabled
persons themselves:
5. Welcomes the voluntary contributions made by
Governments to the International Year of Disabled Persons and appeals for further voluntary contributions to
the Year:
6. Decides to accept the offer of the Government of
Argentina to act as host in 1981 to the action-oriented
international symposium of experts on technical assistance in the field of disability and technical co-operation
among developing countries, to be held in conformity
with the Plan of Action for the International Year of
Disabled Persons:
7. Requests the regional commissions to formulate
appropriate programmes for implementing the recommendations contained in the Plan of Action for the International Year of Disabled Persons:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to examine the
question of access to United Nations buildings, documents and information for persons with sensorial disabilities:
,,, See i\/C ..,;.,~. '·
'' The Plan of Action for the International Year of Disabled Persons adopted by the General Assembly consists of the text appearing
1n paragraphs 57 to 76 of the annex to document A/34/158 and
Corr. I, with the deletion of the phrase following the words "(see subpara. (i) below)" in paragraph 74 (c). of paragraph 74 (u), and of the
\\ords following the v.ord "nationallv" in paragraph 75 (h).

VI.

9. Further requests the Secretary-General to
strengthen the information activities and to provide the
secretariat of the International Year of Disabled Persons with all the resources and personnel necessary for
carrying out its work;
10. Welcomes the progress already made in the
drafting of a long-term world plan of action and approves the procedure and time-scale for its adoption
proposed by the Advisory Committee for the International Year of Disabled Persons at its second session:"'
11. Requests the Secretary-General to convene a session of the Advisory Committee in 1981;
12. Requests the Advisory Committee to examine
the possibilities of continuing the activities of the International Institute for the Rehabilitation of Disabled
Persons in Developing Countries in the light of the experience of the International Year of Disabled Persons;
13. Invites all heads of State or Government, the
President of the thirty-fifth session of the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General to issue special
messages at the beginning of the International Year of
Disabled Persons;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "International
Year of Disabled Persons" and, in view of its importance, recommends that this item should be considered
by the General Assembly in plenary meeting, in observance of the Year;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

35/134.

International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 34/ 157 of 17 December 1979,
in which it expressed the desire that the consultations
concerning the agreement with the Government of the
host country would be expeditiously concluded and requested the Secretary-General to consult Member States
with a view to nominating the Director of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women as soon as possible,
Having received the report of the Board of Trustees of
the Institute on its session held at Geneva from 22 to
26 October 1979, "7
Having also received the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 68
I. Urges the Secretary-General to appoint the Director of the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women, taking fully into account the consultations held with Member States to that
end;
2. Expresses its desire that the necessary consultations concerning the agreement with the Government of
the Dominican Republic will be expeditiously concluded;
""A/35/444, annex.
"' E/ 1980/23.
"A/35/94.

189

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Expresses also its desire that the Institute will start
to function in the Dominican Republic and that its installation in the host country will not be unduly delayed;
4. Reiterates the guidelines set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1998 (LX) of 12 May 1976
regarding the activities of the Institute, in particular the
need for close collaboration with the regional institutes
which have similar objectives;
5. Invites Governments to contribute to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, both
financially and in kind;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 on the implementation of the present resolution.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

35 / 135.

Refugee and displaced women

The General Assembly,
Having considered the resolutions adopted by the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women and the recommendations contained in the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace relating to refugee and displaced women,'•''
which are of concern to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Recognizing that the problems of refugees and displaced persons affect every continent and place special
burdens on developing countries,
A ware that the increasingly serious situations of
refugees and displaced persons place heavy social and
economic burdens on those countries which provide
asylum, relief or rehabilitation,
Noting with great concern that women and children
constitute the majority of refugees and displaced persons in most areas,
Recognizing that the needs of refugee and displaced
women as mothers and as women who have sole responsibility for the support of their families require constructive recognition by all parties to their relief and rehabilitation,
Recognizing also the particular vulnerability of
refugee and displaced women to intimidation, exploitation and physical and sexual abuse,
A ware that the special problems of refugee and displaced women have to date not been fully studied,
Strongly emphasizing the need for increased support
from the international community for the large number
of refugees and displaced persons,
I. Requests all States to co-operate with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in order to
assure full protection of the well-being of women and
children in particular. in accordance with their fundamental rights under international law and national legislation;
2. Calls upon all States and donors providing immediate relief to refugees and displaced persons to en-

"'' See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace. Copenhagen. 14-30 July
19?/0 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum). chap. I.
