S/PV.9027

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9027th meeting

Thursday, 5 May 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-33974 (E)
*2233974*

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

region, I also held discussions with President Erdoğan
in Ankara and President Duda in Rzeszów, Poland.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I would like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of the Council, to thank Her
Excellency Ambassador Barbara Woodward, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, for her service
as President of the Council for the month of April. I
would also like to express the Council’s appreciation
to Ambassador Woodward and her team for the skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany, Greece, Italy, Latvia,
Poland, Slovakia and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Piotr Gliński, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
of Culture and National Heritage of Poland.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and Ms. Tetiana Luzan, Advocacy
Coordinator at Right to Protection.
Mr. Griffiths, Ms. Bachelet and Ms. Luzan are
joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now begin
consideration of the item on its the agenda.

its

I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this opportunity
to address the Security Council on my recent visit to
the Russian Federation and Ukraine, where I met with
President Putin and President Zelenskyy on 26 April
and 28 April, respectively. As part of my visit to the
2/32

05/05/2022

Throughout my travels, I did not mince words. I
said the same thing in Moscow as I did in Kyiv, which is
exactly what I have repeatedly expressed in New York,
namely, that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is a violation
of its territorial integrity and of the Charter of the
United Nations and that it must end, for the sake of the
people of Ukraine, Russia and the entire world.
I visited Moscow and Kyiv with a clear
understanding of the realities on the ground. I entered
an active war zone in Ukraine with no immediate
possibility of a national ceasefire and with a full-scale
ongoing attack on the east of the country.
Before the visit, the Ukrainian Government
issued an appeal to the United Nations, and to me
personally — expressed publicly by the Deputy Prime
Minister — regarding the dire plight of civilians in
the devastated city of Mariupol, and specifically at the
Azovstal plant.
In my meeting with President Putin, I therefore
stressed the imperative of enabling humanitarian
access and evacuations from besieged areas, including
first and foremost Mariupol. I strongly urged the
opening of a safe and effective humanitarian corridor
to allow civilians to reach safety from the Azovstal
plant. A short time later, I received confirmation of an
agreement in principle.
We immediately followed up with intense
preparatory work with the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), along with Russian and
Ukrainian authorities. Our objective was to initially
enable the safe evacuation of those civilians from the
Azovstal plant, and later the rest of the city, in any
direction they choose, and to deliver humanitarian aid.
I am pleased to report on some measure of success.
Together, the United Nations and the ICRC are
leading a humanitarian operation of great complexity,
both politically and in terms of security. It began on
29 April and has required enormous coordination and
advocacy with the Russian Federation and the Ukrainian
authorities. So far, two safe passage convoys have been
successfully completed. In the first, concluded on
3 May, 101 civilians were evacuated from the Azovstal
plant, along with 59 more from a neighbouring area. In
the second operation, completed last night, more than
320 civilians were evacuated from the city of Mariupol
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and surrounding areas. A third operation is under way,
but it is our policy not to speak about the details of any of
them before they are completed, to avoid undermining
possible success. It is good to know that, even in these
times of hyper-communication, silent diplomacy is still
possible, and is sometimes the only effective way to
produce results.
So far, in total, nearly 500 civilians found longawaited relief, after living under relentless shelling and
the scarce availability of water, food and sanitation. The
evacuees have shared moving tales with United Nations
staff. Mothers, children and frail grandparents spoke
of their trauma. Some were in urgent need of medical
attention. I hope that the continued coordination with
Moscow and Kyiv will lead to more humanitarian
pauses to allow civilians safe passage from the fighting
and aid to reach those in critical need. We must continue
to do all we can to get people out of those hellscapes.
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths
will brief the Council today in greater detail on the
most recent efforts in Mariupol and additional steps.
High Commissioner Bachelet will brief on reports
of violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, possible war crimes and
the need for accountability. As I discussed yesterday
with President Zelenskyy, the United Nations will
continue to scale up humanitarian operations, save
lives and reduce suffering.
My meetings with both leaders also focused on
the crucial issue of global food security. Indeed, the
worldwide implications of this war were in full view in
my subsequent travels to West Africa. In Senegal, the
Niger and Nigeria, I heard direct testimony from leaders
and civil society on how the war is unleashing a food
security crisis. We need quick and decisive action to
ensure a steady flow of food and energy in open markets,
by lifting export restrictions, allocating surpluses
and reserves to those who need them and addressing
food price increases to calm market volatility. But let
me be clear — a meaningful solution to global food
insecurity requires reintegrating Ukraine’s agricultural
production and the food and fertilizer production of
Russia and Belarus into world markets, despite the war.
I will do my best to help facilitate a dialogue to help
make that a reality.
At the same time, the war in Ukraine, in all its
dimensions, is setting in motion a crisis that is also

S/PV.9027

devastating global energy markets, disrupting financial
systems and exacerbating extreme vulnerabilities for
the developing world. That is precisely why I established
the Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy
and Finance — to mobilize United Nations agencies,
multilateral development banks and other international
institutions to help countries face those challenges. We
were particularly engaged in making proposals at the
spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank.
The war on Ukraine is senseless in its scope,
ruthless in its dimensions and limitless in its potential
for global harm. The cycle of death, destruction,
dislocation and disruption must stop. It is high time to
unite and end this war.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: As members just heard from the
Secretary-General, elements of diplomatic progress are
coming into view, even as civilian suffering mounts. I
will speak briefly today, if I may, about the human toll
of the war and then about what we are doing to address
humanitarian needs, including a short update on our
most recent operations. I know that High Commissioner
Bachelet will provide details on the impact on civilians.
To recap, the destruction of civilian infrastructure
has come to characterize the conflict. Apartment
buildings, schools and hospitals in populated areas
have been attacked. They must not be. More than
13 million Ukrainians have now been forced to flee
their homes, of whom 7.7 million are displaced inside
Ukraine. Lives have been uprooted, ripped apart and
will never the same again. Many other people could not
run. Often, the most vulnerable are simply stuck. The
elderly and people with disabilities have been unable to
seek shelter from bombs, get out to gather supplies or
receive information on evacuations.
The threat of gender-based violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence, sexual exploitation and
abuse and human trafficking, has risen considerably
since the war began, as I am sure we will hear from the
other briefers. Allegations of sexual violence against
women, girls, men and boys are mounting. As we have
all seen, roads are heavily contaminated with explosive
ordnance, putting civilians at risk and stopping
humanitarian convoys from reaching them.

22-339743/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Let me brief members on what the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners are doing inside Ukraine
to meet those growing needs. There are approximately
217 humanitarian partners with whom we work in
Ukraine. We have scaled up at record speed. We have
more than 1,400 United Nations staff deployed across
the country, operating out of eight hubs beyond Kyiv,
with staff, warehouses and supplies in 30 locations,
principally, of course, across the east of the country,
where the war is happening and the needs are greatest.
We have reached more than 4.1 million people with
some form of assistance, on a daily basis, across all of
the country’s 24 oblasts. Our humanitarian response
has three main aspects. First, we deliver a great deal
of humanitarian assistance and protection services
to displaced people. I know that that is not enough;
it is inadequate. I know that we will hear more about
that. That is all across the country, especially where
internally displaced people have sought safety or where
people have begun returning to severely damaged
communities, which is a crucial development. Just a
few weeks ago when I was in Irpin, the Mayor described
to us, as I think he did to the Secretary-General, how
his people are trying to return to Irpin — but to do so,
reconstruction will be necessary and will take a year
and a half, as he put it.
Restoring basic services necessary to survival is
key. I was very struck by the fact that the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) very quickly after
the conversation I had with the Mayor, but not as a result
of it, went in to repair the basic services element for the
population of Irpin to be able to return. In those areas,
injecting cash aid allows civilians to choose what they
need and offers a modicum of dignity in these fractious
times. It helps to keep markets open and liquidity and
supply chains moving.

05/05/2022

Thirdly, as we have heard from the SecretaryGeneral, we engage every single day with the parties
to the conflict to push for the movement of aid to
civilians in areas of active conflict, or to negotiate to
help civilians leave for safer areas. So far, we have been
able to stage five inter-agency aid convoys to some
of the hardest hit areas — operations that required a
humanitarian notification system used by both parties
to allow for safe passage movements. They have been
a lifeline, a small mercy perhaps, to civilians encircled
by fighting, bringing in medical supplies, water, food
rations, non-food-items and so forth. It is a beginning,
but hopefully it is not an end.
As the Secretary-General has described, we have
seen a glimmer in these past days, thanks to his efforts
and those of our colleagues on the front line. As Council
members know, on 2 May, more than 100 civilians
were evacuated from the Azovstal plant in Mariupol,
including women, children and older people. About
60 more people joined that convoy on the outskirts of
Mariupol and were then able to move to safety. And it
was, as the Secretary-General described, a project of
the greatest complexity and of constant oversight, and
it was an exceptional operation.
I am especially grateful to the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the leadership of
Peter Maurer, as well as to our own highly experienced
first responders. But I must also applaud the
authorities — essentially the respective militaries of
both Ukraine and the Russian Federation — for their
close and constructive and essential cooperation in
making that operation a reality. It showed us that that
can happen. And I believe, although the numbers were
not great, that a single life saved is worth every ounce
of effort.

We plan to reach 1.3 million people with cash
assistance. Plugging into Ukraine’s social protection
system with top-up payments and working with the
Government and the Prime Minister to implement his
plans for the distribution of cash to his people in order
to reach families at risk has needed technical liaison
but is now largely achieved. Cash-based aid will now
scale up rapidly.

As of yesterday, as the Secretary-General said,
we were able to move more than 320 civilians out of
the Mariupol area broadly, again working closely in
lockstep with the ICRC and with the cooperation of
Ukrainian and Russian authorities. Today we have
a third operation, which began this morning, with
the intent of evacuating civilians from Mariupol and
Azovstal. And as he said, we prefer not to speak about
that operation until it is complete.

Secondly, the other part of our response is working
on prepositioning supplies to forward operating bases
and increasing our preparedness in areas to where we
imagine the war might move next.

What I can finally say about this is that we are
finally seeing the fruits of our labour over these past
many weeks — of establishing liaison in Moscow and of
the visit that preceded the Secretary-General — which

4/32

22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

were brought about by the long and detailed meetings
with the leaderships on both sides this past week. We
are beginning to see now that the agreement on local
ceasefires — because none of those movements of
safe passage would happen without local ceasefires,
pauses or windows of silence — are allowing us to
make some progress. And we are building relations
and experience that we hope we can broaden to more
such operations. That is the third element of our
humanitarian programme.
We will keep pushing for more civilians to be able
to leave Mariupol, and indeed Azovstal, if they so
choose. And we will begin, on that basis, to explore
options for reaching others where the need is greatest
and where we need and desire to serve the people of
Ukraine in their hour of direst need.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
Ms. Bachelet: For over eight years, since
15 March 2014, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) — through
the human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine — has
been monitoring the situation in country. To date, we
have released close to 50 periodic and thematic reports.
On 24 February, we quickly adapted to a very
different working environment. Like millions of
Ukrainians, the staff of my Office relocated to other
regions of the country, but — and I am very proud to
say — have not paused their work for a single day.
Currently, the mission has staff on the ground in
Uzhgorod, Kyiv, Lviv, Dnipro, Donetsk and Odesa, and
conducts field visits to various parts of the country,
including the Kyiv and Chernihiv regions just last week.
The mission continues to verify allegations of
violations of international human rights law and of
international humanitarian law in the context of the
Russian Federation’s armed attack on Ukraine. Many
of those allegations concern violations that may amount
to war crimes.
Based on the mission’s work, my Office updated
the Human Rights Council at the end of March, and will
present a report on the human rights situation in Ukraine
covering the period from 24 February to 15 May at the
next session of the Council in June. My press statement
on Ukraine of 22 April summarized our most recent
findings. It pains me to say that all our concerns remain
valid, and the situation keeps deteriorating.

S/PV.9027

Today is the seventy-first day of the escalation
in hostilities, expanding the already eight-year-long
conflict to all regions of the country. Reports of deadly
incidents, such as attacks on hospital No. 3 and the
drama theatre in Mariupol, on the railway station in
Kramatorsk, on residential areas in Odesa, have become
shockingly frequent. There seems to be no end in sight
to the daily reports of civilian deaths and injuries.
My team on the ground conveys the palpable
trauma and shock experienced by the people they speak
with, the vast majority of whom have either personally
witnessed a violation or are victims themselves.
Rather than try to describe what victims are going
through, let me use their words. Residents of Mariupol
set up a Telegram channel to share information about
their relatives who perished in the city: “He was killed
in front of his wife and children.” “Her body remained
under the debris of her house. We could not even bury
her.” “My uncle died from loss of blood after sustaining
fragmentation injuries. I know only that he was
buried in a collective grave.” I could share many more
such messages.
Last week, on 28 April, when the Secretary-General
was visiting Kyiv to meet the President of Ukraine,
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, the city was hit by two missiles.
At least one woman, a journalist, was killed, and four
civilians were injured in the attack. An OHCHR team
was in Kyiv on that day too, preparing to visit Bucha.
On the same day, we corroborated 22 civilian deaths
and 40 civilian injuries in other places of Ukraine.
In Ukraine as a whole, my Office has recorded
6,731 civilian casualties since 24 February. We know
the real figures are considerably higher. As my Office
consistently reports, most of those casualties have been
caused by the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in populated areas, such as shelling from heavy
artillery, including multiple launch rocket systems,
missiles and air strikes.
My Office is also documenting the devastating
consequences of the conflict on other human rights.
In areas around Kyiv, from late February for about
five weeks, Russian forces targeted male civilians,
whom they considered suspicious. Men were detained,
beaten, summarily executed and, in some cases, taken
to Belarus and Russia, unbeknownst to their families,
and held in pre-trial detention facilities. My staff met
with families who are searching for their missing male
relatives, desperate to know where they are, if they are

22-339745/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

alive, and how they can get them back. Families were
shot at as they tried to escape in convoys. In some areas,
it was dangerous to cross the street, with snipers or
soldiers shooting at anyone who tried. Local authorities
are compiling lists of dead and missing, continuing
exhumations, taking DNA from relatives, while
also trying to reconnect those districts to electricity
and water.
In other areas controlled by Russian armed forces
and affiliated armed groups such as the Kharkiv,
Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhya and Kherson regions,
we continue to document arbitrary detention and
possible enforced disappearances of representatives
of local authorities, journalists, civil society activists,
retired servicemen of the armed forces and other
civilians by Russian armed forces and affiliated armed
groups. As of 4 May, my Office had documented 180
such cases, of which five victims were eventually found
dead. We have also documented eight possible forced
disappearances of people considered to be pro-Russian
in Government controlled territory.
My staff heard about cases of women having been
raped by Russian armed forces in areas that were under
their control, as well as other allegations of sexual
violence by both parties to the conflict. And yet, the
stigma around rape and sexual violence continues to
prevent victims and their families from feeling safe to
report. That only highlights the importance of ensuring
adequate and safe support services for victims.
Grim evidence of torture, ill-treatment and
summary executions of prisoners of war committed by
both parties to the conflict is surfacing. My Office is
collecting such evidence, which will be included in its
future reporting.
The only way for those horrors to stop is for
armed forces to fully respect their obligations under
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. It is vital that all parties give clear
instructions to their combatants to protect civilians
and persons hors de combat, as well as to distinguish
between civilian and military objects. Those in
command of armed forces must make it clear to their
members that anyone found to have been involved in
such violations will be prosecuted and held accountable.
Accountability demands that evidence be preserved
and that mortal remains be treated with decency.
The list of gross violations of international human
rights law and serious violations of international
6/32

05/05/2022

humanitarian law continues to grow each day. We
cannot let the number of victims continue to rise.
A one-day ceasefire alone would spare the lives of
at least 50 civilian children, women and men, including
many older persons. A one-day ceasefire would prevent
30 to 70 civilians from being injured and a dozen from
becoming disabled. A one-day ceasefire would allow
several thousand civilians to safely leave areas where
they are currently trapped in hostilities. Most important,
a ceasefire will show that the horror in Ukraine can be
stopped. It is of the most fundamental importance that
the ongoing hostilities cease, once and for all.
Advocating for accountability is a cornerstone
of my Office’s work. If the perpetrators of violations
against civilians and persons hors de combat are brought
to justice, potential perpetrators will think twice
before unleashing similar unlawful attacks or acts of
violence and creating new victims. Accountability also
contributes to the healing process for the victims, their
families and society at large.
National justice systems are the most crucial. I urge
the parties to the conflict to investigate all violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law allegedly committed by their armed
forces, and I welcome Ukraine’s efforts in that regard.
My Office is fully committed to supporting those
systems and the work of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine and to cooperating
with the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court and other international justice
mechanisms, in accordance with our established United
Nations frameworks.
Let us commit to putting a stop to this senseless
conflict. We must be steadfast in our efforts for peace
and resolute that justice will be done.
The President: I thank Ms. Bachelet for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Luzan.
Ms. Luzan: It is a great honour today to represent
Ukraine’s civil society, which mobilized in the first hours
after the full-scale Russian invasion of 24 February, as
they did before for eight years of the war.
Our joint efforts are aimed at supporting brave
Ukrainians fighting at the forefront, as well as in public
offices in Lviv, Kyiv and Kramatorsk. They consist
of volunteers, municipal workers planting flowers
in Kharkiv and other cities in Ukraine under heavy
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

shelling. They are railway workers evacuating people
away from hostilities and death. They are bakers,
cashiers and grocers and all people affected by the war.
All Ukrainians are now beating as one big heart.
In the chaos of war, no one should be left behind.
People, their lives, health, honour, dignity and security
will always be our greatest value. In order to maintain
that goal, Ukraine and the whole civilized world
will face immense challenges caused by the military
invasion of the Russian Federation.
The war has lasted eight years. In 2021, the number
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Ukraine,
including the occupied territories of Crimea, Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, officially reached almost
1.5 million. At the end of April, the International
Organization for Migration reported that the number
of internally displaced persons as a result of the fullscale invasion of the territory of Ukraine reached
7.7 million. They all carried the same heavy burden of
displacement. They all need equal protection.
We must also not forget the Ukrainians — from
Mariupol, Chernihiv, Sievierodonetsk and other cities
and villages — who were forcibly displaced to the
Russian Federation. They were forcibly displaced without
documents or means of communication and were
exposed to “filtration” by the Russian Federation. In
the two most recent months, more than 1 million people
suffered that fate, including approximately 200,000
children. It must be ensured that those who are willing
to come back to Ukraine or travel to other countries
have the ability to do so.
The challenges that children and their parents have
experienced in the face of war are overwhelming. Right
to Protection received calls via our hotline of parents
ready to send their children abroad with complete
strangers out of desperation because of the Russian
atrocities being carried out in Kharkiv, Mariupol and
other cities. The world was shaken by stories of little
boys as young as 4 or 5 crossing the State border alone
or, in the best-case scenario, with barely familiar people.
Ukraine and recipient countries should assume
responsibility for protecting those vulnerable little
Ukrainians so that they can safely cross State borders,
supported by specially trained State officers and
child service representatives. Recipient countries
must guarantee their protection at the highest level;
family reunification should be pursued; and their safe

S/PV.9027

and timely return to the Ukraine after the war must
be ensured.
The number of killed and injured civilians is everincreasing. The destinies of dozens of thousands of
people in Mariupol, Kherson, Kharkiv, Chernihiv and
Irpin are unknown. Relatives cannot always prove the
deaths of their loved ones — even if they witnessed that
person’s final moments. The international community
must assist the Government of Ukraine in establishing
and enforcing appropriate measures for investigation
and prosecution — because each life is priceless and
relatives deserve to know the truth.
I want to mention the Ukrainians who have fled
Ukraine, seeking safety and security in the European
Union and other countries of the civilized world.
Those Ukrainians — overwhelmingly women and
children — must not be overlooked. We must promote
their rights, provide them shelter, protect them from
human trafficking and ensure their access to services,
including psychological help. Stateless persons and
third-country nationals who had previously found
refuge in Ukraine must also be granted protection
alongside Ukrainians.
Finally, it is of paramount importance to recall the
vast number of IDPs, many of whom may not even have
a roof over their heads. In many cases, the conditions
of temporary accommodations do not comply with the
basic norms of adequate shelter. IDPs live in collective
or transit centres established in schools or places of
common use that are often not designed to provide
shelter during cold periods.
Over 32 million square metres of housing and
other properties were destroyed, damaged or occupied.
Despite the massive destruction that the world has seen
in Bucha, Irpin, Chernihiv and Kharkiv, thousands of
civilians either returned or never left their damaged
homes. All of them urgently need adequate temporary
or permanent accommodations, especially for the cold
autumn and winter periods. Those who chose not to
leave their damaged homes must receive much-needed
tangible support, such as construction materials, tools,
plastic wrapping and physical help.
In addition, such unprecedented massive destruction
of civilian infrastructure requires durable solutions
from the Ukrainian authorities, with the support of the
international community. We call on all members of
the Security Council, international organizations and

22-339747/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Governments to firmly support the people of Ukraine
in these dark times.
In the name of the millions of people who have
died, those yet unborn and the surviving residents of
Ukraine, a United Nations Member since 1945, we
are required to rephrase and give a new sense to the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
“All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights” to live in peace.
The President: I thank Ms. Luzan for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): May I start by congratulating
the United Kingdom presidency on its excellent
stewardship of the Security Council during the month
of April. I wish you, Madam President, as well as the
United States team, the very best for this month. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his remarks,
for his clear positioning in upholding international law
and, even more so, for his efforts to negotiate safe
passage for civilians in Mariupol during his recent visit
to Russia and Ukraine. We all must be proud of what
the United Nations system is doing to help Ukraine and
its people. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths, High Commissioner Bachelet
and Ms. Luzan for their important and updated, yet
sobering information.
The absurd, unprovoked, unjustified and ongoing
war of choice of Russia in Ukraine is in its third month.
While Russia continues to be immured in total denial,
the world continues to witness a never-ending human
tragedy. Despite worldwide calls, there is no end in
sight. Calls for a humanitarian pause during Orthodox
Easter went unheeded. The war continues to inflict
undue pain on Ukraine and its people. Indiscriminate
shelling and bombing of population areas, the killing
of civilians and attacks on health facilities, schools and
civilian infrastructure continue. Extrajudicial killings,
sexual violence and rape — actions that may amount to
war crimes — have been documented and are mounting,
as we heard from Under-Secretary-General Griffiths.
8/32

05/05/2022

The eastern and southern parts of Ukraine are now
facing severe consequences, while air strikes continue
in multiple areas in Ukraine, causing additional damage
and civilian losses. Every time that we meet here, there
are new reports of casualties and news of more atrocities
uncovered and more destruction inflicted, just like the
apartment hit in Odesa, killing eight civilians, including
a three-month-old baby, and all those dreadful accounts
just mentioned by High Commissioner Bachelet.
But Russia’s actions are not limited only to Ukraine.
More than 5 million people have been forced to cross
the borders. No one could have imagined how quickly
the world’s breadbasket could go from wheat fields to
battlefields. Global hunger is soaring to alarming levels,
exacerbated like never before by this war, which is
destroying a country, aggressing developing countries
and challenging the entire world.
To date, 1,200 bodies have been discovered around
Kyiv, almost all of whom were civilians, killed by a
bullet to the head. Members will recall that the Kremlin
considered Ukrainians as brothers, yet it is killing
them. When one kills one’s family, one is a monster.
Soldiers have tortured, raped and murdered, only to be
honoured for their bravery. They should be called to
account, not celebrated.
As Russia stalls and keeps redrawing its strategy,
everything indicates that disabused commanders have
abandoned military doctrine and, to prove any form of
success, are flattening cities and terrorizing civilians.
That is the victory à la russe. When one cannot prevail
on the battlefield, one resorts to atrocities — a terrible
match of incompetence with brutality. That is a cruel
reality and a dreadful prospect.
The more Russia struggles in the face of Ukraine’s
resistance, the more the Kremlin’s rhetoric continues
to escalate into the madman’s idea of nuclear war.
Nuclear sabre-rattling is ignominious. Once it was by
the President himself, then another official and then the
unstoppable propaganda machine. What is the purpose
of showing on the television a nuclear weapon, which
could trigger a tsunami strong enough to flood the
entire United Kingdom? What is the logic of staging a
nuclear explosion in the heart of Ireland? There could
not be a more striking contrast between dreams and
projects of science for conquering space and extending
human civilization beyond the planet and that archaic
and rotted rhetoric of the possible use of weapons of
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

mass destruction and of annihilation of civilization
because of the war of choice that is being lost.
Leon Trotsky wrote:
“The army is a copy of society and suffers from all
its diseases, usually at a higher temperature.”
That is why truth is critical so that domestic and
international opinion does not fall for the propaganda
and the conspiracy theories vehiculated relentlessly
from a black hole, from where only darkness escapes.
Only the day before yesterday, we celebrated World
Press Freedom Day. I would like to pay tribute to all
the brave journalists who are risking their lives to tell
the truth and keep the world informed about the war
in Ukraine.
Russian citizens must learn that this war is not
glorifying their country. It has isolated it like never
before. It is not making it further prosper. To the
contrary, it is vertiginously spiralling it downward. It is
not transporting it to modernity, but rather dragging it
into a revolved past.
No one wants to destroy Russia. No one wants to
cancel Russia. If the Kremlin has made bad choices
and has taken wrong decisions, it can correct the
course, which means stopping the war, recalling troops
back home, choosing reason, returning to diplomacy,
respecting its neighbour and letting that big Ukraine
heart beat in freedom, as Ms. Luzan mentioned. That is
what is needed. The keyword here is mir.
After several failed attempts, safe passage
was arduously secured for a number of civilians in
Mariupol’s steel facility, which, as we heard, is under
way. That is a testimony — a welcome, but a meagre
one compared to the scale of tragedy in Ukraine — that
diplomacy can work, but there must be a will.
The lucky ones who are seeing the sun again after
weeks underground to escape relentless shelling say
that, before being escorted to non-occupied parts of
Ukraine, they were interrogated by Federal Security
Service agents seeking information on the tunnels of
the Azovstal steel complex, with a view to locating
Ukrainian soldiers still in the only part of Mariupol not
occupied by Russian forces. Occupied means destroyed.
Only two months ago, Mariupol was a thriving city, with
almost half a million inhabitants. The scorched-earth
strategy applied by Russia has made it the catacomb
of Ukraine.

S/PV.9027

We now know that the main mantra of the pretext of
the war was that the invasion of Ukraine is to free the
country of Nazis despite the fact that the first citizen,
the President of Ukraine, is Jewish. Yet the theory has
been further elaborated.
Pretending that the most ardent anti-Semites are
usually Jews and that Hitler had Jewish blood, which
underlines a theory that Jews inflicted the Holocaust
on themselves, just like the Ukrainians are supposedly
slaughtering their people and destroying their own
country, is not black humour. That is not one of those
basic fake-news items that one easily discards as
rubbish. That is part of the worst conspiracy-theory
warfare. When we have the top diplomat dwelling on
such disgracefulness, that is a terrible low, coming
from a very dangerous high.
We are not in the business of competition as to who
speaks more or louder. We are here to try to stop this
war and those crimes, protect civilians and make sure
that the perpetrators do not have a place in our world,
but only in theirs — the one where they pay for their
deeds through accountability.
We welcome the huge efforts of the European Union
to respond to the massive increase in humanitarian
needs and in providing military, financial and other
support for the reconstruction. We welcome the highlevel international donor conference for Ukraine held
today in Warsaw. Albania made a commitment there.
As we heard, the Secretary-General was received
in Moscow for uneasy talks with the authorities. He
also visited Kyiv. As appalling and as shameful as it
may be, Kyiv was shelled during his visit and while he
was speaking. Rarely have we witnessed such a degree
of disregard for the United Nations and its SecretaryGeneral and such contempt for the Organization and
the entire United Nations personnel. I do not know how
the Russians explain that, unless in the very same way
as for everything else: the Ukrainians did it.
Let me conclude with this note: we should strongly
reject any idea of territorial division of Ukraine
imposed by force as a result of aggression. We have
mentioned it before, and we reiterate it now: the
creation of artificial entities, either by occupation or by
proxies, is unacceptable. That should not be accepted in
Ukraine or anywhere else.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I congratulate the United Kingdom on

22-339749/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

its presidency of the Security Council last month
and wish the United States every success during its
presidency this month. I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, High Commissioner Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Tetiana Luzan for their briefings today.
I begin by acknowledging the efforts of the
Secretary-General during his recent mission to
Russia and Ukraine which, inter alia, allowed for the
evacuation of a considerable number of civilians in very
critical conditions at the Azovstal plant in Mariupol. In
this context, the work of the International Committee
of the Red Cross is also commendable. Humanitarian
assistance must remain our priority through the
implementation of resolution ES-11/2, adopted on
24 March by the General Assembly.
We support the Secretary-General in his good
offices and diplomatic efforts to achieve a peaceful
solution to this conflict, which has lasted more than 10
weeks, and which has had very serious consequences
on the Ukrainian civilian population and whose
repercussions at the global level are already beginning
to have a harsh impact. Until a cessation of hostilities
is reached and progress is made towards a diplomatic
solution, the objective must be to urgently provide
the required humanitarian aid and protect the civilian
population and the infrastructure necessary for meeting
people’s basic needs. The numbers that have been
shared with us with regard to the victims, damages and
costs that this conflict has caused to date are alarming,
and the most unfortunate thing is that the real figures
are probably even worse.
A year ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2573 (2021), which requires all
parties to armed conflict to comply fully with their
obligations under international humanitarian law. It
is unacceptable that the World Health Organization
has so far reported 186 attacks on health and hospital
facilities during the conflict. In addition, we must also
deplore the attacks recorded against schools, dams,
train stations, food warehouses and homes, inter alia,
which demonstrate a total disregard for international
humanitarian law.
We reiterate once again the obligation to distinguish
between the civilian population and civilian objects, on
the one hand, and combatants and military objectives,
on the other. It is impermissible to attack, destroy or
render useless goods that are indispensable for the
10/32

05/05/2022

survival of the civilian population, which is even more
tragic when it occurs in the context of great and growing
humanitarian needs.
Mexico will closely follow the developments
surrounding the investigation into the situation
in Ukraine announced by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court. Such investigations are
fundamental, since international law is the foundation
of the United Nations. International law is also the
basis of multilateralism and of all forms of respectful
coexistence between sovereign States. All parties have
undertaken to respect the obligations arising from the
Charter of the United Nations, the various treaties
and other sources of international law, in particular
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
Mexico’s position has been unequivocal: we
advocate preventive diplomacy, we favour dialogue
and a political solution based on international law, and,
above all, we support putting people at the centre of
the Security Council’s action — without exceptions
and without conditions. We will continue to call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities, as this is the highest
of all priorities. We are closely following the orders of
the International Court of Justice and the investigations
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
We reiterate that, by ratifying the Charter of the
United Nations, all States have pledged to respect the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of States. Ukraine cannot be an exception.
My delegation will continue to promote everything that
allows unrestricted access to humanitarian assistance,
and we insist on the imperative need for the Security
Council to emerge from the paralysis to which it has
been held hostage and fulfil its responsibilities, namely,
to stop the war and restore peace in Ukraine.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General, Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Griffiths and
Ms. Luzan for their briefings.
Let me commend the outstanding work of the
United Nations agencies and humanitarian actors. We
have just heard that the Secretary-General’s visit to Kyiv
and Moscow has enabled the evacuation of hundreds of
civilians. I thank him for that. But how many people are
still there, holed up in the tunnels of the Azovstal steel
plant or blocked in the hidden recesses of Mariupol,
being shelled by the Russian army? It is essential that the
evacuation of civilians continues in complete safety and
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

on a voluntary basis, leaving the choice of destination
to the evacuees. France condemns the resumption of the
offensive by Russia and the maintenance of the siege
of the city in defiance of international humanitarian
law. It also condemns the indiscriminate strikes that
hit Kyiv during the Secretary-General’s visit. These
strikes reflect the low esteem in which Russia, which
has constantly trampled on the Charter and its founding
principles since the beginning of this war, holds the
United Nations.
For more than two months, the Russian army has
been killing civilians, including children, humanitarian
workers and journalists. More than a quarter of the
Ukrainian population has been forced to flee, and the
number is growing. Civilians can no longer find respite
in schools and hospitals. Russia is indiscriminately
dropping bombs, hitting water infrastructure and
laying mines in fields, so as to deprive the Ukrainian
population of the goods necessary for their survival.
The priority is an immediate cessation of hostilities
and full respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights. Access must be urgently guaranteed
in Mariupol and in all besieged cities, while more
than 15 million people are in need of aid. France will
continue to play its full part. It has delivered over 815
tons of aid in response to the crisis. And more than
22,000 tons of emergency aid has been delivered by the
European Union. Our overall support will increase to
$2 billion, as President Macron announced today at the
donor conference hosted by Poland and Sweden.
Beyond Ukraine, the whole world is affected by
this war, which risks pushing a fifth of the world’s
population into poverty and food insecurity. Russia
must lift the blockade of Ukrainian ports in the Black
Sea in order to allow for food exports.
I state this emphatically: war criminals will be
brought to justice. In that regard, France supports the
prompt deployment of accountability mechanisms.
We will remain resolutely engaged alongside the
people of Ukraine and international jurisdictions and
mechanisms, including in particular the International
Criminal Court.
Lastly, I wish to reiterate that France will continue
to stand firmly by the side of Ukraine and its people, to
whom I wish to pay tribute for their courage and their
staunch resistance.

S/PV.9027

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Michelle Bachelet for their briefings. I also
listened to the statement made by Ms. Luzan.
The fighting in Ukraine has been raging for more
than two months now, and China has repeatedly stated
its position on the issue. The longer the conflict lasts,
the more people will suffer. The priority at hand
is to step up efforts to promote a ceasefire and the
cessation of hostilities. Secretary-General Guterres
visited Russia and Ukraine last week and met with the
leaders of the two countries, calling for the creation
of conditions for effective dialogue so as to achieve a
ceasefire as soon as possible. The Secretary-General
has also made unremitting efforts to mitigate the
humanitarian situation.
It is heartening to note that after the visit of the
Secretary-General, and thanks to the intensified
coordination between the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Russia and
Ukraine have agreed to arrange for the evacuation of the
civilians stranded in Mariupol; more than 300 civilians
have been successfully evacuated from Mariupol and
other places to Zaporizhzhya. China welcomes that
positive progress, which was made possible through
consultations among the parties concerned, and thanks
the Secretary-General for his instrumental role.
The humanitarian crisis caused by the conflict
remains dire, and the ever-increasing number of
civilian casualties is deeply lamentable. Once again, we
call on the parties to the conflict to exercise maximum
restraint, refrain from hurting innocent civilians
and damaging civilian facilities, and give priority to
ensuring humanitarian relief and assistance for such
vulnerable groups as women and children.
Building on the evacuation work in Mariupol, all
parties concerned should establish a broader and more
efficient humanitarian coordination mechanism so as to
ensure the safe and smooth operation of the evacuation
and humanitarian rescue channels and minimize the
humanitarian impact of the conflict.
International humanitarian agencies should continue
to mobilize the international community to increase
resource inputs, help Ukraine and its neighbours to
cope with the pressure of providing humanitarian relief,
spare no effort to save lives, alleviate the suffering of

22-3397411/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

people and create the conditions necessary for the safe
and orderly return of refugees to their homes.
The signs that point to a protracted and expanded
conflict are truly worrying. It has to be pointed out that
delivering weapons will not deliver peace and that the
conflict can have no winners. Dialogue and negotiation
is the only and inevitable way to resolve disputes.
Russia and Ukraine have laid some groundwork in the
previous negotiations; all the more reason for them
to continue talks against all odds. The international
community should create enabling conditions for the
Russia-Ukraine negotiations and make further efforts
to facilitate the political settlement rather than the other
way around. It is not only morally despicable to try to
benefit from the turmoil but also dangerous, as doing
so is doomed to backfire.
The continued fighting and multifarious and
indiscriminate sanctions are subjecting people in
all countries, not least the developing countries, to
higher prices for food and oil as well as other hefty
consequences. The arbitrary seizure and freezing of
the foreign-exchange reserves of other countries is
tantamount to weaponizing economic interdependence,
which is bringing more uncertainty and posing
an even greater peril to the world economy and
international relations.
We call on the international community to
strengthen macroeconomic policy coordination and
work together to effectively regulate and contain the
negative spillover effects of the Ukrainian conflict.
The lessons being drawn from the Ukraine crisis
are profound and deserving of serious reflection. The
security of all countries is indivisible. To base one
country’s security on the insecurity of others is neither
reasonable nor viable.
NATO’s repeated eastward expansion after the
cold war has not only failed to make Europe any safer
but also sowed the seeds of conflict. Contrary to its
claim to be an organization that is defensive in nature,
NATO wantonly launches wars against sovereign
countries, causing colossal numbers of casualties and
humanitarian disasters.
The day after tomorrow is 7 May. On 7 May 1999,
NATO fired a number of precision-guided missiles
at the Chinese embassy in Yugoslavia, killing three
Chinese journalists and injuring more than 20 Chinese
diplomats. The Chinese people will never forget that
12/32

05/05/2022

barbaric atrocity and will never allow such history
to repeat itself. Now that the cold war is behind us,
NATO should naturally size up the situation and
make the necessary adjustments. Clinging to the
anachronistic doctrine of security and keen to provoke
bloc confrontations and create tensions in Europe and
even in the Asia-Pacific region and the entire world,
it engages in practices that are as harmful to others
as they are deleterious to the perpetrators themselves.
They deserve nothing less than China’s firm opposition.
The world does not need a new cold war, and it cannot
afford greater turmoil and division.
China solemnly advocates that in order to solve
the practical problems relating to human security and
seek a long-term solution aimed at ensuring world
peace, all countries should reaffirm their commitment
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, earnestly uphold the principle of the
indivisibility of security, forge synergies through
consultations and build together a balanced, effective
and sustainable global and regional security architecture.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May
and wishing you every success during the month. I also
take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Barbara
Woodward and the United Kingdom delegation for their
able leadership of the Council last month.
We thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and have paid close attention to the important briefings
by Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Michelle Bachelet, and we thank them also for their
coordination of United Nations efforts and actions
in Ukraine.
We also thank Ms. Tetiana Luzan of Right to
Protection for highlighting the work of her organization
in the area of protection assistance.
It is the ordinary people of Ukraine who continue to
bear the brunt of the war, with women, children and the
aged being disproportionately affected. Urgent action
is therefore imperative to stem the rising humanitarian
crisis and restore the hope of peace, which has so far
eluded the people of Ukraine.
We therefore welcome the important undertakings
of the Secretary-General during his recent visit to
Moscow and Kyiv, where he held discussions with
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

President Putin and President Zelenskyy, personally
assessed the impact of the war and helped to mobilize
humanitarian evacuations in Mariupol.
We encourage the continued deployment of
the good offices of the Secretary-General in the
international endeavour to bring an end to the war and
facilitate a diplomatic solution to the ongoing security
and humanitarian crises in Ukraine.
We commend the facilitative role played by United
Nations and the International Committee of the Red
Cross in the coordinated evacuation of civilians from
the Azovstal steel plant on 3 May. However, we regret
the resumption of heavy shelling and the fact that air
strikes were aimed at the steel plant before all the
people could be moved to safety. Intense efforts must
be made to secure the immediate evacuation of close to
1,000 people, including an estimated 30 children, still
holed up in the underground tunnels of the steel plant,
with little access to food, water and medical assistance.
We urge the parties to agree to further humanitarian
pauses and demilitarized humanitarian corridors in all
besieged areas to help protect the lives of civilians and
to ensure the unobstructed delivery of humanitarian aid
to alleviate suffering.
We note the set obligation of the parties to conduct
themselves in accordance with the rules of international
law and international humanitarian law and reiterate
our call on them to implement the necessary measures
to protect civilians and humanitarian workers from
harm, while also avoiding the deliberate destruction of
civilian and critical infrastructure, including in Lviv,
Kharkiv, Odesa and the Donbas region where intense
fighting continues to rage.
We continue to be concerned by the growing
reports of gross human rights violations and possible
war crimes, involving summary killings, forced
disappearances, human trafficking and conflictrelated sexual violence, and reiterate the necessity of
an independent, impartial and thorough investigation
to ensure effective accountability and secure justice
for the innocent victims of the war. In that regard,
we welcome investigations opened into all cases of
alleged atrocities.
Beyond the destruction and humanitarian crisis in
Ukraine, the impact of the war is already being felt on
the food, energy and financial systems of the world.
The disruptions in food supply chains and the high
cost of energy have caused historic rises in the cost of

S/PV.9027

living globally. The stifling economic effects, along
with the existing difficulties of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, have the potential to fester sociopolitical
tensions and instability, especially in developing
economies that have little fiscal space to contain
the shocks.
Ending the war in Ukraine now is therefore not
only urgent to avoid a direct humanitarian crisis for
the Ukrainian people but also critical to abate a global
meltdown, which would linger and have deep adverse
impacts on the global economy, the security architecture
and the multilateral order. Furthermore, we are
concerned about the fact that the avowed commitments
of the parties to engage in negotiations have so far not
yielded the desired results due to growing mistrust and
widening differences in expectations. We encourage
the parties to recommit to the objectives of peace and
the settlement of their dispute.
In that context, the international community, and
Security Council in particular, must overcome inherent
challenges to facilitate a constructive dialogue — first,
to support the immediate and unconditional cessation
of hostilities and, secondly, to provide a forum within
which the core geopolitical and security concerns of the
Russian Federation, Ukraine and NATO and its allied
countries can be sustainably addressed.
In conclusion, we call on the members of the
Council to find common purpose in working to restore
and maintain the peace and security of Ukraine.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month.
I thank the Secretary-General for his remarks and
welcome him back to New York after his extensive
and important travels. I also thank the other briefers
for their briefings and the work they do every day. We
also welcome Ukraine’s Permanent Representative and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Poland, among other
speakers, to today’s meeting.
The briefings we have heard make it clear that the
war in Ukraine, caused by the armed breach of the
country’s territorial integrity by the Russian Federation,
is causing extreme suffering. It is also sadly clear that
sufficient care is not being accorded by combatants to
the protection of civilians. After all, the millions of
civilians who have fled their homes did so only because

22-3397413/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

they understood that their lives and properties would be
directly harmed in the course of the conflict.
We are gravely concerned about the most recent
developments in Mariupol, Izium, and Popasna, among
other cities. The reports from those cities reveal heavy
artillery shelling and air strikes that destroy civilian
objects at scale. Those acts constitute a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
international humanitarian law.
Kenya condemns the disproportionate use of force,
the use of human shields and the exploitation of civilian
suffering as a tactic of war. As important as it is for
the Security Council to be clear in its condemnation of
those violating our shared values and rules, it is more
urgent to stop the present cycle of escalation. Public
statements by the combatants and their allies suggest
that there is little respite from violence that civilians
in Ukraine can look forward to. Instead, weapons and
soldiers are being deployed in ever-greater numbers.
The war itself and its aims are being communicated
as existential. There is even repeated mention of the
possible use of nuclear weapons being made in the
media. Increased battlefield engagements, combined
with their propaganda counterpart in the shaping of
domestic and international public opinion, plus the
apocalyptic tone, may lead to a far more dangerous
escalation than is presently the case, with the result
being more Ukrainians being harmed.
Connected to the harm being done to the civilians
in Ukraine is the harm that the war is causing in other
parts of the world. The inability of Ukraine to export
its harvests and fertilizer is directly contributing to the
immiseration of many millions, and serious harm is
being caused to their food security. That is particularly
the case in relatively poor and food insecure countries
in the global South, including those in Africa. The
unprecedented sanctions in response to the war are also
reshaping global development, food security and even
political stability.
With every new mention of nuclear weapons as part
of the conflict continuum, or promises of unceasing
war until one side is permanently disabled, global
equity and debt markets will exit riskier emerging
market economies, and investors will delay or cancel
the investments that we all need to be able to deliver
sufficient jobs to our young people.
14/32

05/05/2022

It is therefore our contention that the civilians in
Ukraine, while under the more immediate threat of
extreme violence, are united in their interest in safety
with the billions of civilians globally. It means that
the whole world has a stake in an immediate cessation
of hostilities for humanitarian purposes, followed
by a structured ceasefire that enables meaningful
negotiations between Ukraine and the Russian
Federation. In addition, if we want the global markets
to play a part in the development of the global South,
rather than the reverse, then Europe’s security order
must be placed on a stable footing.
Added to the growing global economic crisis, that
stable security order in Europe is also needed if we
are to limit the harm to civilians from climate change.
The present arraying of major geopolitical forces in
a growing conflict will make it next to impossible
to undertake ambitious climate change action. Even
before the war started, agreement on climate adaptation
and mitigation action was plagued by the lack of trust,
changing goalposts and unmet commitments. If climate
change is indeed, as the science informs us, leading
to serious harm to humankind, then we can count
the war and its deleterious impact on multilateralism
as yet another blow to the safety and security of
civilians worldwide.
At this rate, the multilateral system may not
survive the multiple major crises we are causing while
undermining its ability to solve them. As a minimum
response to protecting peace, Kenya urges Member
States to place more trust in the good offices of the
Secretary-General. The historical record of the use
of those good offices is replete with shortcomings but
also with great successes. The decisive factor has been
the extent to which conflicting States and their most
influential allies give the Secretary-General space to
help mediate conflict at all stages.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
recent trips to Russia and Ukraine, where he sought
commitments for a ceasefire and safe humanitarian
passage and to encourage negotiations. We urge the
parties to embrace his readiness to mediate. Their
doing so will signal their regard and respect for our
United Nations.
I underscore, in conclusion, that the continued
undermining, and even destruction, of multilateralism
will lead only to more war. It will be a catastrophe for
civilians in multiple regions and countries. Stopping
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the war in Ukraine offers us all an opportunity to
live up to the promise of the Charter of the United
Nations to protect succeeding generations from our
own shortcomings.
I reaffirm Kenya’s respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to express
my gratitude for the participation of Secretary-General
António Guterres, High Commissioner Michelle
Bachelet, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Tetiana Luzan, including for their first-hand
accounts from the conflict in Ukraine.
The Brazilian Government continues to follow
closely the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. Our utmost
priorities should be the immediate cessation of hostilities
and the strengthening of diplomatic negotiations in
order to bring about a lasting solution to this crisis, one
that does not only end the conflict but also contributes
to improving the security and defence architecture in
Europe. Besides the human rights violations and the
humanitarian costs of the conflict, we are also attentive
to the negative economic effects of the war for the whole
world, especially in the form of higher food and energy
prices, which have particularly dire consequences for
developing countries.
We acknowledge the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral during his recent visits to Moscow and Kyiv
to discuss with Presidents Putin and Zelenskyy how
to establish safe humanitarian corridors to allow
the evacuation of civilians from conflagrated areas,
such as in the city of Mariupol. We commend all the
tireless work being done by the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to provide
humanitarian aid to millions of people inside Ukraine,
while being cognizant of the fact that humanitarian
assistance needs remain huge. We would also like to
express our appreciation to Ukraines neighbouring
countries for keeping their borders open to refugees.
I would also like to express my recognition of the
Secretary-General for having raised this afternoon,
despite it not being the central focus of this meeting,
the impact that the conflict and its associated factors
are having on food security worldwide.
Brazil stresses the importance of all parties to the
conflict to fully respect international humanitarian law,
especially its provisions regarding the protection of

S/PV.9027

civilians. Of particular concern to Brazil are: first, the
consequences of the shelling of urban areas, including
with the use of explosive weapons and the targeting of
civilians; secondly, the need to avoid the destruction
of civilian infrastructure and the disruption of basic
services; thirdly, the protection of the elderly, people
with disabilities and children, among other vulnerable
groups; fourthly, the protection of humanitarian
personnel and unimpeded humanitarian access; and
fifthly, the protection of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
It is our belief that resolution ES-11/2, the
humanitarian resolution adopted by the General
Assembly last March, provides an adequate framework
for concrete actions on the ground, such as guaranteeing
safe passage for civilians and unimpeded access for
humanitarian personnel. Furthermore, the resolution
provides us with the main objectives we should
strive to achieve, in particular full compliance by all
parties to the armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international refugee law.
Within its capabilities, Brazil is contributing to the
humanitarian efforts, offering shelter to citizens fleeing
the armed conflict in Ukraine. Since last March, Brazil
has granted temporary visas and residency authorization
for Ukrainian nationals and stateless persons who have
been affected or displaced by the events in Ukraine.
Brazil has also donated food, medicine and water
purifiers to the victims of the conflict.
The lives and well-being of civilians in conflagrated
areas are in great jeopardy. The cessation of hostilities
is a matter of urgency. We have already witnessed too
much suffering. The effective delivery of humanitarian
aid is of paramount importance. Moreover, we need a
resumption of diplomatic negotiations that are conducive
to a peaceful and lasting solution to this crisis.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
welcome back the Secretary-General and thank him
for his briefing this afternoon. I also want to extend
a particularly warm welcome to High Commissioner
Michelle Bachelet. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths and Ms. Tetiana Luzan for updating
us today on the humanitarian disaster in Ukraine. Their
briefings highlight yet again the utter senselessness of
this unlawful war.
Eleven weeks into this unjustified and unjustifiable
war, we continue to witness widespread destruction,

22-3397415/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

indiscriminate attacks and unconscionable human
suffering. As each day passes, reports of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law by
Russia grow. And, as we have heard from colleagues
around this table, the consequences are being felt
far beyond Ukraine and Europe. Russia must end its
war now.
We salute the courageous decision by the
Secretary-General to visit Moscow and Kyiv last week.
The founders of the United Nations were clear on their
primary objective — to prevent the human suffering
wrought from war.
The Secretary-General speaks for all of us in
deploring this war and calling for its end. The cynical
timing of further attacks on civilian infrastructure
during his time in Kyiv and following his visit to Moscow
is further evidence of the disdain that has been shown
towards the United Nations. It is more than regrettable
that we should have to recall that the Secretary-General
of the United Nations is appointed by all Members of
the United Nations. He is mandated by all Members of
the United Nations. We have a responsibility towards
our Secretary-General.
What the Secretary-General witnessed in Bucha,
Irpin and Borodyanka follows the devastation wrought
on Kharkiv, Kherson and Mariupol, as well as
elsewhere. Civilians, as he said, are paying the highest
price for this conflict.
We commend the work of the United Nations
agencies in Ukraine and the organizations with whom
they are working to alleviate the suffering there. They
have our support. They have our appreciation.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s work to put in
place arrangements for the evacuation of civilians from
Mariupol. We welcome the ongoing life-saving work
of the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross there. We believe that thousands still
remain trapped and under siege. We encourage all
parties to ensure that those safe passage operations
continue and that humanitarian aid reach all those
in need.
Parties to the conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law, including the
obligation to limit attacks to military objects. That
also includes the prohibitions against indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks and the obligation to
16/32

05/05/2022

take all feasible precautions in attack. Compliance is
not optional.
We have heard today from High Commissioner
Bachelet of how civilians continue to bear the brunt
of this unconscionable war. We condemn the horrific
violations documented by the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine — unlawful
killings, including summary executions; conflict-related
sexual violence; arbitrary detentions and deportations,
including of journalists, human rights defenders and
civil society activists; enforced disappearances and
torture of prisoners of war. All allegations of violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law must continue to be investigated
and those responsible held to account. The people of
Ukraine deserve nothing less.
Let us be clear. Daily, we see the devastating impact
of the use of explosive weapons, including prohibited
cluster munitions, by Russian forces in populated
areas, without regard for civilians. We see the toll of
destruction of homes, hospitals and schools. We know
what we are dealing with: it cannot be dismissed as
fake news. The sheer scale of destruction in itself
belies the Russian Federation’s attempt to dissemble
and distort reality. We condemn indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks in all circumstances. We reject
all efforts to question reality.
We are resolved to ensure accountability for the
atrocious crimes taking place in Ukraine and recognize
the important role of the ongoing investigation of the
International Criminal Court in helping to pursue that.
We must not and cannot accept impunity for those
inflicting such horrors — not in Ukraine, not anywhere
in the world. As the High Commissioner said last
week, “accountability is a cornerstone of upholding
human rights.” We will never shirk our responsibility
in upholding human rights.
We once again call on the Russian Federation to
comply with its obligations under international law to
allow full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
for humanitarian personnel, to allow all those seeking
to leave Ukraine to do so safely and to destinations
of their choosing. Civilians who choose to remain in
Ukraine are not combatants. That is a fact, pure and
simple. They must be protected in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The international community and the Council must
not become numb to the devastation and tragedy that
continues in Ukraine. I am marked by the horror of the
death of a 91-year-old Holocaust survivor who froze
to death in a basement in Mariupol — her life ending,
under our watch, in a shameful reflection of how, as a
child, she had hidden to save her life during the war she
called the Great Patriotic War.
Stopping this war today could not undo what has
been done. It could not bring back those lost, or erase
the horrors that those who have been forced to flee have
endured. It could not undo the human suffering already
caused around the world. But it would stop the slaughter;
it would save lives. Russia must end its aggression,
comply with its obligations under international law and
withdraw all forces unconditionally from the entirety
of the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
We call again on the Russia Federation to end its
war. It is never too late to do the right thing.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, we would like to congratulate the
United States on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. We trust
that, unlike the previous presidency, yours will be
effective and impartial, as is necessary when acting in
the capacity of President of the Security Council rather
than in a national capacity.
We are compelled to make a few remarks about
the briefer Ms. Bachelet, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. I will not delve into the substance of
what she stated or her one-sided assessments, about
which we had many questions. I would like to remind
colleagues and the High Commissioner that, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 48/141, which established
the mandate of the High Commissioner, under the
guidance and auspices of the Secretary-General, this
official is primarily responsible for United Nations
human rights activities within the framework of the
overall competencies, powers and decisions of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Human Rights Council. No other matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security or the protection of civilians fall under the
High Commissioner’s purview.
For two months now we have been discussing
the developments in Ukraine, and for two months, in
addition to the stream of hostility, lies, deceit, fakes,
hatred and insults, we have been hearing the same

S/PV.9027

question: How could Russia, unprovoked — as they
say — attack a sovereign, democratic, non-aggressive,
independent and peaceful Ukraine — for it posed no
threat to Russia.
Among those who say or think that, I allow that
there may be those who are sincere and may not
understand what has actually been taking place all those
years. Yet there are also deceitful people and countries
that have long dreamed of transforming Ukraine into
a bridgehead for a battle against Russia and have
been doing everything possible — politically and
ideologically — to achieve that, since Ukraine gained
independence, 30 years ago. Today they continue to do
that by pumping weapons into Ukraine.
What has been happening in Ukraine all these
years will not fit into the format of our statement today,
and it is unlikely that many of those gathered here will
want to hear or understand it — just as they did not, and
did not wish to, understand it before. We have spoken
repeatedly here in the Chamber about the difficulties
of translation. People are listening to an interpretation
of the Ukrainian authorities, who have told and are
telling people what they want to hear. But we have
listened, and continue to listen, to the Kyiv authorities
in the original, without interpretation. We know about
their machinations, their intractability, their lies, their
deceit, including to their own people, in the course of
all of these years.
Instead of providing for their own State, an
oligarchical and totally corrupt regime flourished,
which made even the Western sponsors of Kyiv cringe.
We know how they tried to create their own ideology
based on a repudiation of everything Russian and all
that has bound us together for centuries. Some people do
not know, and do not want to know, what kind of insults
and hatred was directed against everything connected
with Russia — not only at the household level, but also
at the level of State and public figures. Some do not
know that, during the years of independence, a whole
generation of people has been taught to hate Russia
on the basis of absurd Ukrainian history textbooks.
Russophobia has become the main domestic national
product of the Ukrainian Government — and the main
export commodity of Ukraine. There is nothing of the
sort in Russian society with respect to Ukraine and
the Ukrainian people. Some simply do not hear their
slogans or notice their torch-bearing marches. Some do
not see their nationalists and undisguised Nazis.

22-3397417/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

A clever Ukrainian historian and patriot, Oles
Buzina, who was killed by nationalists in 2015 — in a
crime that has not yet been investigated, even though
the murderers were known — rightly said that as, the
empire collapsed, extreme blatant nationalism, tinged
with deep provincialism, began to flourish along the
border areas. Ukraine is the clearest example of that.
Today it is not a war in Ukraine, as is said; it is
a proxy war between the collective West and Russia.
It seems that the West has just been waiting for this
moment to launch a spiral of repression against Russia.
If there is any talk of a world war, today it is clearly
being waged at the economic level. We have no doubt
that it was prepared for well in advance, because of the
speed with which the spiral was launched. It is simply
mere robbery in the best traditions of the Wild West.
In case anyone here is not aware, let me report
that, in addition to countless sanctions and bans,
misappropriation of private property from Russian
citizens who have nothing to do with the special
military operation, Western countries have frozen
$300 billion worth of accounts belonging to Russia.
What international law dare they talk about? It is not
even a rules-based order that is being invented. It
was not even colonialism when the enlightened West
went about imposing civilization on its colonies, while
plundering their natural resources. It is nothing less
than basic lawlessness and pillaging. Now the masks
have simply been cast off. At the same time, it has
become fashionable to blame Russia for the energy and
food crisis, which the West itself created.
For eight years we have been talking about the
suffering of the people in Donbas, the shelling by
Ukrainian armed forces and nationalist battalions,
the deaths of civilians caused by that shelling and
the fact that it was not Donbas that waged a war on
Kyiv, but Kyiv that went to Donbas just because people
there did not accept the coup d’état and the policy of
complete Ukrainianization implemented by the Maidan
authorities. There was no response. Members do not
want to remember that similar protests in 2014 were
brutally suppressed in Kharkiv, Odesa and the very
same Mariupol. We have been saying for all those eight
years that this must stop.
There was very little that needed to be done. The
Ukrainian authorities had to implement the Minsk
agreements, which they had publicly renounced,
using the West’s protection and support and being
18/32

05/05/2022

under the illusion of complete impunity. They liked
to feel part of the so-called civilized world and to
be its vassals. I wonder if, in the light of the current
situation, the bankrupt Ukrainian Government is
now kicking itself about that. Now, after all that and
after all the Kyiv regime’s crimes and the warnings,
when the special military operation to liberate Donbas
began, we suddenly heard desperate cries: what have
we done wrong? Those who know Ukrainian and
Russian folklore will know what I am talking about.
But I will answer the question myself. It is all thanks
to the Western sponsors and patrons, who have been
rubbing their hands with glee at the sight of Ukraine
becoming anti-Russia. Everything that is happening
now did not start at the end of February, and not
even eight years ago. It began much earlier with the
encouragement and support of the United States and its
Western satellites.
We have repeatedly raised our security concerns.
Those in the West were dismissing those concerns,
not taking them seriously, assuring themselves that
NATO was purely defensive, while pushing the bloc’s
boundaries right up against our borders. Today they
are already talking about a global role for the alliance,
including in Asia. We put forward our proposals for
a global and indivisible security architecture. They
arrogantly dismissed them. They should not try to
convince us today that dragging Ukraine into NATO
was never part of their plans. It was — if not today,
then tomorrow. We did not have, and do not have, any
illusions in that regard.
We would once again like to stress that the West
does not need Ukraine, as such. It was, and is, needed
only as an area of confrontation with Russia. Ukraine
should have no illusions either. The West will not help
Ukraine except by pumping in armaments and trying
to prolong the conflict. The West is already at war with
Russia by means of a proxy war.
Today the hypocrisy of our Western partners keeps
surprising us. The topic of United States and Western
aggression in Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yugoslavia and the
inglorious campaign in Afghanistan, not to mention
what happened prior to those events — for example, in
Viet Nam — seems somehow to have faded away. Those
tragedies are somehow forgotten today. It is as if they
never happened and as if they are ancient history and
the West had nothing to do with them — of course not.
It was a struggle for democracy back then. However,
that struggle cost the lives of millions of people and
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

destroyed cities and countries, and all that thousands of
kilometres away from home.
Instead, today we hear delusional talk about
sponsors of terrorism. Let me ask a rhetorical question:
where did the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
come from? ISIS appeared as a result of the invasion of
Iraq by the United States of America. Its core backbone
is made up of former members of the Iraqi army. Who
therefore is the real sponsor of terrorism?
Today we live in a state of information, or rather
disinformation, warfare. Its target is Russia. We have
already said more than once what immense psychological
operations special forces are being deployed on the
information battlefield. They seek not only to denigrate
the enemy, but also to disarm it, depriving its media
of access to the world community and accusing it of
propaganda in the process. The world community
should hear only one version of events — the one about
so-called atrocities committed by Russian military,
the deliberate shelling of residential houses and the
killing of civilians and the completely delusional idea
about the genocide of Ukrainian people. The West has
been preparing for this information warfare for many
years. However, if in the past the information war
accompanied a real war, now the very opposite is true.
By contrast, the world community should hear
nothing about Ukrainian provocations, such as in Bucha
or Kramatorsk, about how Ukrainian nationalists shield
themselves with civilians by placing gun posts near
schools, hospitals, kindergartens, near people’s homes
and in citizens’ flats, and about how they keep people
in basements and do not let them out, not allowing them
to leave through the humanitarian corridors provided
daily by the Russian military. If someone comes out,
they are shot in the back by their own people. There is
plenty of evidence provided by Ukrainians themselves.
It is just that members do not want to hear it. Have they
ever seen the testimonies of Russian prisoners of war
or the footage of their torture by Ukrainian nationalists
posted on social networks?
Have they ever seen something like that from
Russian soldiers towards Ukrainian prisoners of war?
Have they seen the reports of foreign correspondents
who are brought by the Russian military to liberated
Ukrainian cities and allowed to look around and talk to
anyone? Have they ever heard what people from those
towns say and how the Ukrainian nationalists acted and
behaved towards them?

S/PV.9027

I cannot fail to note that the Secretary-General’s
trip to Russia and Ukraine was presented by both
the media and Western politicians in a completely
distorted way. The impression is thereby deliberately
created that Ukraine and the United Nations managed
to persuade Russia to open a humanitarian corridor for
the evacuation of civilians from Azovstal. However, the
Russian side regularly opens humanitarian corridors
there, and, incidentally, they remain open today.
The problem lies in the following: the Azov
fighters who are at Azovstal prefer to use civilians as
human shields, and this is openly talked about by those
who have managed to flee. Contrary to the mendacious
allegations of the Ukrainian authorities, many of those
who have exited Azovstal have preferred to remain in the
Donetsk People’s Republic or voiced a desire to return to
liberated Mariupol. And, today, the Azov fighters have
definitively cast off their masks, demanding that they
be provided with one ton of foodstuffs and medicine for
each of the 15 hostages liberated at Azovstal. Before
them, only terrorists from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front acted in this way.
Earlier, the Permanent Representative of Albania
quoted Trotsky, who said that the army is a copy of
society. Is this episode what he was talking about?
Tomorrow we will hold an Arria Formula meeting
on Ukraine’s violations of international humanitarian
law, and it will not be us, but witnesses — Ukrainians
and foreign journalists — who will describe to the
Council what they have seen. Anyone who has the
inkling of a desire to hear objective information should
come and listen.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, let me thank Ambassador Barbara Woodward,
and the delegation of the United Kingdom for their
able stewardship of the Security Council in April, and
I wish the United States success in its presidency this
month and offer our full support.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and updates on his visit to Russia and Ukraine,
as well as for his exercise of his good offices in this
conflict. We fully support his continued effort and
engagement. I also wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths, High Commissioner Bachelet and
Ms. Luzan for their briefings.
As the Secretary-General noted last week, civilians
always pay the highest price in war. As the conflict

22-3397419/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

moves into its third month, its repercussions have
far exceeded many worst-case projections made at
the start of hostilities in February. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees now
believes that more than 8 million Ukrainians could end
up fleeing the country — double the initial estimates.
At the same time, the United Nations Development
Programme forecasts that the war will soon erase nearly
two decades of progress in the development of Ukraine.
And we have not yet fully absorbed how the impact
of this war is reverberating globally, although there
are already clear repercussions being felt — through
rising commodity prices and supply disruptions, and
disruptions to the global financial system on which we
are all dependent for shared stability and development.
We remain deeply concerned by reports of rising
civilian casualties and the ongoing destruction of
civilian infrastructure. It is imperative to underline once
again that all parties must abide by their obligations
under international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. This necessarily includes respect
for the fundamental international-humanitarian-law
principles of necessity, proportionality and distinction.
The Council has built a framework to strengthen the
protection of civilians and civilian objects, including
its unanimous adoption of resolution 2573 (2021) just
over a year ago. Attacks on civilian infrastructure
can undermine the provision of essential services to
the civilian population and have horrifying knock-on
effects. We appreciate the efforts of international actors
to provide tools and mechanisms to operationalize this
framework, and we call on the parties to engage in the
design of urgently needed solutions, including for safe
and voluntary passage. We are encouraged by the recent
progress with regard to safe passage from Mariupol
through coordinated action by the United Nations, the
authorities of both Ukraine and the Russian Federation,
and the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
we are hopeful that it can be built upon.
However, as we have underscored before,
initiatives like corridors do not alter the obligations
of the parties to uphold international humanitarian
law. The Secretary-General’s proposal to create a
contact group is a welcome starting point to implement
additional measures supporting the implementation of
international humanitarian law, and we hope to hear
more details about the proposal in the near future.
20/32

05/05/2022

As the conflict continues, we join others in
emphasizing the critical importance of increased
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine and to the
neighbouring countries hosting refugees. As part of
our ongoing support, the United Arab Emirates most
recently dispatched a plane, on 28 April, carrying 30
additional tons of food supplies to support refugees
from Ukraine and Moldova, and we are committed
to continuing to work with international partners
on relief efforts. In addition, we emphasize the need
to systematically take into account needs based on
gender, age and disability in providing humanitarian
assistance, not least as it also supports longer-term
recovery efforts.
Finally, we reiterate that the protection of civilians
can only be ensured with a cessation of hostilities and
a diplomatic solution to the conflict. We call on both
sides to remain committed, despite the difficulties, to
direct dialogue and for the international community
and the Security Council to create the conditions to
help halt the war and ultimately bring about a lasting
peace in Europe and stability to our international order.
The alternative — increasing polarization and
the resulting ruptures — are in no country’s interest,
neither today nor in future. We must step back from
this brink.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on the United
States presidency of the Security Council this month. I
thank the Secretary-General for his poignant briefing. I
also thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Tetiana Luzan for their inspiring briefings.
We salute the Secretary-General’s boldness in
seeking a solution to end the war in Ukraine and
provide assistance to those caught in the crossfire. His
recent visit to Moscow and Kyiv, and the humanitarian
mission coordinated by United Nations agencies and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, demonstrate
a remarkable commitment that we support.
The war continues in Ukraine and with it
a humanitarian situation that has been steadily
deteriorating 71 days since the war began. Civilians
continue to pay the highest price, and attacks and
bombings of civilians and civilian infrastructure are also
rampant. Water shortages, lack of access to health care
and energy threaten the daily lives of those who have
decided to stay in their country. More than 13 million
people have been forced to move, including nearly
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

5.5 million who have had to leave Ukraine since the
war broke out on 24 February. Many cities in Ukraine
are almost completely destroyed, and communication
routes, including some railroads, are being bombed.
We reiterate our condemnation of the war and the
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
call on the belligerents to strictly respect international
humanitarian law and ensure the respect and protection
of all medical personnel and humanitarian agencies.
Essential infrastructure, production and distribution
facilities for electricity, gas and the supply of drinking
water should never be targeted.
We encourage people to allow the evacuation
of civilians who wish to leave combat zones. In this
regard, we note Russia’s announcement of a ceasefire
and the establishment of a humanitarian corridor for the
evacuation of civilians who are amassed in the Azovstal
metallurgical complex in Mariupol. However, it is
essential that the ceasefire is effective and sustainable.
The shockwaves of the war are now being felt
by many countries beyond the immediate borders of
Ukraine. Pressure is mounting in many economic
sectors. Uncertainty over the delivery of agricultural
inputs and other products — wheat, grain, cooking
oil — is causing concern for many businesses and
families around the world.
If the war does not end immediately, there is a risk
that countries already facing serious humanitarian
emergencies will be left in a state of collapse. Indeed,
the prices of food, fuel and other energy resources are
reaching unprecedented heights, and we are all already,
wherever we are, collateral victims.
Diplomatic and political signals do not suggest a
real commitment by the stakeholders to ending this war.
On the contrary, the verbal escalation is rising, at the
same pace as the fighting on the ground, the movement
of arms and the high-level visits. Yet a way out can be
found only through dialogue. My country calls on the
parties once again to exercise restraint and to seize all
opportunities to meet to resume dialogue. We call for
a firm commitment to a return to peace and security
in Ukraine.
The Council cannot content itself with recording
the numbers of dead and counting the wounded while
also reconciling contradictions. It is vital that the end
of the war be the driver behind all of the diplomatic
efforts envisaged by the parties. The war must be ended

S/PV.9027

as swiftly as possible. We are horrified by the atrocities
that have been reported and ask that independent
and impartial investigations be conducted in order to
shed light on the facts, establish responsibility and
guarantee accountability.
In closing, we would like to say that it is high time
for the fighting to stop. It is time for diplomacy to
prevail over weapons. Our energies must be directed at
achieving a political settlement of the situation. We owe
that to the Ukrainian people.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Before I start, may I thank you, Madam President, and
others for your kind words towards me and my team
and wish you a successful presidency.
On this subject, I would like to start by thanking
the briefers for their statements, and I welcome the
Secretary-General’s participation in this meeting.
On 4 April, the Russian Permanent Representative
told the United Nations press corps that what was
happening in Ukraine was warfare and that in warfare
it cannot be excluded that civilians are dying. The truth
is that it is not just that civilians are dying in Russia’s
illegal war of aggression, but that Russia is deliberately
waging a war designed to terrorize and kill Ukrainian
people. Civilians have been executed and dismembered
in Bucha and Irpin. No distinction has been drawn
between military targets, hospitals, schools or the
Mariupol theatre, outside of which the word “children”
was clearly written and where the latest reporting
suggests that as many as 600 people were killed.
Russia’s actions are clear violations of international
humanitarian law, including, but not limited to,
resolutions 2286 (2016), 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021).
I should like to make three points on the issue of
the protection of civilians in Ukraine.
The first and clearest solution to end the suffering
of civilians is for Russia to end its illegal war and
withdraw its troops from Ukraine. Unless it does so,
civilians will continue to die, and many millions more
will be put at risk across the globe owing to the food and
energy shortages resulting from the invasion. That is
what the Secretary-General referred to as the limitless
potential for global harm.
Secondly,
while
the
invasion
continues,
international humanitarian law must be strictly
observed and full humanitarian access to civilians

22-3397421/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

facilitated. We commend the Secretary-General and
his team on the efforts that led to the evacuation to
safety of about 500 civilians from the Azovstal works.
But it should be a matter of profound concern to the
Council that humanitarian supplies were not allowed
into the city and that the shelling of the steelworks
restarted immediately.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned that Russia’s war
is accompanied by a propaganda campaign, including
in the Council, designed to dehumanize and demonize
Ukrainians by labelling them as neo-Nazis. That hate
speech is extremely dangerous. And, as we near the
anniversary of the end of the Second World War, it
disrespects the sacrifices of those Russians, Ukrainians
and many other nationalities who fought to end Nazism.
Finally, I want to assure the Council that the
United Kingdom continues its help and support to
Ukraine. Today we announced a further £45 million
for humanitarian and United Nations organizations to
support the vulnerable and provide medical equipment.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths, High Commissioner Michelle
Bachelet and Tetiana Luzan for their sobering but very
important insights into the daily reality of millions
of Ukrainians. I also extend special thanks to the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his recent
visits to Russia and Ukraine. He has our strong support
to use his good offices in the quest for a peaceful
solution to the senseless and horrific war in Ukraine.
Norway recalls that all Member States, under the
Charter of the United Nations, have the obligation to
settle their international disputes by peaceful means. We
support all sincere efforts towards political dialogue,
negotiations and mediation. But it is Russia that has
chosen to start an unprovoked war of aggression against
Ukraine and must take steps to end it.
We welcome yesterday’s joint statement by
a cross-regional group of freedom of expression
mandate-holders. We agree that it is precisely during
times of war and armed conflict that the right to
freedom of expression and free access to information
must be vigorously defended. It is instrumental for the
promotion of lasting peace, understanding the causes of
conflict and ensuring accountability.
We continue to be alarmed by the humanitarian
situation, including in Mariupol. As United Nations
High Commissioner Bachelet highlighted, it seems that
22/32

05/05/2022

international humanitarian law has not merely been
ignored but seemingly tossed aside. Safe, rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access to people in need must
be allowed immediately.
While we are relieved that the safe passage
operation to evacuate civilians from the Azovstal
steel plant was successful in bringing some to safety,
the poor condition of many of the evacuees shows the
urgent need to allow for the humanitarian voluntary
safe passage of thousands of civilians and hundreds of
wounded out of the city.
Norway is deeply worried that Russia’s intensified
hostilities in eastern Ukraine will lead to a fresh
besiegement of entire cities and towns and that the
suffering and bloodshed that has engulfed Mariupol
may be repeated elsewhere. We call on Russia to
immediately end its relentless attacks on civilians. The
continued bombardment of civilian infrastructure must
also stop. Ukrainian ports must be reopened to allow
wheat and grain to reach those in need globally. The
crippling impact of Russia’s war on the food security of
millions is unacceptable.
There are abundant indications that massive-scale
war crimes are being committed. Those atrocities will
not be forgotten. Individuals at all levels will be held to
account. There must be accountability for the sake of
the victims and all the people of Ukraine.
We welcome the fact that the International Criminal
Court and the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine will continue to coordinate,
cooperate and work together with others to investigate
possible violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Also, earlier this week the United Nations
signed a framework of cooperation with Ukraine on
the prevention of and response to conflict-related
sexual violence. That is a key example of the positive
partnership that the Secretary-General’s good offices
can provide. We strongly support all efforts made
to bolster accountability, risk mitigation against
trafficking and access to comprehensive services
for survivors.
I started my remarks today recalling the obligation of
Member States to settle their disputes through peaceful
means. Russia started this senseless war. Russia must
immediately, completely and unconditionally withdraw
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

all of its military forces from the territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Allow me, at the outset, to
thank the United Kingdom for a successful presidency.
I wish the United States every success in its presidency.
Let me thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his presence and remarks on the situation in Ukraine.
I thank High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle
Bachelet and Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
for their updates. I also thank Ms. Tetiana Luzan for
her insights.
Ever since the commencement of the conflict
in Ukraine, India has been consistently calling for
a complete cessation of hostilities and for pursuing
the path of dialogue and diplomacy as the only way
out. However, the conflict has resulted in the loss of
lives and countless miseries for its people, especially
for women, children and the elderly, with millions
becoming homeless and forced to take shelter in
neighbouring countries.
India has strongly condemned the killing of
civilians in Bucha and supported the call for an
independent investigation. We support all efforts to
alleviate the suffering of the people of Ukraine. India
remains on the side of peace, and therefore believes that
there will be no winning side in this conflict. While
those impacted by this conflict will continue to suffer,
diplomacy will be a lasting casualty.
We welcome the visit of Secretary-General to
Moscow and Kyiv and his engagement with the
leadership of the Russian Federation and Ukraine. We
agree that the immediate priority is to evacuate innocent
civilians from areas witnessing intense fighting. We
deeply appreciate the efforts of the United Nations in
evacuating the civilian population from Mariupol. We
hope those efforts will extend to other areas as well.
The conflict is having a destabilizing effect with
broader regional and global implications. Oil prices are
skyrocketing, and there is a shortage of food grains and
fertilizers. That has had disproportionate impact on the
global South and developing countries. We acknowledge
the efforts made by the Secretary-General, particularly
the findings of the Global Crisis Response Group Task
Team. We welcome its recommendation for exempting
purchases of food for humanitarian assistance by the
World Food Programme from food export restrictions
with immediate effect. It is important that similar

S/PV.9027

such exemptions be provided to all Member States and
relevant stakeholders that are contributing to the global
humanitarian effort.
The food security challenges emanating from the
conflict require us to respond by going beyond the
constraints that bind us presently. Energy security is
equally serious as a concern and needs to be addressed
through cooperative efforts.
India has been sending humanitarian supplies to
Ukraine and its neighbours. We are also providing
more medical supplies to Ukraine. We support calls
for guarantees of safe passage to deliver essential
humanitarian and medical supplies, including through
the establishment of humanitarian corridors. We hope
the international community will continue to respond
positively to the evolving humanitarian requirements.
We reiterate the importance of the United Nations
guiding principles of humanitarian emergency
assistance. Humanitarian action must always be guided
by the principles of humanitarian assistance, which are
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Those measures should never be politicized.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that the
contemporary global order has been built on the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and respect for
the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
First, let me sincerely thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks and for his update from the region. I am
so glad that he has returned to us safe and sound, and I
know that he must be jet-lagged after his trip practically
around the world. But his being at this meeting shows
us the commitment that he has to this institution.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
and High Commissioner Bachelet for their remarks.
And I thank our civil society briefer, Tetiana Luzan,
for joining us at this late hour for her and for her
powerful testimony today. I welcome the representative
of Ukraine, as well as His Excellency the Deputy Prime
Minister of Poland and other speakers who are with
us today.
There are no signs that Russia’s war against Ukraine
is abating. Russia’s forces may have abandoned their
attempt to capture Kyiv, but Russia continues to conduct
missile strikes against Kyiv and terrorize citizens

22-3397423/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

across Ukraine. Independent media reports have laid
out a deadly pattern of attacks in the past two weeks.
On 23 April, reports indicate that Russian
missile strikes killed civilians in Odesa, including
a three-month-old girl. Then, Russian missiles hit a
thermal power plant and oil refinery in Kremenchuk
the next day. The day after that, Russian forces attacked
five railway stations across Ukraine. The following
day, two rockets flew dangerously close to a nuclear
power plant, posing colossal safety risks to the region.
That string of attacks culminated on 28 April when
Russia had the audacity to attack Kyiv while the
Secretary-General was there to discuss humanitarian
aid and peace.
Russia has violated the Charter of the United
Nations. Russia has ignored our unified, global call to
end this war. The message we continue to hear loud and
clear from Moscow is that Russia does not respect or
believe in the United Nations or its Charter and will not
be a responsible actor in the international system.
Over the past 10 weeks — just 10 weeks — we
have seen Russia continue to wage an unprovoked
war against a smaller neighbour. We have seen Russia
brutalize civilian populations and attack thousands
of civilian-used buildings, structures and vehicles,
apartment buildings, schools, shopping malls, markets,
cafés, trams, heating plants, grain silos, food storage
facilities, hospitals, orphanages and a maternity ward.
The list goes on.
Russia has lied to the Security Council repeatedly
with a wild string of conspiracy theories and
disinformation, every falsehood more ridiculous than
the last. Three months ago, Russian representatives told
the Security Council they had no intention to invade
Ukraine. Now Russia claims the attacks are not real or
never happened. Russia has even claimed that Ukraine
is attacking itself, that it bombed its own buildings,
attacked its own people and assaulted its own democracy.
Those lies defy all logic, all evidence and common
sense. Russia is spreading pure disinformation. The
truth is well known. Russia is the only perpetrator of
this war. So, it is hard to understand why some Council
members continue to call on all parties to desist. Let us
call a spade, a spade. Members should call on Russia,
explicitly, to stop its aggression against Ukraine.
We have imagery that confirms the presence of
mass graves in Bucha, and that is not just an unverified
accusation on social media. It is a horrifying fact,
24/32

05/05/2022

one the world must now reckon with. Russia alone
started this war, and Russia alone can end it. Silence
the guns, withdraw from Ukrainian territory and
embrace diplomacy.
Recently, the eyes of the world have been trained on
Mariupol, where hundreds of civilians have been taking
shelter in a steel plant besieged by Russian forces. We
all watched in horror as Russia laid siege mercilessly
against civilians trapped inside and underground for
weeks. This week, the United Nations and President
Zelenskyy announced that over 100 Ukrainians had
finally been rescued and reached relative safety.​
We applaud the role of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross in that
rescue, and we strongly support the five convoys that
the United Nations has sent to besieged areas. But we
are concerned that attacks on the plant have reportedly
resumed, with civilians still inside, and we will be
following this situation closely.
What we truly need is unhindered access throughout
Ukraine so that the United Nations and its partners can
reach everyone in need, and people of all nationalities
can flee to safety. Convoys and evacuations take days
and weeks, or months, of intense negotiation. They
cannot be the norm. The only norm we should accept
is Ukraine returning to its normal life, without Russian
forces illegally on its territory, terrorizing and killing
civilians, including so many innocent children.
Here in the Security Council and at the United
Nations, we can help Ukraine return to normalcy. We can
do that in two ways: by supporting the Ukrainian people
and their efforts and by holding Russia accountable.
On the first point, we must address the immediate
and dire humanitarian situation, both in Ukraine and
outside of it. For our part, the United States announced
this morning at the pledging conference in Warsaw
that we will provide an additional $387 million in
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine. That brings the
total we have committed thus far to over $688 million
since Russia’s further invasion. That money will
help our brave partners rapidly distribute food, clean
drinking water, sanitation and hygiene kits, critical
medical supplies and even cash to those who need it
most in Ukraine.
We must also be attentive to the way Russia’s war of
choice is harming countries beyond Ukraine’s borders,
from the arrival of millions of refugees in Europe
to the global food crisis that is hitting African and
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9027

Middle Eastern markets particularly hard. I suspect we
will hear more details about that from our colleagues
who are joining this meeting today. Russia is actively
halting Ukrainian agricultural production and blocking
the ports that once provided food to those in dire need.
While we work to stop that blockade and hold Russia
to account for its actions, we will all be called on to
step up to prevent looming famines and provide more
food and funding in the name of decency and humanity.
We will focus the attention of the Council on that and
other aspects of global food insecurity during the open
debate we will convene later this month.

Last week the Secretary-General visited Ukraine at
a time when my country continues to defend the very
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It was
important for António Guterres to visit the suburbs of
Kyiv and see with his own eyes the horrific war crimes
committed by Russia in Ukraine.

On the second point, we must hold to account those
in Russia who unleashed, perpetrated and ordered the
war crimes committed in Ukraine. The United States
supports a range of international investigations into
the atrocities in Ukraine, including efforts by the
International Criminal Court, the United Nations,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and others. Make no mistake — we will see
justice served.

On behalf of the President of Ukraine, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General, the United Nations
team and the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), which demonstrated the possibility of making
progress and saving civilians from Mariupol, which is
blocked by the Russian army. In the President’s words:

The Ukrainian people are fighting for their lives,
for their future and for all of the values the United
Nations holds dear. We stand with them and with the
overwhelming majority of the international community
in defence of sovereignty, liberty and democracy.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I would like to again draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
At the outset, let me express gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Guterres, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths,
High Commissioner Bachelet and civil society
representative Luzan for their briefings. I join all
previous speakers in expressing appreciation for a very
successful presidency of the Security Council by the
United Kingdom last month.

I am grateful to the Secretary-General for the clear
and unequivocal position on the war against Ukraine
as a violation of territorial integrity and the Charter
of the United Nations. I appreciate the efforts to use
the good offices mechanisms for de-escalation. Every
opportunity must be used to achieve peace.

“The whole world has learned about the role
of the United Nations and the ICRC in this. This
has shown that international organizations can
be effective”.
The second stage of the evacuation operation from
Mariupol was completed, with 344 people rescued from
the city and its suburbs, in addition to more than 150
people taken out of the Azovstal steel plant. However,
there are still civilians there — women, children.
Therefore, the evacuation operation must continue.
Russia has shelled Ukrainian cities with almost
2,000 missiles. Most of them hit civilians, not military
infrastructure. Russia struggles to advance and suffers
terrible losses. That is the reason that they resort to this
desperate missile terror across Ukraine. They want to
break us down, but the only thing that will break down
in the end is Russia and its capacity to invade, bomb,
murder, loot and rape.
I would like to recall one of my compatriots,
Oleksandr Makhov, a well-known journalist in Ukraine,
born in the Luhansk region. In 2017, he was the first
Ukrainian journalist to visit our station in Antarctica.
When the coronavirus disease came, he was not afraid.
For two weeks he lived in Sanzhary, where Ukrainians
were brought to from China. From the first day of the
full-scale war, he was on the front line as a volunteer,
an anti-terrorist operation veteran and a warrior of
the 95th assault brigade. He was killed in the Kharkiv
region in the battles near Izyum. He was 36 years old.

22-3397425/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

My sincere condolences go to his family and friends.
Russia will bear responsibility for that death, as well as
for that of every hero who gave their life for Ukraine.
Ukraine is not afraid, and the world should not
be afraid either. Russia’s missile terrorism must be
punished and responded to with stronger sanctions and
increased military assistance for Ukraine.
On 1 May, the Russian Ministry of War declared
that more than 1 million people had been transferred
to Russia, including 193,000 children. Most of them,
in particular those transferred from Mariupol, undergo
“filtration” camps with mandatory procedures that
constitute violations of their human rights— being
stripped naked, fingerprinting and interrogation.
Eyewitnesses testify that Russian soldiers kill those
whom they consider suspicious.
There have been multiple reported cases of the
kidnapping or hostage-taking of Ukrainian civilians
by Russian troops. There are numerous cases of the
mistreatment of forcefully displaced Ukrainian citizens
in the Russian Federation, including depriving them
of their Ukrainian passports and preventing them
from leaving Russian territory. We reiterate that all
Ukrainian citizens forcefully transferred by Russia
must be granted safe return to the territory of Ukraine.
Food security in Ukraine and worldwide appears
to be another deliberate target of Russia. As of now,
Russia has stolen about 400,000 tons of grain from
the temporarily occupied parts of the Zaporizhzhya,
Kherson, Donetsk and Luhansk regions — a third of
all reserves in the regions. Given that the stolen grain
was to be used before the next harvest, it has already
increased the threat of famine.
In addition to stealing grain, Russia attacks grain
silos, farming infrastructure and fertilizer stores and
continues to steal farm vehicles. The looting of grain
from the occupied part of Ukraine, the blockade of
shipments from Ukrainian ports and the mining of
shipping routes endanger global food security.
Russia is in fact harming not only Ukraine, but
also the world population through its illegal actions.
According to the United Nations, more than 1.7 billion
people may risk poverty and famine as a result of
disruptions in the food production system caused by
Russia’s full-scale war against Ukraine. Furthermore,
Russia continues to intentionally block sowing
in Ukraine.
26/32

05/05/2022

We demand that Russia stop illicit grain theft,
unblock Ukrainian ports, restore freedom of navigation
and allow trade ships to pass. We urge the international
community to strengthen economic sanctions against
Russia in order to stop its military aggression against
Ukraine to avert a humanitarian disaster and the world’s
food security crisis.
Today the State of Israel is celebrating the
seventy-fourth anniversary of its independence. On
29 November 1947, Ukraine, as a Member of the United
Nations, voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
181 (II). The following year, in May, Israel declared its
independence. Taking this opportunity, I wish peace
and prosperity to Israel and all Jews around the world.
As we approach 9 May, the threat of new
provocations and a raising of the stakes by Russia is
increasing. In that regard, I would like to condemn
the anti-Semitic attacks by Russian Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov on the President of Ukraine and all
Jews. Such attacks are absolutely unacceptable.
Lavrov could not help revealing the deep-rooted
anti-Semitism of Russia’s elites. It demonstrates to the
world that Putin’s Russia is purposefully cultivating
Russian supremacy and hatred of other peoples.
Russia is already too deeply bogged down in uttering
nonsense aimed at justifying its barbaric aggression
against Ukraine.
In fact, the Russian Foreign Minister questioned
the existence of not only the Ukrainian nation, but also
the Holocaust. Lavrov deliberately insulted the memory
of millions of Jews who died at the hands of the Nazis
during the Second World War.
At this point, I would like to bring the Security
Council’s attention to one of the most recent examples
of Russian atrocities in Ukraine. On 4 May, the bodies
of two young men, aged 22 and 23, were exhumed in
the village of Rudnya-Talska in the Kyiv region. On
25 February, the Russian invaders shot at a car with
them inside. However, it was not enough for the socalled Russian soldiers to kill innocent civilians. They
decided to run the car over with heavy equipment,
while the two men were inside. That is insane. That
is inhumane.
While we are in this meeting, the Russian terrorist
practice of shelling Ukrainian cities throughout the
entire country with long-range missiles continues. The
Secretary-General had a chance to witness that practice
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

last Thursday during his visit to Kyiv. However, there
was no strong reaction from the Security Council
regarding such deliberate attacks.
In that regard, the inaction of the Security Council
and its ability only to express deep concerns continues
to irritate the international community, undermine its
authority in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and create an atmosphere of impunity.
As it appears, this Chamber has turned from a
venue of diplomatic debates into a biological hazard
site. There is a trail of blood and a sickening smell of
the smouldering bodies of women, men and children
that a Russian envoy leaves lingering behind him when
entering and leaving this Chamber. The air that we
inhale is filled with poisonous spores of turpitude when
he drivels torrential lies as his lips begin moving.
Victory over the Russist army comes closer by the
day, as does the time when Putin’s henchmen will sit on
the bench at a trial for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Punishment is imminent. Milošević will not
stay lonely for too long.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Culture and National
Heritage of Poland.
Mr. Gliński (Poland): Let me start by expressing
Poland’s appreciation and support for the SecretaryGeneral’s recent trip to Moscow and Kyiv. Each and
every effort to restore peace in Ukraine is meaningful,
even if we have to deal with an aggressor who shows very
little goodwill and trustworthiness, as demonstrated by
the very symbolic Russian shelling of Kyiv during the
Secretary-General’s stay in the city.

S/PV.9027

The number of persons in need and the volume of
assistance that they require increase with every day that
the Russian aggression continues. We therefore all need
to contribute to the relief efforts alongside the growing
Polish aid for both the refugees from Ukraine who are
staying in our country — as the Council is probably
aware, more than 3 million war refugees have crossed
our border during the past two months — and those
hiding from bombs in Russian-shelled cities and towns.
Today in Warsaw, Poland and Sweden co-hosted a
high-level international donors conference for Ukraine.
The event, which was organized in cooperation with
the President of the European Commission and the
European Council, was meant to serve as a platform for
pledging the much-needed additional funds to sustain
immediate, life-saving humanitarian assistance for
Ukraine. According to early estimates, the conference
brought in $6.5 billion in pledges.
We are all still struggling to grasp the full
implication of the war, but we already know that its
consequences go far beyond Ukraine and Europe. The
Secretary-General has accurately called the damage
to multilateralism caused by the ongoing invasion of
Ukraine a three-dimensional crisis that impacts global
food, energy and financial security. The full effects
of the Russian invasion will be felt in economies and
societies around the whole world. The international
community needs to engage in devising immediate longterm policies that will mitigate the impacts of the war
and contribute to long-term resilience to global shocks.

I was also in Kyiv and Borodyanka less than two
weeks ago and witnessed this war with my own eyes.

In five days’ time, on 10 May, representatives of
some 50 countries of Europe and Central Asia will
gather in the Polish city of Łódź, at the thirty-third
session of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations Regional Conference for Europe, to
discuss the very pressing issue of food security and the
transformation of agrifood systems.

We Poles were very happy to facilitate the SecretaryGeneral’s trip and to host him on his way from Moscow
to Kyiv, especially because he had a chance to meet
with the Polish President, Andrzej Duda, and to stay
in the city of Rzeszów, which has become a crucial
hub for the delivery of assistance to Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people. As President Duda assured the
Secretary-General personally, Poland will not cease to
both deliver aid on its own and to be a reliable partner
for all United Nations system institutions involved in
providing support to Ukraine.

However, we will not solve the food, energy and
financial crises if we do not address their root causes.
Those are the crisis of values, as you already mentioned
today, Madam President, and the crisis of peace. So,
in fact, we are facing not just a three-dimensional
but a five-dimensional crisis. Therefore, the very
first step that must be taken right now is very simple.
It requires that Russia stop the war and withdraw all
its forces from the territory of Ukraine. Once peace
has been secured, the international community must
turn its efforts to developing more effective measures

22-3397427/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

to protect the fundamental values enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. They have been trumped
by a permanent member of the Security Council, and
we must ensure full accountability for the violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
committed in Ukraine by the Russian Federation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): We are thankful to the
United States presidency for having organized this
meeting. Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General,
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle
Bachelet for their insightful remarks and their immense
efforts. I also thank Ms. Tetiana Luzan for briefing us.
The consequences of Russia’s continuing military
aggression against Ukraine and its civilians are dire,
especially in Mariupol and near the former line of
contact in Donbas. Greece has a particular interest in
the Mariupol area, which is home to an established,
centuries-old Greek community of more than
120,000, which is a productive part of local society.
Regrettably, those people, along with so many other
civilians — families, women and children — face the
horror of Mariupol being almost entirely destroyed.
That is why our consuls in Odessa and Mariupol,
demonstrating unprecedented courage, strength and
altruism, stayed behind and carried out a total of
six operations called Nostos — the Greek word for
homecoming — for the evacuation of Greek citizens
and diaspora Greeks from Ukraine.
We have repeatedly called for an immediate
ceasefire and for the swift operationalization of
humanitarian corridors. It is of utmost importance
to scale up humanitarian operations by enhancing
the supply-chain capacity and providing targeted
humanitarian assistance to the people affected. The
recent evacuation of the Azovstal plant in Mariupol,
achieved thanks to the persistent efforts of the United
Nations, demonstrated in the clearest way possible that
when there is a will, there is a way. We hope to see
additional similar initiatives.
Greece has been actively engaged in providing
humanitarian assistance. Our Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Nikos Dendias, himself spearheaded one of
Greece’s assistance operations to the historic city of
Odesa. At the same time, we are all witnessing the huge
28/32

05/05/2022

wave of migrants that the war has provoked. Greece is
showing solidarity with Ukraine as well as with frontline Member States, welcoming thousands of refugees
from Ukraine.
The amount of devastation and destruction
is inconceivable. Greece remains engaged in the
reconstruction of Ukraine and will be present, in
coordination with our partners, in order to do everything
possible to bring those two cities back to their previous
state and to facilitate the diaspora Greeks’ return to
normal life after this tragedy. Our Prime Minister has
already announced that we are ready to rebuild the
maternity hospital destroyed by Russian shelling in the
city of Mariupol. In the same vein, Minister Dendias has
reiterated our support for the reconstruction of Odesa.
There can be no peace and no reconciliation
without accountability. We will continue to actively
raise the issue of Mariupol in all forums and to
emphasize that the perpetration of war crimes should
be thoroughly investigated.
Only peace can put an end to this immense tragedy,
which is having far-reaching repercussions throughout
the world. We commend the recent visit of the SecretaryGeneral to the region and his efforts towards peace.
We stand firm in our call for dialogue and diplomacy
to prevail.
Greece, a pillar of stability in the region of the
eastern Mediterranean and beyond, reiterates its
unwavering commitment to international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. Refraining from
the threat or the use of force is the guiding principle
underpinning our Charter. We are steadfast in our
support for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, as well as of every State Member
of the United Nations. Those are fundamental norms
of international relations. Their violations — no matter
who they target — are threats to us all. There is no
room for exceptions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the three Baltic states — Estonia,
Lithuania and my own country, Latvia.
I thank the Secretary-General António Guterres,
High Commissioner Bachelet and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths, as well as the representatives of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and the non-governmental organization for their
insightful, but sobering briefings.
We appreciate the important visits of the SecretaryGeneral to Kyiv and Moscow, in particular his
humanitarian plea and engagement, which have resulted
in very practical life-saving humanitarian action on the
ground, notably in Mariupol.
We also positively note the close cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Committee of the Red Cross in that regard. In the
future, the United Nations should build further on that,
although limited, success.
Unfortunately, those achievements are far from
solving the tragic security and humanitarian crisis
caused by the Russian aggression. Moreover, many
more people remain trapped in the Azovstal iron and
steel works complex, in conditions that humanitarian
workers have described as hell. Yet it has again been
under heavy fire from Russian air strikes. We call on
Russia to immediately cease all hostilities and allow
the safe evacuation of the remaining civilians trapped
in the complex. We also call on all relevant United
Nations mechanisms to maintain their focus on the
situation of civilians affected by the Russian aggression
in Ukraine, especially on their rescue and evacuation
from areas of persistent hostilities.
It has been more than two months since Russia, a
permanent member of the Security Council, launched
its aggression against Ukraine in grave violation of
international law, including the founding principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. Russia has persistently
ignored the calls by the General Assembly, as well as
the order of the International Court of Justice, to cease
aggression and to immediately and unconditionally
withdraw all forces and military equipment from the
entire territory of Ukraine. We strongly condemn
Russia’s contempt for the Court, Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine, as well as the involvement
of Belarus as Russia’s accomplice.
Russia’s unjustified and unprovoked invasion
of Ukraine has triggered one of the fastest-growing
displacement and humanitarian crises on record. Over
17 million people inside and outside Ukraine now are in
need of humanitarian assistance. There are 7.7 million
people who are now internally displaced, and more than
5 million refugees have fled into countries neighbouring
Ukraine and beyond. Ninety per cent of refugees are
women and girls. They need urgent humanitarian

S/PV.9027

assistance, a cessation of hostilities and safe passage,
including through the creation of humanitarian corridors
to allow those who wish to do so to leave voluntarily
to the destination of their choice. In that light, we are
concerned about the reports of hundreds of thousands
of Ukrainians, including children, forcibly moved to
the so called “filtration camps” and then to the territory
of the Russian Federation, often unaccompanied by
their parents.
Russia’s denials, deceptions, lies, disinformation,
war propaganda, incitement to violence and
dehumanizing language against Ukrainians do not
change the fact that Russia is committing war crimes,
crimes against humanity and other violations of
international humanitarian and international human
rights law against the civilian population in Ukraine.
As underlined by the Secretary-General, those directly
responsible for those war crimes and violations on
Ukrainian soil must be held accountable. There will
be no impunity. There will be accountability for that
horror, and international justice will be done.
The Baltic States will continue to steadfastly
support all efforts to ensure independent and effective
investigations into crimes committed by Russia in
Ukraine. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were among the
first to refer the situation in Ukraine to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, and we will
continue to support the Office of the Prosecutor in its
investigation concerning alleged war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in Ukraine.
The impact of Russia’s war against Ukraine is
reaching beyond Europe. Millions of people globally
are already on the brink of famine. Russia’s invasion
will further exacerbate the negative impact on global
food security and prices on the world market, thereby,
increasing the threat of hunger for many countries.
Ukraine is the world’s fifth-largest exporter of wheat.
However, the shelling and bombing makes it almost
impossible for Ukrainian farmers to sow. On top of that,
the Russian Federation is blocking hundreds of ships
filled with wheat in the Black Sea. Twenty million tons
of grain from last year’s harvest have been trapped in
Ukraine owing to Russia’s blockade and bombardment
of Odesa’s sea port and the military closure of the sea
lanes in the Black Sea. That is the result of the Russian
aggression and not sanctions or anything else, as
Russia’s propaganda suggest.

22-3397429/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We call on Russia to unblock Ukrainian ports and
to restore the freedom of navigation. And we encourage
the Security Council and the relevant United Nations
agencies to consider ways to ensure the safe passage for
grain-carrying ships from Ukraine’s territorial waters
to the Black Sea.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Today’s interventions
by the Secretary-General, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the High Commissioner for Human
Rights confirmed the extraordinary gravity and the
multidimensional character of this senseless war. This
is, at the same time, an unprovoked military aggression,
a blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
by a permanent member of the Security Council,
as well as a humanitarian and human rights crisis of
dramatic proportions.
From a political perspective, we cannot but reaffirm
the fundamentally illegal nature of this war, which
violates the prohibition of the use of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
a sovereign country, the obligation to settle disputes
peacefully and the prohibition on targeting the
civilian population.
For that reason, while we reiterate once more our
unwavering support for Ukraine’s full independence
within its internationally recognized borders and
condemn the Russian military aggression, we appreciate
and strongly support the diplomatic initiative taken
by the Secretary-General with his recent mission to
Moscow and Kyiv. Let me reaffirm our conviction that
we need to take urgent steps towards peace, in the words
of Secretary-General Guterres. Achieving a broad and
sustainable ceasefire would be the first of those steps.
From a humanitarian perspective, the conflict in
Ukraine is not only fuelling one of the most severe
humanitarian crises in Europe since the Second World
War; it is also exacerbating a global food security crisis.
Italy renews its call on Russia to ensure safe, rapid
and unhindered access to humanitarian assistance and
to allow the export of crucial Ukrainian agricultural
goods, including in order to alleviate the challenges
faced by numerous States of the global South depending
on those products.
30/32

05/05/2022

We also strongly support the Secretary-General’s
proposal for a humanitarian contact group, composed
of Russia, Ukraine and United Nations officials.
Italy has stood by Ukraine and its people since
the beginning of the crisis, with general budgetary
support, loans and support for the humanitarian
activities carried out by the United Nations system
and the International Committee of the Red Cross in
Ukraine and in neighbouring countries. However, as
humanitarian needs continue to increase as we speak,
we are evaluating additional humanitarian initiatives,
in terms of funding and in-kind donations.
From a human rights perspective, this aggression
is dramatically affecting defenceless and innocent
civilians, including those in the most vulnerable
situations, such as women, children, elderly persons
and persons with disabilities. As documented by the
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, Russian
armed forces have indiscriminately shelled and bombed
densely populated areas. That is unacceptable, and we
strongly advocate the establishment of safe passages for
the evacuation of civilians.
We are also particularly concerned by the large-scale
destruction and damage of civilian infrastructure,
including medical and education facilities, the number
of journalists and media workers killed and injured
since the start of the conflict, and sexual and genderbased violence against women and girls.
Italy welcomes all measures to ensure full
accountability for human rights violations as well as
violations of international humanitarian law occurring
in Ukraine, and fully supports the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine,
established by the Human Rights Council, and the
investigation launched by national authorities and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on war crimes.
That is why Italy, together with more than 40 States
parties, has indeed referred the situation of Ukraine to
the Prosecutor of the ICC.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
would like to express our full support for your work
and initiatives for the remainder of the month. You can
count on our continued support.
22-33974

05/05/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
all other briefers for their sobering presentations that
unfortunately confirmed our grave concerns about the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, in addition to many
other aspects of the ongoing war. High Commissioner
Bachelet mentioned that today is the seventy-first day
of the war.
As we have remarked in previous meetings, even
one more day of this terrible tragedy is one too many.
It is therefore regrettable that we have to continue
counting the days, and we truly hope that the tragedy
will stop as soon as possible.
We thank the Secretary-General for his recent
visits and his intervention. His work has been extremely
important. That includes the locations outside of Kyiv
that he visited on 28 April. After his visit there, he said:
“there is something everybody should remember,
everywhere in the world. Wherever there is a war, the
highest price is paid by civilians.”
I would like to bring that to the attention of the
Russian Federation and call on Russia to immediate
cease its hostilities against Ukraine, in particular its
attacks against civilians and civilian objects. I call on
Russia to hear the countless calls, including from the
Secretary-General, and unconditionally withdraw all
troops from the whole territory of Ukraine.
Today we once again heard a victim-based
narrative from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation. This is completely out of place
in this context. I would also like to call on Russia to
immediately stop this false narrative and distortion
of facts. The facts are clear. It is clear to us who the
aggressor is and who is suffering. The only thing
that is not clear to us is why innocent civilians have
to continue suffering as they have been for the past 71
days — and counting.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as of 4 May there
have been 6,635 civilian casualties — 3,238 killed
and 3,397 injured. I am mentioning those statistics to
again remind the aggressor that we know the facts.
They are all clear, and there will be no impunity for
the crimes committed. But what is worse is the reason
for the human suffering. We already condemned the
Russian decision to start the senseless war under the
pretext of the “special military operation” and the socalled need to de-Nazify and demilitarize Ukraine. But

S/PV.9027

what we recently heard from Foreign Minister Lavrov,
who claimed that Adolf Hitler was part Jewish, is
particularly hideous and confirms our approach based
on fiercely combating the disinformation of the Russian
Federation concerning the war in Ukraine.
As a neighbour, partner and directly affected
country in the context of fleeing refugees, Slovakia is
particularly alarmed by the crisis resulting from the
Russian aggression. Almost 5.7 million refugees have
fled the country. Since the beginning of the aggression
of the Russian Federation, about 394,000 refugees
have entered Slovakia so far. We have welcomed then
and will continue doing so for as long as necessary.
We will continue to stand in solidarity with them,
as a close friend and a good neighbour in these most
challenging times.
Let me conclude by reiterating our ongoing support
for Ukraine. In that regard, Slovakia is one of the largest
donors per capita with regard to military, humanitarian
and financial assistance. We would rather not be; we
would rather focus our efforts on other issues, but it is
extremely important for us to reach out in this time of
need. As they say, a friend in need is a friend in deed.
This was also mentioned during today’s high-level
international donors conference for Ukraine in Warsaw,
where the Prime Minister of Slovakia, Mr. Eduard
Heger, announced an additional financial contribution
of half a million euros for international organizations
in order to bolster humanitarian assistance to Ukraine.
I would like to add my wish that — at least for the
rest of this month or for the upcoming period — that
this will not have to be repeated again in a similar
fashion, but, of course, if we have to gather again, we
are ready to do so, and will continue working closely
with the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I thank the SecretaryGeneral, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, High
Commissioner Bachelet and Ms. Luzan for their
insightful briefings.
Furthermore, I want to thank the SecretaryGeneral and all United Nations staff for their tireless
efforts to alleviate the human suffering in Ukraine and
neighbouring countries. Germany strongly supports
those efforts. We were relieved about the successful
evacuation operation from Mariupol. The people still

22-3397431/32

S/PV.9027

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

trapped need to be safely evacuated as soon as possible
to their chosen destination.
In a few days, the world will commemorate the
day when the Second World War, unleashed by Nazi
Germany, ended. Seventy-seven years after that
watershed moment of world history, Russian propaganda
is now trying to create an outrageous link between the
truly heroic fighting then of the Red Army, including
many Ukrainian fighters, against the Nazi regime and
the Kremlin’s current aggression against Ukraine. This
apparently aims at creating an alternate reality, in which
Ukraine’s President leads a failed State that needs to be
“de-Nazified”. This utter nonsense is beyond cynicism.
The whole world can see what so-called Russian
liberation looks like. The pictures from Mariupol, Irpin
and Bucha speak for themselves. These mass atrocities
and crimes against humanity have to stop. The
perpetrators must be held accountable in accordance
with international law. To that end, Germany will
second experts and contribute additional funding to
the International Criminal Court. Meanwhile, the
German Federal Public Prosecutor General has opened
structural investigations, preparing the ground for
indictments on charges of war crimes.
Even if Russia again tries hard in tomorrow’s Arria
Formula meeting to impose its narratives on the world
outside, it will not succeed in altering reality. Rapes,
torture and killings will be brought to the fore, and
those responsible will be brought to justice one by one.
Millions of people are fleeing from attacks,
bombing and shelling. Germany has so far recorded
more than 600,000 refugee arrivals, and over 90,000
Ukrainian children are attending German schools, at
least temporarily. It is children who suffer the most
from Russia’s war of aggression. Their schools are
being destroyed. Those children’s peaceful lives have
been disrupted, and many had to leave their families
behind. All they want is to go home and return to their
loved ones. In that connection, reports about the Russian
Parliament planning to ease rules for the adoption of
Ukrainian children are extremely concerning. We
will follow that ideologically motivated motion with
extreme scrutiny and will hold Russia accountable for
its deeds. United Nations agencies should also play an
active role in that regard.

32/32

05/05/2022

The war in Ukraine has dramatic consequences
for humanitarian crises in other parts of the world
and for global food security. Russia is ravaging
agricultural potential in Ukraine, while, at the same
time, preventing grain exports by blocking the Black
Sea. It absurdly tries to blame Western sanctions
for increasing food prices. Currently, an estimated
4.5 million tons are stuck in Ukrainian ports. In this
meeting, the Ukrainian representative reported that
Russia had stolen tons of grain from Ukraine. With
the expected delays of the next planting season and
shortages of seeds, we are standing on the brink of an
unprecedented global food security crisis. Germany
is strengthening its humanitarian response, especially
through the World Food Programme. We are also
committed to putting global food security, among other
issues, high on the agenda at the upcoming meetings of
foreign, development and agricultural ministers of the
Group of Seven. The German Government also already
announced €430 million in additional funding for the
crisis response outside Ukraine. That is in addition to
the means that we pledged for Ukraine, including at
the Warsaw conference. My message to the countries
economically affected by the repercussions of Russia’s
war of aggression is that they can count on our support.
The food security crisis proves that the war
transcends the borders of Europe. A permanent member
of the Security Council is trying to annex new lands by
force. If we allow Russia to set a precedent, who will
be next? Which former empire will feel encouraged to
attack its weaker neighbour, justifying it by a distorted
notion of history? If we do not want to open flood
gates for recolonization, the world must stand united in
rolling back Russia.
We once again call on Russia to stop its aggression
immediately. Russian troops encounter fierce resistance,
not only from the brave Ukrainian military but also
from a huge block of States that stand up for the Charter
of the United Nations and the rule of law. Continuing
the senseless war will lead only to more bloodshed.
It is never too late to change course. Russia must
withdraw its troops now and for good. The upcoming
day of liberation that we all commemorate will provide
an excellent opportunity.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

22-33974
