Resolutioru1 adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with satisfaction the role played by the Office for Sahelian Relief Operations of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations with
regard to emergency assistance, and the activities undertaken by the United Nations Sahelian Office with a
view to combating the effects of the drought and implementing the medium-term and long-term p_rogramme
adopted by the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the economic and social situation in the SudanoSahelian region stricken by drought and the measures
to be taken for the benefit of that region, 79
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on measures to be taken for the recovery and rehabilitation of the Sudano-Sahelian region stricken by drought; 79
2. Expresses its gratitude for the assistance given
to the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region by
Member States, private organizations and individuals;
3. Urges Member States, the organs of the United
Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations to respond favourably, in an effective and continuing manner, to the requests for assistance formulated by the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel and by Governments, so
as to meet the medium-term and long-term needs of
the Sudano-Sahelian countries;
4. Requests the United Nations Sahelian Office to
continue its close co-operation with the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel
and its efforts to ensure co-operation and co-ordination between United Nations programmes and organizations with a view to the implementation of mediumterm and long-term assistance programmes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
action aimed at obtaining the financial assistance necessary for the implementation of the medium-term and
long-term projects submitted by the States members
of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sabel.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3513 (XXX).

United Nations Water Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1761 C (LIV) of 18 May 1973,
Bearing in mind chapter IV of the report of the
Committee on Natural Resources on its fourth session, 80
which contains the comments made by members of the
Committee at that session,
Taking note of the relevant chapters of the report
of the Economic and Social Council on its fifty-eighth
and fifty-ninth sessions, 81
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 (LIX) of 31 July 1975,

69

l. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social Council to convene the United Nations Water
Conference in Argentina from 7 to 18 March 1977;
2. Endorses the arrangements for the preparations
for the Conference, as set out in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1979 (LIX);
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give ample
support to the Conference secretariat in its preparatory work, including, if necessary, arrangements for
the close collaboration of the relevant organizations
of the United Nations system;
4.. Requests the relevant organizations of the United
Nations system to co-operate closely with the Conference secretariat in the preparatory work;
5. Urges the United Nations Environment Programme to provide financial support for the preparatory work of the Conference in order to ensure its
success;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of Member States the nature and importance
of the water problems to be dealt with at the Conference, to give wide publicity to the Conference through
the Office of Public Information and the Centre for
Economic and Social Information of the Secretariat and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the action taken on the present resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3514 (XXX). Measures against corrupt practices
of transnational and other corporations,
their intermediaries and others involved
The General Assembly,
Concerned by the corrupt practices of certain transnational and other corporations, their intermediaries and
others involved,

Recalling paragraph 4 (g) of the Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Ord~~, 82 which pr4:>V}~es for the regulation and superv1s1on of the actIV1t1es of transnational corporations,
Recalling also the provisions of section V of the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order83 emphasizing, inter alia,
the need to formulate, ad9pt and implement the code
of conduct referred to in the report of the Commission
on Transnational Corporat~ons on its first session; 84
Recalling further the provisions of the Charter of
Ec<;momic Rights and Duties of States, 85 according to
which sue~ corporations should not operate in a manner th~t violates the laws and regulations of the host
countnes,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1721 (LIII) of 28 July 1972, 1908 (LVII) of 2 August 1974 and 1913 (LVII) of 5 December 1974,
Recalling the report of the Commission on Transnational Corporations on its first session,
1. Cond~mns all corrupt practices, including bribery,
by transnatronal and other corporations their intermediaries and others involved, in violatio~ of the laws
and regulations of the host countries;

10 A/10346.

so Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5663).
8 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/10003 ), chap. IV, sect. E, and
chap. VI, sect. G.

82 Resolution 3201 (S-VI).
83 Resolution 3202 (S-VI).
84 Official Records of the

Economic and Social Council
Fift7-ninth ~ession, Supplement No. 12 (B/5655 and Corr.I)'.
Bv Resolution 3281 (XXJX).

General Assembly-Thirtieth Seaion

70

2. Reaffirms the right of any State to adopt legislation and to investigate and take appropriate legal
action, in accordance with its national laws and regulations, against transnational and other corporations,
their intermediaries and others involved, for such corrupt practices;
3. Calls upon both home and hosrGovernments to
take, within their respective national jurisdictions, all
necessary measures which they deem appropriate, including legislative measures, to prevent such corrupt
practices, and to take consequent measures against the
violators;
Calls upon Governments to collect information
on such corrupt practices, as well as on measures taken
against such practices, and to exchange information bilaterally and, as appropriate, multilaterally, particularly through the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations;
5. Calls upon home Governments to co-operate
with Governments of the host countries to prevent such
corrupt practices, including bribery, and to prosecute,
within their national jurisdictions, those who engage in
such acts;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
direct the Commission on Transnational Corporations
to include in its programme of work the question of
corrupt practices of transnational corporations and to
make recommendations on ways and means whereby
such corrupt practices can be effectively prevented;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

4:

3515 (XXX}. Conference on International
Economic Co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
coniaining the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic _co-operation,
Noting that a Conference on International Economic
Co-operation is to be held in Paris with participants
from developing countries and developed market economy countries,
Conscious of the fact that the proposed Conference
on International Economic Co-operation will consider
subjects which are of universal importance and affect
the interests of the entire international community,
Considering that the proposed programme of work
of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, as well as the results attained, wi11, directly or
indirectly, have a bearing on the ongoing work on international economic co-operation and development
within the United Nations system,
·
Bearing in mind the need to establish a relationship
between the United Nations system and the Conference
on International Economic Co-operation,

1. Requests the Governments particip;:iting in the
Conference on International Economic Co-operation
to ensure that their deliberations and decisions take
full account of the principles and policy decisions
adopted within the United Nations, in particular General Assembly resolutions 2626 (XXV) containing the
International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade, 3201 (S-VI)
and 3202 (S-VI) containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
and 3362 (S-VII) on development and international
economic co-operation;
2. Invites the Conference on International Economic
Co-operation to report on its conclusions to the General Assembly at its thirty~first session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, through the Economic and Social
Council, a report on bis participation in the Conferen~ on International Economic Co-operation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and all other executive heads of competent organs .and
organizations of the United Nations system actively to
assist the participants in the Conference on International Economic Co-operation.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3516 (XXX). Permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Arab territoriee

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, entitled "Permanent sovereignty over national
resources in the occupied Arab territories" in parag~aph 5 of _which it requested the Secretary-General,
w1~ the as~1stance of relevant specialized agencies and
Umted Nations organs, including the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, to prepare a
report on the adverse economic effects on the Arab
State~ and peopl~ resulting from repeated Israeli aggression and continued occupation of their territories,
Recalling the statement, made at the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly86 on behalf of the cosponsors in introducing the revised draft resolution 87
underlining the need to seek the assistance of relev~t
United Nations organizations in preparing the report
r~uested of the Se<:retary-General, as these organizations had the machmery needed to carry out studies
and research which would be useful in preparing the
report,
Recalling further the statements on administrative
and financial implications submitted by the SecretaryGeneral88 in which he proposed that the report would
be prepared on the basis of inquiries from and visits
to the States concerned and consultations with the relevant specialized agencies and United Nations organs,
86 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Second Committee, 1635th meeting.
87 A/C.2/L.1372/Rev.1.
118 A/C.2/L.1385, A/C.5/1649.
