52

General Assembly-Seventh Session

-------------------------------------------··----·not already applie<l against Members' assessments for
1951 in accordance with General Assembly resolution
585 A (VI) of 21 December 1951;
( c) As to $260,797 by transf er of part of the balance of surplus account as at 31 Decemher 1951 not
alrea<ly applied against l\T cm bers· assessments for 1952;
2. M em bers shall make cash acl van ces tu lthe \ Vorking Capital Fund as rcquired under paragraph 1 (a)
above in acrordance with the scale adopted hy the
General AssemLly for contributions oi ;\lembers to the
eighth annual budget; "'
3. There shall be set off against this new allocation
of advances the amllunts paid by Members to the
· \Norking Capital Fund for the financial year 1952,
under Ceneral Assembly resolution 585 A (VI), paragraph 2; provided that, should the a<lvance paid by any
Member to the Working Capital Fund for the financial
year 1952 exceed the amount of that ::\ Tember's advance unùer the provision of paragraph 2 hereof, the
excess shall be set off against the amount of contributions payable by that Member in respect of the eighth
annual budget, or any previous budget ;
4. The Secretary-Gener:.il is authorizeù to aùvance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions; sums so advam:e<l shall be reimbursed as s0011 as
receipts irom contributions are available for the purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance
commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolution relating to unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses. 20 The Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing
the Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed $250,000
to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities. Advances in
excess of the total of $250,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The SecretaryGeneral shall submit, with the annual accounts, an
explanation of the outstanding balance of the revolving
fund at the end of each year;
(d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by intergovernmental agreement under the auspices of the
United Nations to finance their work, pending receipt by
the agencies concerned of sufficient contributions under
their own budgets. In making such loans, which shall
normally be repayable within two years, the SecretaryGeneral shall have regard to the proposed financial resources of the agency concemed, and shall obtain the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any cash
issues which would increase the aggregate balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and
outstanding) at any one time to an amount in excess
of $3,000,000 and for any issue which would increase
See resolution 665 (VII), p. 46.
(VII), p. 51.

11
10 See resolution 675

the balance outstanding ( including amounts previously
advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one
agency to an amount in excess of $1,000.0(Xl, provided that, notwithstanding the above provisions, the
Interim Commission of the International Trade Organization shall be authorized to postpone until 31
December 1953 re·payment of the outst:mding balance
of the Juans made to the Interim Commission;
( e) Such sums as, together with the sums previously advanced an<l outstanùing ior the same purpose, d•J not exceed $420,000 to continue the Staff
l lousing Fund in order to finance rentai payments,
guarantee deposits and working capital requirements
ior housing the staff of the Secretariat. Such advances
shall be reimbursed to the \Vorking Capital Full([ following the recmery of rentai advances, guarantee deposits and working capital advances;
(f) Such sums not exceeding $90,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance
premiums and deposits where the period of insurance
extends heyond the end of the financial year in which
payment is made. This amount may be increased with
the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Dudgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates of each year during the life of the related policies
to cover the charges applicable to each such year;
(g) Such sums not exceeding $1,000,000 as may
be necessary to complete the Headquarters of the
United Nations.

410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

677 (VIl). Payment of honoraria to rapporteurs
of United Nations bodies
The General Assembly,
Recogniâng that the app~ntmerit of a person as rapporteur of a United Nations body confers honour upon
his country and distinction upon himself,
1. C onsiders that no such appointment should carry
remuneration;
2. Rcquests all organs of the United Nations to
bear in mind in future the views of the General Assembly as expressed in the present resolution.
410th plenary meeting,
21 Decembcr 1952.

678 (VIl). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staft' Pen1ion Board for the year ended

31 Deeember 1951
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the ar.nual report 21 of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board for the year ended
31 December 1951;
21 See Official Records of the Gtfltral Assembly, Sroenth
Session, Supplement No. 8.

53

Reaolutions adopted on reporte of the Fifth Committee

-----------

2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of the specialized agencies which are members of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
the reports submitted to the General Assembly at its
seventh session by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Dudgetary Questions ; 22
3. Recommends that the appropriate governing organs of the specialized agencies concerned accept the
jurisdiction of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal in matters involving applications alleging nonobservance of Pension Fund regulations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its eighth session on the action
taken by the specialized agencies concerning this recommendation.
410th plenar}' meeting,
21 December 1952.

further consideration in the light of the observations
presented with respect to these articles in the twentyfourth report 28 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the seventh
session of the General Assembly and of the discussions
held at the 369th meeting of the Fifth Committee;
3. Refers to the Joint Staff Pension 'Board for consideration at its next session the recommendation of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions that the administrative expenses incurred in the administration of the Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund should be
charged to the Fund;
4. Requests the Joint Staff Pension Board to report to the General Assembly at its eighth session on
the matters referre<l to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
present resolution.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

679 (VII). Second actuarial valuation of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The Generdl Assembly
1. Takes note of the report 23 of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the second actuarial
valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund as of 31 December 1951;
2. Takes note of the observations H thereon of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
410th plenary meeting,
21 Decembn- 1952.

680 (Vll). Amendmente to the Regulations for
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the recommendations 28 proposed
by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board in
pursuance of article 37 of the Regulations 26 for the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, with respect
to amendments and additions to be made in the Regulations,
1. Approves the amendments and additions 2 ' to
the Regulations for the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund as set forth in the annex to the present
resolution and decides that the Regulations so amended
shall take effect as from 1 January 1953;
2. Refers the proposals of the Joint Staff Pension
Board relating to articles 11 and 16 to the Board for
22 See document A/1.285.

23 See Official Rtcords of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session, Su,t/ement No. 8A.
H See document A/2346.
21 See document A/2203.
28 See resolution 248 (III).
2 ' The text of the above-mentioned amendments and additions, indicated by italics, can be found in document A/2345
which is reproduced in the Official Records of the General Asstmbly, Seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 45.

ANNEX

Regulaiiom o/ the United Nationa Joint Staff
Penaion Fund
(lncorporating the amendmenta and additions approved
b,.- the General Auembly at iu eeventh se111ion)
ARTICLE

I

De/initions
1. "Member organization" means the United Nations or a
specialized agency referred to i~.Article 57, paragraph 2, of
the Charter which has been admitted to the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund under article XXVIII of these regulations.
2. "Age of retirement" means the age at the end of the
month in which the participant reaches the age of sixty years
or such later age as may be detennined in accordance with the
staff regulations applying to the participant concemed for the
termination of appointmcnt by retirement.
3. "Pensionable remuneration" means the remuneration of
a participaut which is pensionable in accordance with bis terms
of employment. It shall not include any special grants or allowances, such as children's allowances, education grants, expense
allowances, cost-of-living allowances, payments for overtime,
fees, honoraria, and payments for any expenses incurred in the
service of a member organization: If part or the whole of the
pensionable remuneration is paid in kind, the value of such
payments, if not stated in the terms of employment, shall be
determined by the Joint Staff Pension Board.
4. "Final average remuneration" means the average annual
pensionable reinuneration of the participant during the last ten
years of his contributory service. Where the participant bas
less than ten years of contributory service, the ·final average
remuneration shall mean the average annual pensionable remuneration during the actual period of contributory service.
5. "Contributory service" means the actual time spent in
continuous employment, with a member organization or with
two or more of these organizations, for which cootributions
have been paid in accordance with these regulatiom
28

See document A/2285.
