S/PV.7315

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7315th meeting

Tuesday, 18 November 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Park Yong Min
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Tatham
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Letter dated 11 November 2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/805)

14-63498 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1463498*

S/PV.7315

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Letter dated 11 November 2014 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2014/805)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Guinea-Bissau to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Domingos Simões Pereira, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, and I request the Protocol
Officer to escort him to his seat at the Council table.
Domingos Simões Pereira, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, was escorted to a seat at
the Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Ghana and Timor-Leste to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Hanna Serwaah Tetteh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of Ghana, and His Excellency
Mr. José Luis Guterres, Minister of State and Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/805, which contains a letter
dated 11 November 2014 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Trovoada.

2/9

18/11/2014

Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I have the honour
and privilege to address the Security Council as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). My statement follows
the letter of the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council on 11 November
2014 (S/2014/805) on the latest political and security
developments in the country since his last report
(S/2014/603), in August.
Constitutional order has been fully restored in
Guinea-Bissau. Its principal institutions are once
again legitimate and representative. Moreover, an
inclusive Government incorporating all of the political
persuasions represented in Parliament has been formed.
With the support of the international community,
regional and subregional organizations and partners,
the country is striving to continue its transition from
a state of fragility to one of peace and stability. In
that context, I must emphasize the important role
played by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), especially the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau, as well as that of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
Today, Guinea-Bissau has reached a critical stage
in its evolution. The country cannot afford the luxury
of the status quo, at the risk of losing its significant
democratic gains and slipping backwards.
There is a point on which all stakeholders — including
the authorities, the political class and the population of
Guinea-Bissau as a whole — seem to agree. It is the
need for reform, in particular in the areas of defence and
security, justice and public administration. Given the
sensitivity and importance of the issues at stake, such
reforms will require commitment at the national level
and concerted action to achieve consensus. With regard
the specific case of defence and security, the change at
the head of the General Staff of the Armed Forces was
just the first step. Reform must be a comprehensive,
inclusive, pragmatic and integrated in order to achieve
a solution that is technically feasible, economically
viable and politically acceptable to all stakeholders.
Guinea-Bissau is a country where inequalities
persist between the various layers of society, in which a
handful of people have a lot and the vast majority of the
population does not have enough. The infrastructure
required for the development of agriculture and the
exploitation of natural resources are almost non-existent.
The same goes for the areas of health care, education,
14-63498

18/11/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

water, electricity, transportation and communications,
to name just a few.
Faced with these many challenges, the authorities
spare no effort in seeking to meet the needs of the
population. They are working hard to find ways to
ensure the regular payment of salaries and arrears, to
implement preventative measures against Ebola and to
improve the delivery of basic services.
As Council members will be aware, the Government
developed, and presented in September, a programme
setting out its priorities for the short, medium and
long terms. In that context, the authorities identified
stability, the strengthening of the rule of law and
of public institutions, good governance, justice and
development as overarching priorities.
The process of transformation and democratization
under way in Guinea-Bissau is on the right track, but
there is still a long way to go and the resources at the
country’s disposal are extremely limited and, at times,
unpredictable. It is therefore not the time to withdraw;
on the contrary, the international community must
remain mobilized in solidarity alongside the people of
Guinea-Bissau in support of their efforts to build peace,
stability, justice and a better future for their children.
It is important to ensure that the progress achieved
so far be consolidated, and not eroded by corruption, the
use of the country as a transit point for drug trafficking
or a base for organized crime, or by lack of respect for
the rule of law and human rights. The judicial system
must be strong enough to avoid any major breakdown
in law and order. In other words, impunity cannot be
eradicated until those who interpret and apply the law
have the freedom to act without constraints and the
necessary tools to enforce judicial decisions.
On 17 and 18 October, the Government held a
retreat in preparation for the donor round table to be
held in early 2015. Its findings were very encouraging.
The retreat defined a vision for economic recovery
based on the agro-food industry and investment in the
areas of energy, infrastructure and capitalizing of the
wealth of biodiversity.
The latest Human Development Report ranks
Guinea-Bissau’s at 177 out of 187 countries. We hope
and believe that the country will be able to attain better
results on the Human Development Index next year.
The will to do so is clear and the resources are being
mobilized.

S/PV.7315

Following the request of the Security Council in
resolution 2157 (2014), the Secretary-General deployed
a strategic assessment mission in Guinea-Bissau
from 3 to 14 November. The objective of the mission
was to review the mandate of UNIOGBIS and make
recommendations to align its activities with national
priorities identified by the Government. The mission
has completed its work and is finalizing its report.
Its findings will be included in the next report of the
Secretary-General on UNIOGBIS, which will be
published in January 2015.
The President: I thank Mr. Trovoada for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for inviting me to address
the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Miguel
Trovoada for his briefing and his wise leadership, as
well as to acknowledge the presence among us of Prime
Minister Domingos Simões Pereira.
I would like to say how encouraged I was by the
attendance at the International Contact Group meeting
this morning, which was co-chaired by the Foreign
Ministers of Ghana and Timor-Leste in their respective
capacities as rotating Chairs of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.
There seems to be broad agreement that the new
authorities in Guinea-Bissau are moving in the right
direction and that international partners are ready to
fully re-engage with the country. As I mentioned this
morning and also to Security Council experts last
week, I recently took a short visit to the country, where
I found a political situation markedly different from
the one I saw in my last visit in January, as well as to
witness at first-hand the genuine commitment from the
national authorities to achieve the stability, prosperity,
development and institutional progress that BissauGuineans need so much.
The defence and security sector modernization
process, which is an essential element to ensure longterm stability in the country, is already under way. As
I mentioned in my report on the recent visit, which
was circulated to the members of the Security Council,
decisive steps have been taken in the past months,
especially in the update of the members of the armed

14-634983/9

S/PV.7315

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

forces retirement roster, the identification of military
personnel to be retired by January 2015, paying
military personnel through the banking system and,
most notably, in the peaceful and very well-conducted
replacement of the Chief of the General Staff of the
Armed Forces.
One should recognize, however, that this progress
is viable mainly due to the efforts that have been put
forward by the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) on the ground. At the International Contact
Group meeting this morning, participants unanimously
agreed that ECOMIB had been playing an essential role
in the implementation of the security sector reform, and
therefore that the sustainability of the process depended
to a large extent on the continued presence of the force
in Guinea-Bissau. In that context, I would like to bring
to the Council’s attention paragraphs 17 through 19 of
the final communiqué adopted today, which read as
follows:
“The Group strongly supported the position
of the new authorities of Guinea-Bissau regarding
the need to maintain an ECOMIB presence on the
ground. Such a presence will decisively contribute
to supporting the implementation of the identified
reforms and to build up confidence among
international partners. The Group underlined the
need for that force to enjoy a formal invitation
by Guinea-Bissau setting out a clear mandate and
time frame for its activities. It also invited the
United Nations Security Council to consider this
force’s mission and coordinate it with UNIOGBIS’
mandate. The Group recognized and welcomed the
decisive contribution made by ECOWAS through
ECOMIB, which has been guaranteeing security in
Guinea-Bissau.”
With regard to the socioeconomic situation, I was
equally impressed during my recent visit to witness
a newfound optimism prevailing among BissauGuineans. Improved access to water and electricity and
the payment of salaries are notable dividends of the
re-establishment of constitutional order.
However, as the Prime Minister pointed out at this
morning’s meeting, the food security issues worsened
by this year’s sparse and irregular distribution of rains
are a stark reminder that multiple challenges need to be
faced. Moreover, it should be noted that any progress on
the socioeconomic front could also be threatened, if not
annulled, by the potentially devastating consequences
of an Ebola outbreak. While some international support
4/9

18/11/2014

has been forthcoming, Guinea-Bissau’s health system
remains extremely fragile. I would like to take this
opportunity once again to encourage the Government
and the United Nations counterparts to engage with the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
and continue their efforts to bolster rapid response
capacity and preparedness in Guinea-Bissau.
I was encouraged to see that the final commuiqué
adopted this morning by the Contact Group also made
reference to that crucial point by emphasizing, in
paragraph 14,
“that the Group identified as a potential threat to
the socioeconomic structure in Guinea-Bissau
the Ebola virus disease, which had seriously hit
some countries in the West African subregion, and
expressed their firm commitment to put in place
an operational preparedness plan to forestall the
outbreak of the epidemic in the country.”
I would agree with Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Trovoada that the best way
to describe the situation on the ground after the new
Government’s first 100 days in office is to speak of
a fragile stability with room for cautious optimism.
While recognizing the positive developments so far, it
is important to note that the progress will be sustainable
only if due attention is paid to the political context.
Following a request made by the Prime Minister
at the Contact Group meeting, the PBC stands ready
to support the Government in its efforts to foster an
inter-institutional dialogue, with a view to ensuring
that Guinea-Bissau’s most relevant political actors all
share the same commitment to the long-term prosperity
of the country. The international community, while not
interfering or prejudging a national dialogue that needs
to be conducted and decided upon by Bissau-Guineans
themselves, must remain vigilant to any source of
potential instability.
Furthermore, continuing progress will also greatly
depend on the Government’s ability to maintain the
momentum for reform and mobilize sufficient internal
and external support for the implementation of the
established priorities, while effectively preventing
spoilers from threatening to unravel what has been
achieved so far. The political and financial support of
all stakeholders will be crucial for the new authorities
to survive this critical juncture.
In that regard, we are pleased to note that the
preparations for the upcoming round table scheduled to
14-63498

18/11/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

take place in Brussels in February 2015 are under way.
In support of the round table, the PBC’s Guinea-Bissau
configuration will work to facilitate international
coordination with a view to mobilizing sufficient
resources for the Government to implement as priorities
and maintain the positive momentum.
Finally, I would like to underscore that it is
of the utmost importance that the international
community speak with one voice and work in a
coherent manner — a call that was eloquently made
by the Prime Minister himself. As a platform that
includes neighbouring Governments, Security Council
members and many donor countries, the PBC’s GuineaBissau configuration is well placed to ensure that
international partners provide deep, sustained and
coordinated accompaniment for the country’s progress.
In fact, Guinea-Bissau provides us with an example of
how constructive and complementary the relationship
between the Security Council and the PBC can be. I
am confident that by working together we will be able
to transform Guinea-Bissau into a success story for the
region and for the United Nations.
The President: I thank Mr. Patriota for his briefing.
I now have the honour to give the floor to the Prime
Minister of Republic of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Pereira (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the honour of inviting me
to attend and speak at today’s meeting of this important
body of the United Nations.
Guinea-Bissau is a country that, on the international
stage, is emerging from a climate of relations with the
international community characterized by multiple
conditions and sanctions. Our presence and participation
in the work of this important body for the maintenance
of international peace and security and the symbolism
it projects is of critical importance for my country, and
indeed for all the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Guinea-Bissau has returned to this forum of
dialogue and political consultation at a time of
complete renewal — with new political authorities,
fresh commitment and a hope that we can build a State
and a society that are better positioned to pursue our
major national aspirations. That return also signals
that we have completed yet another phase in restoring
the framework for dialogue and cooperation with the
outside world, as well as a growing affirmation of
Guinea-Bissau as a stable and credible partner in the
regional and global security system.

S/PV.7315

Ultimately my presence in this forum also
represents a unique opportunity for me, on behalf
of His Excellency Mr. José Mário Vaz, President of
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, all of our national
political stakeholders and our wider society, to thank
the members of the Security Council and, indeed,
the entire United Nations system, for the efforts and
support provided over more than a decade to assist the
stabilization process in our country.
Despite ongoing political instability, the United
Nations has continued to maintain Guinea-Bissau on
its agenda while pursuing ways and means to promote
political dialogue and reinforce the institutional
framework for the rule of law. I would like to suggest
some features that, in the view of our Government,
should characterize the new framework for dialogue and
cooperation with our international partners, especially
with the United Nations.
Guinea-Bissau is experiencing a new cycle full of
hope and expectation that is responding to the dreams
of its people to build a State capable of achieving the
necessary internal and external conditions for good
governance and development.
The understanding reached among the major
national political parties, especially the African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde and
the Party for Social Renewal — the two main parties
in the Parliament — is both a pillar of inclusive
governance and a factor in pursuing the necessary
reforms in the basic State institutions and essential
legal and constitutional elements in building stability
and strengthening a foundation for development.
Ensuring legitimate governance and social stability
and rebuilding our economy are essential in establishing
political and governmental stability in the country.
To achieve those results, Guinea-Bissau urgently
requires robust external aid to enable us to shore up
the foundation of an already fragile State with limited
resources and persistent social instability, where scars
are still visible in essential social sectors, including,
among others, education and health.
Despite significant progress in the reform
process — for some people it called for great
courage — the Government admits, given the
reality, that major threats and vulnerabilities remain,
warranting further attention and an appropriate
response. We welcome the outstanding work of the
Economic Community of West African States Mission

14-634985/9

S/PV.7315

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

in Guinea-Bissau in maintaining security on behalf
of our institutions and political representatives. To
that end, Guinea-Bissau expresses its unequivocal
determination to ensure that its mandate is continued.
We therefore call on the Security Council and all
international partners to provide the requisite financial
support.
The current phase of stabilizing and rebuilding
our State, the rule of law and our economy requires the
continuing presence of Guinea-Bissau on the agenda of
United Nations, as well as its continued support and
political assistance. To that end, we would advocate
in favour of immediately continuing the presence of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau and United Nations support, based on
strategic collaboration between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. That concern was
also expressed during the recent visit of the strategic
assessment mission deployed by the United Nations in
our country.
Similarly, Guinea-Bissau needs United Nations
support to organize the donor round table scheduled to
take place in Brussels in February 2015. The successful
convening of the round table for development partners
would be a fundamental achievement in maintaining
the Government’s momentum in the medium term.
The new Guinea-Bissau — which is currently
under construction — intends to establish a strategic,
fresh partnership with the United Nations that is geared
towards success as a platform for sustainability. That
new framework will include the commitment of the
political leadership — having confirmed their political
compromises — and of all sectors of civil society.
I also welcome the re-establishment of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau,
established under the auspices of the United Nations in
2006, which has now held its first meeting after two
years of interruption. My country views that forum as
a framework for interaction of critical importance in
breathing fresh life into the dialogue between GuineaBissau and its international partners and in supporting
our Government’s efforts to mobilize international
assistance. I would therefore like to express my deep
appreciation for the presence of the representatives
of the States members of the Security Council in that
forum.
In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to the United
Nations, its bodies and its agencies for the attention and

6/9

18/11/2014

assistance that they have tirelessly provided to GuineaBissau.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): It is a great honour
for us to take part in this afternoon’s meeting of the
Security Council. It is also a great honour to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over the meeting. Australia is
a neighbour and a friendly country that has supported
Timor-Leste for many years in achieving peace and
stability. Australia has also been a great contributor to
the development process in Timor-Leste. I thank the
Australian delegation, the permanent members of the
Security Council and the non-permanent members that
are present today for this opportunity.
It is a great honour for us to address the Council
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe and
Timor-Leste.
I would like to start by also congratulating the
people of Guinea-Bissau on the holding of peaceful,
free and fair elections earlier in the year and on the
inauguration of the newly elected authorities, thus
formally returning the country to constitutional order.
In that regard, I would also like to recognize the very
decisive supporting role played by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau and other partners.
In its first 100 days, the Government, led by Prime
Minister Domingos Simões Pereira, has made very
significant progress in improving the provision of basic
services to the people of Guinea-Bissau, paying salary
arrears, launching the new school year and seeing its
programme and budget unanimously approved by the
National Assembly.
Politics in Guinea-Bissau is not as it was before.
It is a new day and a new and great journey lies
ahead for the people of Guinea-Bissau. Policies
implemented by Prime Minister Simões Pereira and
his team evidence the change that has occurred in the
country. I congratulate the Prime Minister and all of
his colleagues for those policies. I profoundly believe
that following that path will lead to success, not only
in peace and stability but also in development for the
people of Guinea-Bissau and, ultimately, for the entire
14-63498

18/11/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

region of West Africa — including even small countries
such as ours that are very far away and situated in Asia.
The recent actions taken by the authorities
concerning security sector reform — especially the
substitution of General António Indjai as Chief of
General Staff of the Armed Forces, the routing of all
salary payments through the banks, the revision of the
Armed Forces retirement roster and the identification
of 100 personnel to retire by January 2015 — are to
be commended. Those achievements show the strong
commitment and steady leadership of the newly elected
authorities. We welcome the Government’s continuing
reforms aimed at greater political and socioeconomic
stability, as well as at consolidating the rule of law and
protecting and promoting the civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights of all Bissau-Guineans.
In that regard, we stress the vital importance of the
international community’s support in its technical and
financial aspects, but also in ensuring stability to allow
the national authorities to implement those reforms.
For all its achievements, Guinea-Bissau is still
a post-conflict country with fragile institutions and
scarce financial resources. In his address to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, the Prime
Minister called on the international community for
assistance, and specifically requested the reactivation
of the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau
as a privileged forum to discuss and seek support for
the mobilization of international aid (see A/69/PV.17).
This morning, we held the tenth working session of
the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau.
A joint communiqué has been published. I urge
Council members to read it because it contains some
recommendations that will certainly be helpful to them
and their own countries.
This morning, the Prime Minister described for
us the current situation in Guinea-Bissau and the
vision that his overnment has for the people of that
country. The CPLP and its member States remain
deeply involved in coordinating efforts with the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
European Union, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the International Contact Group
on Guinea-Bissau to support the priorities identified by
the Government of Guinea-Bissau. On 29 October, the
CPLP held an extraordinary meeting of its Council of
Ministers in Guinea-Bissau, at which we expressed our

S/PV.7315

deep appreciation for the positive role played by the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB), while
encouraging the national authorities to coordinate
with ECOWAS and all African States to reconfigure
ECOMIB to support the implementation of muchneeded reforms. We also call on the Security Council
to give all its support to ECOMIB, which has played an
extraordinary and very positive role in bringing peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau.
We also recognize the very positive role played by
the President of Rwanda and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, His Excellency President
Trovoada. In that regard, we also welcome the
Secretary-General’s recent report on Guinea-Bissau
(S/2014/805) and its recommendations, and we endorse
in particular the technical rollover of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau. We look forward to the next report of
the Secretary-General, which will include the findings
and recommendations of the strategic assessment
mission sent to the country earlier this month, and the
comprehensive review of the mandate announced for
early 2015.
We profoundly believe that it is our obligation —
whether we are a small or big country, a poor or rich
nation — to give our support to a people that today is in
great need of it. For many years, Timor-Leste was blessed
by Council members’ support here in this Chamber, as
well as by all the Members of the United Nations. We
are deeply grateful for that and acknowledge everyone.
Today, Guinea-Bissau, a small and still a poor country,
needs the same support. We feel the need and the duty
to share what we have with our brothers and sisters of
Guinea-Bissau.
Today, each member of the CPLP is deeply
committed to contributing to Guinea-Bissau in the
coming years, as we have done in the past. As President
of the CPLP, I would like to pledge our full support
to the Prime Minister and people of Guinea-Bissau
during the donors conference to take place in early
2015. We will continue to seek the full engagement
of all international partners, and in particular the
International Contact Group.
I would also like to draw Council members’ attention
to the risk of the Ebola epidemic in West Africa, which
also poses a great threat to Guinea-Bissau. Even if no
cases have yet been identified, if the virus spreads to
the country and no preventive measures are taken we
can be sure that one day all the achievements in peace

14-634987/9

S/PV.7315

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

or development that we have achieved in that country
will be lost. In that respect, we also commend the
efforts made by the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
prevent the spread of the deadly disease, and we ask
Council members and international partners to support,
financial or otherwise, the people and the Government
of Guinea-Bissau in order to help prevent the spread of
Ebola that we all know is affecting West Africa.
Let me thank Council members for their attention.
All the countries from the Portuguese-speaking
Community are committed to supporting GuineaBissau.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the
Republic of Ghana.
Ms. Tetteh (Ghana): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the honour and opportunity to address the Security
Council on behalf of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). Let me also thank you for
the leadership that you have provided to the Security
Council since Australia assumed its presidency, and
assure you of the appreciation of ECOWAS for the work
of this organ.
I would also like to thank the Security Council
for its efforts to promote peace, security, progress
and development in West Africa, particularly, in
Guinea-Bissau, as well as its commitment to fighting
and eliminating the Ebola virus disease, an epidemic
considered to be a threat to international peace and
security, from our region. I also note with keen interest
that during Australia’s presidency of the Council, the
situations in Liberia, Mali and Guinea-Bissau, as well
as the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau,
among others, which are of interest to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), will,
we hope, be favourably considered by the Council.
This morning, at the tenth meeting of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau, held
across the hall from this Chamber, we explored effective
ways of coordinating and harmonizing international
interventions for optimal gains in our collective efforts
to help to consolidate the political stability and economic
recovery of Guinea-Bissau. Our deliberations were not
oblivious to the scarcity of resources and the urgent and
competing global needs, yet the need for us to strive
hard to sustain the support and assistance provided so
far and to improve our support and contributions to help

8/9

18/11/2014

Guinea-Bissau make further progress, kept us resilient,
believing that, with international support and goodwill
and by working together, we will be able to give hope
for the future to the people of Guinea-Bissau.
I therefore would like to closely associate myself
with the sentiments ably expressed by the Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau, my colleague the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, and Ambassador
Patriota on the Security Council’s support to GuineaBissau. Allow me to highlight the need for the Council
to recognize and support the work of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) and to maintain
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau so as to shore up the progress that has
been made so far been in the country, and to further
emphasize the need for support for the defence and
security sector reforms currently being undertaken by
the Government of Guinea-Bissau.
The next meeting of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government of ECOWAS will take place
in December. It will be an opportunity to extend the
mandate of ECOMIB to support the work of the new
Government of Guinea-Bissau — of course, at its
request — in its plans and initiatives. But I would like
to put on record that this year has been a difficult one
for the West African region, especially with the Ebola
epidemic and its economic impact on the region. In
these circumstances, support for the operations of
ECOMIB by the Council and development partners
would be greatly appreciated.
ECOWAS welcomes the reactivation of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau and will
continue to do its best to help sustain peace, security
and development in our member State. With the fragile
socioeconomic situation in Guinea-Bissau, we consider
the Ebola virus disease to be a serious potential threat
that may rapidly reverse the modest progress made in
the country. We know that preparation to prevent Ebola
is extremely expensive. We know that it also involves
the deployment of a significant amount of logistics
and people — the right people — to help to prevent
something like this from happening. For a country like
Ghana, it has been an expensive exercise, even though
we have not recorded an incidence. For a country like
Guinea-Bissau, we think that it definitely needs all the
support it can get to prevent the epidemic from being
able to take root, even if it were to occur, within the
member States.

14-63498

18/11/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

We urge the United Nations to assist GuineaBissau to prepare against the outbreak of the disease
in the short and long terms, and to support the
strengthening of its public health systems to be able to
deal with other outbreaks and epidemics. We believe
that, with the needed support, Guinea-Bissau can be
part of the new narrative of Africa rising and become
a model of democracy and good governance. But if
that is to happen, it is imperative that the Council and
United Nations Member States continue to support
its rebuilding efforts, and we would like to encourage
the Council’s support to deal with the possible threats
that may derail the process of nation-building that has
begun with so much promise. We would also like to
emphasize that work done by non-governmental and
civil society organizations funded by international
development partners should support the priorities of
the Government of Guinea-Bissau.

S/PV.7315

In conclusion, I would like to urge the Council and
our international partners in development to continue
to support Guinea-Bissau in its efforts to build on the
gains that have been made, sustain them, consolidate
peace, establish a credible democracy and ensure
economic development by effectively participating
in the donors pledging conference scheduled to take
place in 2015. And by “effectively”, I mean I hope
that attendees will come with deep pockets and with
deep wallets. On that note, I would once again like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
the Council and wish the Council all the best in its
deliberations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

14-634989/9
