UNITED NATIONS

SEC
OFFICIALREc RDS

,.’.,‘!,_
::..j1’
/,’
.’
.i

THIRTY-SEVENTH

2

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

25 FEBRUARY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

‘The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Resolution 498 (1981);
(6) Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (S/ 14869);
(c) Letter dated 16 February 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/14875) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2332/Rev.l)

SlPV.2332

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officinl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohrtions and
Decisions of the Sec~ity CuLlIzcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resoIutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2332nd MEETING
ork on Thursday, 25 February 1982, at 4 p.m.
president:
Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Pwsent: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2332/Rev.l)

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
(N) Resolution 498 (1981);
(h) Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/14869);
(c) Letter dated 16 February 1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/14875)
The meeting

of the agenda

IVCIScalled to order at 6.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Resolution 498 (1981);
(b) Special report of the Secretary-General
on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/14869);
(c) Letter dated 16 February 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14875)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the 233 1st meeting, I invite the representative
of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table; I invite
the representative of Israel to take the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber; I invite the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, TuBni (Lehnnon) took CI place at the Council trrhle; Mr. Blurn
tlsmrl) took the place reservedfor hirn rrt the side of
the Council chnmber; Mr. Teszi (Palestine Liberrrtion

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/14888,
which contains the text of a letter dated 23 February
1982 from the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General.
3. Mr. DORR (Ireland): Sir, the month of February
is drawing to a close. It is therefore with full knowledge of the skilis you have deployed and the efforts
you have made as President that I congratulate you on
holding this office and congratulate
ourselves on
having had you as President for this month of February.
4. I should also like to express my thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, our colleague Mr. Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union, for the skill and courtesy
which he displayed in turn when he was President
during the month of January.
5. In December last [232&h meeting], the Council
renewed the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
until June 1982 [I’PSO/~Ition 498 (198/j]. The purpose of the draft resolution
which will shortly be before the Council is not to
change that mandate but to increase the strength of the
Force from 6,000 to 7,000 men. Ireland will vote in
favour of that draft resolution.
6. Countries like mine which contribute contingents
to the Force have known for some time that it is thinly
stretched in its effort to carry out its functions effectively in difficult conditions.
The Secretary-General.
makes this clear in paragraph 6 of his special report
[S/14869].
7. In one sense, this is good news because it refutes
the criticism sometimes made that UNIFIL
is ineffective, The truth is that UNIFIL
has been very successful in one important
aspect of its work-promoting
peaceful conditions
in the area where it has been
allowed to operate. That area, it seems, is now regarded
as comparatively
safe and there has been an influx of
people into it for that very reason. This, in turn, has
led to a renewal of economic activity and indeed to
something of a boom in the area.

8. This is a tribute to UNIFIL.
But it does mean
a greater strain on the Force, which is now responsible
for a much larger population
than before. There is

’

1.5. What is the responsibility of the Council in face
of this situation? In our view it is simply not good
enough for the Council to limit itself time after time
to renewing the mandate if it accepts with resignation that the Force must suffer occasional casualties
from hostile action-as
if there were a tolerable level
of losses for a peace-keeping force. Nor should the
Council accept indefinitely that an international force
which it has created will continue to be hampered
and harassed in its efforts to carry out its instructions,
If this goes on, the concept of peace-keeping may be
gradually discredited and the authority of the Council
weakened, UNIFIL
would then become part of the
landscape in the Middle East-just
one among the
many other elements in a troubled region, useful
enough in its own way but not of serious consequence.
The Council too would come to be seen as just another
actor of no great importance in a complex and dangerous play of forces. The tensions and dangers of the
region are simply too great to allow this to happen and
the risks of a wider conflict at any moment are much
too serious to allow the peace-keeping role of the
United Nations and the over-all authority of the Council in limiting and easing conflict to be gradually eroded.

therefore a very good case for increasing the strength
of the Force for practical reasons and irrespective of
other considerations.
9. Clearly, therefore, the Council should approve
the present request. But its responsibilities
do not
end there. We must always keep in mind the UNIFIL
basic mandate as set out in resolution 425 (I 978) and
confirmed and endorsed by many subsequent resolutions. We must continue to press for UNIFIL
to be
allowed to fulfil that mandate and we must ensure that
the opportunity
created by this peace-keeping operation is used for a serious effort at peace-making in the
region.
IO. When UNIFIL
was set up in 1978, the SecretaryGeneral at the time said that three conditions were
essential if it was to operate effectively: first, that it
must have at all times the full confidence and backing
of the Security Council: secondly, that it must operate
with the full co-operation of all the parties: and, thirdly,
that it must be able to function as an integrated and
efficient military unit [S/1261 I, pm/. 33.
1I, The present increase in strength will help to meet
one of these three conditions since it will allow the
Force to function more efficiently as an integrated
unit protecting an increasing population. But what of
the other two conditions--the
full co-operation of the
parties and the full confidence and backing of the
Council?

16. What, then, should the Council do if it is to give
its ful1 backing to UNIFIL?
17. First, the Council must at all times insist on full
respect for the peace-keeping Force itself. Like any
international
peace-keeping operation, UNIFIL
cannot and should not enforce its will on hostile forces. It
depends fundamentally
on acceptance and, like any
peace-keeping force, it should have no enemies. It is
not tolerable therefore that it should be subjected at
times to harassment or attack.

12. Though the parties have accepted the Force, the
co-operation they have given to it so far has, in our
view, been less than adequate. As the SecretaryGeneral notes in his report, efforts at infiltration
by
armed elements have continued and the encroachments on the UNJFIL
area of deployment
by the
C!(Jf~~irc*to forces have not been removed [S/14869,

18. Secondly, the Council must maintain its pressure on all concerned not simply to accept the Force
but to co-operate with it, and in particular to allow
it to deploy fully so that it can be truly effective in the
interests of all concerned.

pcrrcr. 21.

13. Both of these are serious issues. The task facing
UNIFIL
has therefore been a particularly
difficult
one. It seeks to prevent infiltration and to maintain
peace. But it has been prevented from interposing
itself fully along a continuous line between the hostile
forces which it was designed to separate; it has been
harassed at times by the de frrcto forces, which are
encouraged to operate between its present lines and
the Israeli border; and it has at best had a grudging
acceptance rather than full co-operation
from all
parties concerned.

19. Thirdly, it should be clear that the dispatch of a
peace-keeping
force such as UNIFIL
is not a substitute for continuing
efforts to negotiate a peace
settlement and for pressure by the Council to that
end. The main function of the peace-keeping force
is rather to allow an opportunity for peace-making so
that the parties concerned may seek a more permanent and lasting solution to their difficulties.
20. The present fragile cease-fire in southern Lebanon seems to be holding despite occasional incidents
and despite ominous noises about a new invasion,
which would present the most serious dangers to international peace and security, But as the previous
Secretary-General
emphasized in his annual report on
the work of the Organization:

14. It is a tribute to the dedication and couraee of the
officers and men of UNIFIL
that in these conditions
it has had such considerable success in its effort to
maintain peace in the area. But that success is less
than it might have been if UNIFIL
had been given
full co-operation and had been allowed to carry out its
mandate fully throughout the whole area of operations
assigned to it.

“No
cease-fire,
peace-keeping
operation,
or
other expedient for containing the conflict can, in
2

the end, prevent new outbursts of violence as long
as the basic elements of the problem are not tackled
in negotiations involving all the parties concerned”.’

take a general defence of the Organization.
Criticism
is sometimes salutary and it is in any case for each of
the many organs of the United Nations system to assess
how far these criticisms are valid so far as they are
concerned. What I should like to emphasize here is
the positive value of the peace-keeping operations of
the United Nations, of which UNIFIL
is a good
example.

The continuing existence of UNIFIL
and the
courage and dedication of its officers and men in face
of many difficulties have for four years now offered
the international
community a breathing space which
has created and continues to create an opportunity
for such wider negotiations. It is for others to see how
such negotiations can be brought about, and we are
glad to note that the efforts undertaken by a permanent member of the Council, through a special envoy
charged
with mediation, are about to be renewed.
It is of course for the Council itself at all times to seek
ways and means of encouraging the process of negotiation and mediation.
21.

26. Over the 25 years since United Nations peacekeeping operation began, some 360,000 officers and
men have served with various United Nations forces
in difficult and dangerous areas. Of these, I believe
more than 600 have given their lives. Today, in difticult conditions in southern Lebanon, contingents
from some 11 countries are serving at the orders of the
Council. They come from small and medium-sized
countries in Africa, Asia and Europe. They come from
Fiji, France, Ghana, Ireland, Italy, Nepal, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Senegal and Sweden. These
countries have joined to send contingents to a distant
region where they have no direct national interest at
stake. Already the Force has lost some 70 men in
carrying out its difficult mandate. My own country
has suffered its share of these losses.

22.
One important first step would be the phased
programme
to restore the authority of the Lebanese
Government
in the area which is referred to in operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution which will
shortly be before us. Another would be the revival of
the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice Commission in
accordance with operative paragraph 4. But ultimately
some wider framework for negotiation will be needed,
since the tragedy of southern Lebanon is that it has
become the arena where many aspects of the wider
conflicts of the region are played out. It is difficult
to see how lasting peace and stability can be restored
there without some progress towards a settlement of
those wider issues.

27. It is indeed a new and hopeful development in
world affairs over the past generation that countries
from all corners of the world are ready to send their
troops to distant areas like southern Lebanon at the
behest of the Council in the difficult and thankless
task of seeking to maintain international peace and
security. It shows that the United Nations, despite
its many faults and inadequacies, is and can be a
major force for peace in the world. I would hope that
the Organization will continue to play that role and
that the Council, as the responsible authority at whose
request the troop-contributing
countries serve, will
continue to give its full backing and support to the
peace-keeping operations which it establishes and that
all those involved in any way in the issue will avail
themselves fully of the opportunity and time for peacemaking which the existence of these forces allows.

23. In this statement I have referred frankly to the
difficulties
under which UNIFIL
has been obliged to
operate. But I want to emphasize that even under
its present handicaps the Force has been remarkably
successful. To see this one need only imagine for a
moment what the situation would now be in southern
Lebanon
if UNIFIL
did not exist; or what it could
become if the Force were to be withdrawn. In such a
case, the dangers and tensions in the area would greatly
increase. They could quickly reach a flashpoint; new
outside forces would be very likely to intervene and
there would then be the most serious danger of a
wider war.

28. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (int~r;ol.etation.fr’om
Russirrn): Sir, since
today’s official meeting of the Council is the first, and
it would appear the last, in February at which my delegation will be speaking, I should like to congratulate
you, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, not only on
your assumption of the post of President of the Council but also on the successful work of the Council this
month under your highly qualified leadership. I should
also like to express my gratitude to those who have
paid compliments to me personally in connection with
my work as President last month.

24. All of us therefore, not just in the Council but in
the international community as a whole, have a serious
interest in the continuation of UNIFIL
and in making
its functioning
increasingly effective. We all of Us
have reason to thank it for what it has been able to
achieve
in difficult conditions,
despite criticisms
levelled at it at times by some who have not always
given it full co-operation or support.

i
,-

25. There is one other point I should particularly
. like to emphasize. We have heard a good deal of public
criticism of the United Nations in recent weeks. The
usefulness of the Organization has been called into
question and it has been accused of increasing rather
than reducing conflict. This is not the place to under-

29. The Council has met today in accordance with
resolution 498 (1981) in which it decided, inter nlirr,
to carry out an over-all review within two months of the
situation as a whole in the iight of a letter dated I4 December 1981 from the representative
of Lebanon
3

Council, not to mention the fact that, as far as ttrc
Israeli leaders are concerned, any concept of respect
for the view of the international community has IOIQ,
ceased to exist. There can be no denying that Israel
would be unable to continue such detiant behaviour
were it not for the comprehensive support it receives
from the United States of America. The responsibility
for the dangerous new deterioration in the situation it,
the Middle East lies wholly with both Tel Aviv and
Washington. The policy of Israel is nothing but a direct
reflection and extension of the global policy of the
United States. To deny this would be to deny the
obvious.

addressed to the Secretary-General [S/14792 1, in which
the Government of Lebanon quite justifiably requested
of the Security Council an injunction calling on Israel
to withdraw forthwith from the border area where
UNIFIL
had not yet been allowed to deploy and
clearly to define the prerogatives of UNIFIL,
enabling
the Force to carry out its mandate and to deploy, fully
unimpeded, in the totality of its area of operations
up to the internationally
recognized boundaries.
30. I should like to stress the fact that the Soviet
‘delegation shares and supports the concern of the
Lebanese Government over the absolutely abnormal
situation in southern Lebanon and the failure of the
Force to implement its mandate in that region.

35. In the light of the completely abnormal situation
obtaining in southern Lebanon, where Israel is essen.
tially occupying with impunity a part of Lebanese
territory,
arming and supporting separatists of its
stooge, Major Haddad, the task of ensuring its imme.
diate compliance with Council resolution 425 (1978)
is one that has become extremely urgent and indeed
brooks no delay whatsoever.

31. As is well known, the Council, in resolution 498
(198 l), reconfirmed the key provisions of resolution 425
(1978)-that is, the provisions calling for strict respect
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries, and for the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all Lebanese territory.
In that
resolution, the Council also stressed that UNIFIL
was
created primarily to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli
forces. However, it must be noted that these key
provisions of resolution 425 (1978) have so far not been
comphed with, although almost four years have elapsed
since they were adopted.

36. The draft resolution before the Council includes
provisions that reaffirm those of resolution 425 (1978),
which contains the fundamental
definition
of the
mandate of UNIFIL,
that is to say, the confirmation
of
the withdrawal of Israeli forces, the restoration of international peace and security and the affording of assistance to the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the
return of its effective authority in the area. The draft
resolution also stresses that the Council will act in
accordance with resolution 498 (1981), which unambiguously reiterates the Council’s
determination
to
implement resolution 425 (1978) in the totality of the
area of operations assigned to UNIFIL
up to the
internationally
recognized boundaries.
We attach
significance too to the provision for continuing
consideration of this question and the request to the
Secretary-General
to present to the Council a report
on the situation as a whole in the region within two
months. This will enable the Council to monitor the
situation in southern Lebanon in a continuous fashion
and to keep abreast of all matters connected with the
increase in the strength of the Force in the area and
its deployment in the field, This is extremely important in light of the extremely tense and explosive
situation in southern Lebanon and in the areas bordering it.

32. As we can see from the special report of the
Secretary-General
on UNIFIL
dated I6 February
[S/14869], the encroachments
established
in the
UNIFIL
area of deployment by the de j&o
forces,
which are supported and supplied by Israel, have not
been removed, and violations of Lebanon’s territorial
integrity by Israel have also continued. The report
further points out that “for reasons of which the
Council is aware, UNIFIL
has been prevented from
making progress towards fully implementing
the
mandate entrusted to it by the Council in its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978)” [ibid., pwa. 21.
33. In a word, serious obstacles still remain to the
fulfilment by the Force of its task and the position
in southern Lebanon as a whole still remains extremely
dangerous. Furthermore,
ever more alarming reports
have recently been emanating from the southern
Lebanese frontier, and in particular reports of a massive build-up of Israeli forces in that area. There is
every sign of preparations for a new stage of Israeli
aggression and the existence of a deadly threat to
Lebanon. Therefore,
a legitimate
question arises:
should the Council not take some preventive actions
to forestall a new act of aggression on the part of
Israel?

37. For those reasons, the delegation of the Soviet
Union finds it possible not to object to the strength Of
the Force being increased by 1,000 men-primarily
to ensure the possible further deployment
of that
Force in accordance with the mandate approved bY
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). The Soviet
delegation confirms also its position with regard to the
leadership of the Force, the principles governing the
selection of contingents and the system of financin6
the Force. The question of how specifically the additional contingents can be attached to the Force is fl
matter, as always, for further discussion and agree-

34. It would be appropriate in this regard to recall
the repeated warnings addressed by the Council to
Israel not to violate the territorial
integrity of the
Lebanese State. But, as our experience shows, Israel
stubbornly refuses to comply with the decisions of the
4

ment in the course of consultations
the Council,

among members of

a whole. The situation prevailing in the south of the
country is merely one symptom of a much larger
problem.

38. The Soviet delegation will abstain in the vote on
this draft resolution by virtue of its position of principle with regard to UNIFIL-a
position which has
been repeatedly set forth in the Council.

45. The internal problems of Lebanon are of long
standing. They were greatly aggravated by the arrival
of large numbers of armed PLO terrorists there. With
its far from gentle expulsion from Jordan in September 1970 and its exclusion from other Arab countries, the PLO took advantage of Lebanon’s inherent
weaknesses to establish operational bases and headquarters there. Indeed, the erosion of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, to which Council resolution 425 (1978)
refers, began in the early 1970s when the PLO set up
what was virtually a ‘“State within a State” in Lebanon, principally in southern Lebanon, where one of
the areas was even dubbed “Fatahland”.

39.
The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative
of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
40.
Mr. BLUM (Israel): Permit me, Sir, at the outset
to express to you my respects on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. It is good
to have a diplomat of your proven skill, experience and
knowledge
preside over our deliberations.

46. Over the last few years, the PLO with increasing
intensity turned southern Lebanon into a staging-post
for its murderous incursions into Israel. Names like
Avivim,
Ma’alot,
Kiryat
Shmona, Nahariya and
Misgav Am came to denote the scenes of bloody
massacres of women and children. All of these acts
were perpetrated by PLO terrorists operating from
Lebanese territory.

41.
The historical bonds between our two peoples
have a special dimension. When my people embarked

on the Return to Zion of modern time after 18 cenof exile and dispersion, your country played an
important
role in promoting that noble goat. Distinguished countrymen of yours led enlightened mankind
in support of the cause of Zionism, the national liber.ation movement of the Jewish people, and one of
the noblest liberation movements in history. They saw
the return of my people to its homeland as one of
the mast momentous events of our time and thus earned
for your country the distinction of being entrusted
by the international
community
with a mandate to
promote and assist the restoration of the Jewish people
to the Land of Israel. Many illustrious countrymen
of yours who at various times tent their valuable
support to our great national effort, including three
former Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom, Arthur
James Balfour, David Lloyd George and Winston
Churchill,
are well remembered in Israel, as is evidenced also by the naming of streets after them in
our capital, Jerusalem, as welt as in other major cities
of our country,
turies

47. Nor were the PLO terroristic activities confined
to Israel. A reign of terror swept Lebanese villages in
the south as the PLO gradually tightened its grip over
the area.
48. Moreover, southern Lebanon became the training
ground, logistic centre and refuge for members of the
terrorist international
from all over the world. Their
activities have plagued numerous countries and the
international community
at large.
49. From the early 1970s onwards, Lebanon lost
much of its sovereignty over its own territory to the
terrorist PLO. But in the bitter and brutal war in
Lebanon between 1974 and 1976 the country also lost
its independence to Syria, which saw in the steadily
deteriorating
situation
in Lebanon an opportunity
to realize its long-standing
ambition to swallow up
Lebanon within what the Syrians refer to as “Greater
Syria”--“Suriah
AI-Kubra”
in Arabic. Between
I974 and 1976, Syrian allegiances jockeyed and
changed for reasons of political expediency to suit
Syria’s own purposes. At one stage, the Syrians presented themselves as the protectors of the Christian
Lebanese against the PLO and did not hesitate at that
stage to bombard and demolish PLO strongholds such
as Tel el-Zaatar. Later, roles reversed and the Syrians
turned brutally on the Christians with horrifying
results, mercilessly
bombarding
civilian centres,
killing uncounted thousands of civilians and turning
up to a million Lebanese into refugees. Indeed, the
images of Syria’s indiscriminate
brutality in Lebanon
are familiar to anyone who watches television news.
Most vivid are the pictures of last year of the merciless Syrian siege of Zahte, the largest Christian city
in the Middle East. That siege went on for weeks and

42.
I should also like to take this opportunity
to
express my appreciation to Mr. Troyanovsky,
who
conducted
the Council’s business last month with his
customary
aplomb and courtesy.
43.
The Council has met on numerous occasions
since 1978 to consider the situation in southern Leb-

canon. The Council has on its record Israel’s position
with respect to the more complex issues arising in this
context,
especially as regards the UNIFIL
threefold
mandate as laid down in Council resolution 425 (1978).
The Council
is also acquainted with our position
regarding the broader context of the Lebanese tragedy.
44. The tragic reality prevailing in Lebanon must
be recognized by all of us. We are all painfully aware
that Lebanon’s problems far transcend the issue of the
UNIFIL
area of operation in the south of that troubled
country. The situation in the southern part of Lebanon
cannot be detached from the situation in Lebanon as
5

by the time it was lifted it had resulted in more than
1,000 casualties.

which decides how that terrorist organization will be
deployed and what tasks it will undertake within the
framework of wider Syrian designs.

50. In all these activities, both the Syrian army of
occupation and the terrorist PLO have been aided,
abetted, trained, equipped and financed by the Soviet
Union, whose attempts at destabilizing and subverting
the Middle East as a whole are well known and whose
sinister role in the Lebanese tragedy is common
knowledge.

55. Over all these years of turmoil in Lebanon, the
Council has not seen fit to devote any time to discuss
the subversion of Lebanese sovereignty first by the
PLO and subsequently by Syria, except for the five
desultory minutes which it accorded the topic on 6 Oc.
tober 1978 [208Yrh rneetingl-almost
three and a
half years ago-at
the end of which it nervously
adopted, without any formal debate, a milk and water
resolution [~solution
436 t/978)] that avoided even
indirect reference to Syria, which was then involved
in the massive bombardment
and destruction
of
civilian quarters of Beirut and the large-scale massacre
of its population. This cynical approach by the Council, totally at variance with the facts and realities
prevailing in Lebanon, will also be duly reflected in
the resolution to be adopted by the Council today.
The Council, apparently, is still not aware of the fact
that Lebanon is an occupied country dominated by the
Syrian army of occupation and the PLO armed terrorists. This bizarre pattern of behaviour by the Council
may perhaps be understood by its members, but is
certainly far from being comprehensible
to world
opinion. It can only further lower and compromise the
Council’s already badly shattered credibility
on any
matter affecting the Arab-Israeli conflict.

51, As a result of all this, Lebanon has been in recent
years and still remains a country occupied by alien
forces. Syria still maintains in Lebanon a sizeable
portion of its army, that is, about 25,000 troops and
upwards, and the PLO still have over 15,000 armed
.terrorists operating in the country, of whom over
2,000 are positioned south of the Litani River. About
1,500 of these terrorists are located in the so-caIled
“Tyre pocket” and around 700 are deployed in some
40 pockets and nests within the UNIFIL
area of operation, with the clear intention of using that area as a
springboard in their attempts to terrorize Israel’s
civilian population.
52. As long as these non-Lebanese
elements are
allowed to operate within and from Lebanon, no real
progress will be achieved towards the return of the
effective authority of the Government
of Lebanon
throughout the length and breadth of that country.
Peace cannot be restored in Lebanon and the Lebanese
Government cannot re-establish its effective authority while a massive Syrian army of occupation holds
down the bulk of the country and while PLO terrorists
trained and armed by the Soviet Union are given free
rein on Lebanese soil.

56. All these are facts that are well known by all of
us and certainly by the representative of Lebanon.
They should be known even to Mr. Maksoud,
no
matter how often he tries to pontificate them away.
57. Israel has profound sympathy for the agony of
Lebanon and its people. I personally can also sympathize with the plight of our Lebanese colleague and
with his need to please in his statements not only his
Syrian overlords but also the various warring factions
in Beirut, as well as the visiting Lebanese parliamentarians who are closely following his performance. But
our sympathy for the predicament of Lebanon and
Mr. Tuini should neither serve nor be construed as
an entitlement
on his part to make statements competing in form and substance with those of the representative of Syria, or in other words fatalistic statements, statements ci Itr Futtal.

53. Ever since its occupation of Lebanon in 1976,
Syria has denied the Government
of Lebanon any
semblance of free and independent political decisionmaking and action. No decisions affecting Lebanese
national policies, either internal or external, are taken
any more by the Government
of Lebanon and no
longer are those decisions made in Beirut, its capital.
They are now made by its fraternal neighbour, Syria.
To rub things in, Syria, along its border with Lebanon,
has eliminated
all remaining vestiges of Lebanese
sovereignty and authority,
especially in the Bekaa
Valley. Internationai
frontier demarcations between
the two countries have been removed, Syrian currency has been introduced
and various Lebanese
Government
signs have been taken down and destroyed. The statements of the representative
of
Lebanon in the Council must also be viewed against
this background.

58. We deplore the arrogant tone struck by Mr. TuCni
last Tuesday in his references to Israel [233/st
meeting]. His statement, as well as those of other Arab
speakers, resorted to terms gleaned from the realm
of psychopathology.
One could not help but think
that we were confronted here with a classical example
of what psychologists call a “negative projection”,
that is, the mental mechanism by which human beings
read into the behaviour of others the destructive tendencies which they fear to recognize in themselves.

54. To the outsider it may seem that Lebanon has
been divided into spheres of influence, principally
between the Syrians, who keep their army in the north
of the country, and the terrorist PLO, which operates
throughout much of the south. The fact is that the
PLO in Lebanon operates under complete Syrian
control. It is Syria which oversees the supply of the
PLO armaments and Iogistic facilities. It is Syria

59. Our sympathy for Lebanon and its agony does
not absolve its representative from a minimum
of
6

honesty in these debates. His statement in the Council in the present debate, like so many of his earlier
statements, has a ring of duplicity, which, regrettably,
has come to characterize his country’s position in
these debates. It is essential to realize that from the
viewpoint
of the Lebanese representative the true
object of the debates is to find a scapegoat for Lebanon’s fundamental problems and a way to avoid facing
up to them directly and honestly. This, sadly, has been
Lebanon’s
approach for the last decade and more. FOI
example, as early as December 1968, Fuad Boutros,
the present Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon,
claimed
in the Council that “Lebanon
shelters no
commando
organization”
[/46/st meeting, pow. /6/l.
This was a bare-faced lie and when the President of
Lebanon,
Mr. HClou, was pressed about it, he later
admitted
to Lebanese parliamentarians
that the claim
was made in the Council-and
I quote him-“in
order
to secure Israel’s condemnation”.
This was reported
in the Beirut newspaper AI-Hoycrt of 1 July 1969. This
mendacious and duplicitous approach and the psychological problems it reflects continue to find expression
in the positions taken by our Lebanese colleague in the
Council.

62. Israel expects that with the scheduled increase
in the ceiling on UNIFIL
troops, the efforts to keep
the UNIFIL
area of operation free of PLO presence
and infiltration will be intensified. In this connection,
it will be recalled that when the area in question was
handed over to UNIFIL
by the Israel Defence Forces
in 1978 it was completely free of any PLO presence,
63. In the course of his statement [233lst meeting,
partr. $51, the representative
of Lebanon has again
relied on the now-defunct
Israeli-Lebanese
General Armistice
Agreement
of 23 March 1949.’ As
I have already pointed out in the Council on previous
occasions, that Agreement
was brought to an end
by Lebanon in June 1967. I might add that. subsequent to June 1967, the Government of Lebanon
also repeatedly demonstrated
that it no longer considered the Agreement in force by concluding a series
of agreements with the terrorist PLO that were totally incompatible
with its basic obligations under the
Armistice Agreement.
64. Although
Israel’s
position of principle concerning Lebanon is well known, I should like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm once again that Israel continues to support the political independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Lebanon
within its internationally
recognized boundaries. Israel
wants peace both in and with Lebanon, and has repeatedly indicated its readiness to enter into peace negotiations with the Government
of Lebanon, as indeed
with the Governments
of other Arab States. I wish
to take this opportunity
to renew this offer to the
Government of Lebanon.

60. Let me therefore tell him very plainly: Had Lebanon been prepared to face over the years its problems
honestly and had it fulfilled its national and international commitments,
it might not have come to the
sorry pass it has reached. One could go further and
suggest that the need for UNIFTL
could have been
avoided and all debates we have had in recent years
obviated.
The UNIFIL
mandate was originally set out in
Council resolution 425 (1978). At the time that resolution was adopted, the Council was well aware of the
problem of Lebanon in its entirety, recognizing that
the presence of Syrian troops and the PLO terrorists
on Lebanese soil constituted a major obstacle to the
restoration of international
peace and security and to
the re-establishment
of Lebanon’s authority over its
own
territory. In that resolution the Council thus called
for “strict respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon within
its internationally
recognized
boundaries”,
and
UNIFIL
was entrusted with an appropriate threefold
mandate,
namely: first, to confirm the withdrawal
of Israeli forces; secondly, to restore international
peace and security; and, thirdly, to assist the Government of Lebanon in ensur:ng the return of its effective authority in the area. In co-operation with the
Israel Defence Forces, UNIFIL
successfully carried
-out the first part of its mandate, as confirmed by the
UNIFIL
Commander on 13 June 1978 and recorded
in the progress report of the Secretary-General of the
same date [S/l2620/AddS,
pa~~~.s. 22 and 231. Regrettably, the remaining two parts of the UNIFIL mandate
have not yet been implemented
because of the continuing presence of the Syrian army of occupation
and the massive presence of PLO terrorists on Lebanese soil.
61.

65. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have just received a letter
from the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

66. The PRESIDENT:
I now invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to take a place at the
Council table in order to make a statement.
67. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
I should like, Sir, to avail myself of this opportunity
to extend to you our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I am confident
that your deep knowledge of all the aspects of the
Middle East conflict, and in particular of its root
causes, will help the Council, whenever it discusses
the Middle East problem, to reach a correct conclusion.
7

we heard in the famous monumental
speech by the
representative
of the United States in the General
,b,ssemblyJ-and
I shall revert to this in a moment,

68. I should like also to express our admiration and
thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, who
presided over the Council at a very difficult moment,
both for my country and for the Arab nation. His skill,
wisdom and objectivity were instrumental in preserving and enhancing the prestige of the Council
despite the arrogant behaviour of those who tried-as
they still are trying-to tarnish the image of the United
Nations system.

74. At the very time when the Council was resuming
its deliberations concerning the laWleSS
Israeli annexa.
tion of the Syrian Golan Heights, Israel’s decision
to establish more settlements was made public, The
pIan
is to quadruple the number of settlers in the
occupied Syrian territories. Let US PaUSe for a moment
and contemplate this impudence-the
impudence of
yesterday and the impudence of today with regard to
the Lebanese question.

69. I would not have asked to participate in this
debate had the Israeli representative at least respected
the framework within which the Council is discussing
a very important and dangerous problem, that is,
Israeli aggression against southern Lebanon.

.

81. 1
is a ns
nation
right t
use tt
repres
move1
placet
tion a
I.5 ml
A nat
word
it is tl
been
help 1
empir
That
tation
garris
of thl
impel

75. Members of the Council may agree or disagree,
but in my opinion, States, like people, tend to develop
a personality of their own. Character traits which
distinguish one individual from another will surface
in the behaviour and action of States. I wish that the
Council would help me find the appropriate terms to
describe this defiance and to devise methods for the
United Nations to deal with it.

70. Schizophrenia
is a well-known phenomenon
and I think that we have a case of schizophrenia on our
hands, I am going to quote from a certain article by
a professor ir I’isdlienne.
The article was written
by none other than one Blum in the Zs/~el Lcrlr R~)view
in 1968. I quote it to demonstrate the extent to which
a person can use double standards to misrepresent his
position and to mislead the Council. The article says,
on pages 288 and 289 of volume 3, number 2, of this
work:
“And it is a cardinal rule of the international
belligerent occupation that

80. T
sentati
of nan
‘bzioni:
us of
recogn
the rel
.she wi
ism”tional
interpi

76. The Syrian Arab Republic is very proud of having
been one of the founders of the United Nations. We
take pride in the fact that we contributed to the drafting
of the Charter of the United Nations. We and all
Arabs have been bringing our complaints to the Council: in the context of the Lebanese complaint, this is
because the Arabs believe that the Council is the
organ responsible for the removal of aggression and
the establishment
and maintenance
of peace and
security.

law of

‘occupation does not displace or transfer sovereignty. The occupant is entitled to exercise
military authority over the territory occupied, but
he does not acquire sovereignty unless and until
it is ceded to him by a treaty of peace (which is
the commonest method), or is simply abandoned
in his favour without cession, or is acquired by
him by virtue of subjugation, that is, extermination of the local sovereign and annexation of his
territory’ “.

82.
prow
esser

77. The problem before the Council is essentially
a colonial one. Israel wishes to implement the Zionist
plan for a “Greater Israel”. There is no “Greater
Syria” and should a Greater Syria be created it will
be created through the will of our masses. But Greater
Israel is occupation and annexation, in the exclusivist
manner used by Israel since 1948.

71. Those are the words of Mr. Blum. Two months
ago Israel annexed the Golan and that is schizophrenia.

West

into
West

its er

/

83.
and I
estat
clain
indiv
COI0
of A
en n
The
forrr
Zion
Ioni;
cher
whil
expc

!.

84.
and
to F
Leb
shal

78. I shall now quote Mr. Begin, the arch-terrorist.
He said:

72. In the same article, on page 289, he says that:

“We call on the young generation, in the homeland and in the Diaspora, to arise, go forth and
settle. Come from the East and the West, the North
and the South, to build together Eretz Yisrael. There
is room for millions of returnees to Zion.”

“Castrln, likewise, points out on this matter that
‘sowwignty
over occupied territory . . . is not
transferred to the occupying Power. , . . [Olccupied
territory may not be rrnrmed, and unilateral declarations to this effect are consequently void of legal
effect’ “.

This call for the creation of Eretz Yisrael is nothing
but a call for the creation of “Greater Israel” at the
expense of the Arabs and Arab lives from the Nile to
the Euphrates. “Greater Syria” or Arab unity Wil
one day be rcalized through the will and the wish of
our people, not through occupation and displacement.

73. The article is too long to quote in full, but its
stress is on the non-acquisition of territory by force
and the illegitimacy of occupation and annexation.
Mr. Blum, ri l’isr~rdienne, quotes others as well and
concludes that that is a factual truth and a principle
of international law, but that it applies only to Israel
and not to other countries. In this he is supported,
I think, by the United States of America, which states
that Israel has not annexed the Golan. That is what

79. What sort of State are we dealing with? What
ideology? Mr. Blum has called his movement a national
liberation movement. I wonder if anyone in the Council, even the United States delegation, can accept that.
8

!
:
1’

80. The other day I heard 3 statement from the representative of the United States in which she accused us
Of name-calling
tactics, and she included the word
“Zionism”
in the category of names she was accusing
us of using. Thus the United States does not even
recognize Zionism, according to the statement made by
the representative
of the United States. At the time,
she was angry because we had used the term “zionism” -not
knowing, perhaps, that Zionism is 3 “national liberation movement”
according to Mr. Blum’s
-interpretation.

35. I wish that the Israeli representative would come
to this table and declare that Israel was willing to
rescind the annexation of the Golan and unconditionally withdraw from all occupied Arab territory.
36. Our Presence in Lebanon through the Arab
deterrent forces is legitimate. It is a national duty,
The Lebanese people, the Lebanese President, the
Lebanese parties, Muslims, Christians and others,
311called on Syria to come to stop the fractricidal war,
which was on the verge of dividing Lebanon into small
States along religious or sectarian lines. We have no
objective in Lebanon except to serve Lebanon and the
Arab national interest in Lebanon. Israel wishes to see
Lebanon divided into small States. Israel wishes there
to be small sectarian States because Israel is itself 3
sectarian State.

81. YOU have to make up your mind. Either Zionism
is a national liberation movement or it is not. If it is 3
national liberation movement,
you should give us the
right to say the contrary. You ask us, “Why do you
use this term?” But the term is to the liking of the
representative
of Israel. It is a “national
liberation
movement”,
It really is. It is a movement that has displaced 2 million Palestinians
and extended its occupation and annexation to the remnants, which number
I ..5 million. That is 3 “national
liberation movement”.
A national liberation movement?
It is an insult to the
word “liberation”.
Zionism
is 3 colonial movement;
it is the result of colonialism,
Zionism would not have
been able to enter Palestine had it not been for the
help of those who are behind it-the
great colonial
empires of the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries.
Th3t is Zionism. Zionism
exports bloodshed, exploitation and occupation.
It is, finally, no more than a
garrison State which exists to protects the interests
of the colonialist
Power, on the one hand, and the
imperialist
Power, on the other. That is Zionism.

87. Mr. President, in order to alleviate your plight
I shall only refer the Council to the verbatim record
of the 2320th meeting, which contains the text of a
statement in which the Syrian position on Lebanon is
quite well clarified. That statement was made in reply
to the misrepresentations of the Israeli representative.
88. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/14890 dated 25 February
1982, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

82. The history of Israel must be considered in its
proper context, a context which was and remains
essentially colonial. Zionism
is an outgrowth of the
Western colonial incursions of the nineteenth century
into Asia, Africa and Latin America, during the
. West’s hectic race to carve out its colonies and build
its empires, It is not a national liberation movement.

In fcrrour: China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Spain, Togo, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Zaire
Against: None

83. It is paradoxical that the late nineteenth century
and the twentieth century should have witnessed the
establishment
of wider democracies in Europe that
claimed to recognize the civil and political rights of
individuals while simultaneously
giving birth to racist
colonialist
philosophies
directed against the peoples
of Asia, Africa and Latin America, depriving them
en tnc~ss~ of their rights as individuals and peoples.
The Zionist philosophy
was born perverted and deformed, It was precisely
at that juncture that the
Zionist movement in Europe opted to emulate the colonial ventures, Liberty, equality, fraternity-the
most
cherished of ideals- were for home consumption,
while subjugation,
inequality
and racism were to be
exported abroad.

Ahstrrining:
Republics

Poland,

Union

of Soviet

Socialist

89. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now Call on those members of the Council who wish to make statements
following the voting.
90. Mr. NOW,&
(Poland): Sir, I should like at the
outset to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February.
We are grateful for your efforts to facilitate 3nd expedite our work here. I should also like to express our
sincere thanks to Mr. Troyanovsky of the Soviet
Union for the skilful and effective manner in which
he presided over our work in January.

84. How many times must I come to the Council
and say that the Arab deterrent forces have one task
to perform-to
deter a further civil war among the
Lebanese people, our brothers? We are not and we
shall not be an army of occupation.
9

Lebanon, fully sympathizes with the desire expressed
by the Lebanese Government that UNIFIL
be provided with additional means to enable it to fulfil its
mandate and to increase both its military
and its
civilian presence in the southern part of the country.
In this connection, we give our unreserved support
to the proposals and comments which were made by
Mr. Tu&ni in the Council on 23 February 12-~-~/.~~

91. In our statements on 21 April 1978 at the eighth
special session of the General Assembly, we presented, in the Assembly and in the Fifth Committee,
our substantive reservations concerning some important political and financial aspects of UNIFIL.4
92. We reiterated that position of principle of ours
in the Fifth Committee at the thirty-third,
thirtyfourth and thirty-sixth sessions of the General Assembly, and I wish to state that it stands equally valid
today in the Council.
93. Consequently,
draft resolution.

meetin,q].

100, Aware of its particular responsibilities
in the
area and in keeping with the Secretary-General’s
recommendations,
France endorses the increase in
the strength of UNIFIL
by an additional
1,000 men.
We would also be prepared to consider the possibility
of increasing its own already considerable effort if this
should be expressly requested by the SecretaryGeneral as part of the process of redeployment.

we abstained in the vote on the

94. Mr, de La BARRE

de NANTEUIL
(France)
Mr. President, since
I believe that this is the iast meeting of the Council
we shall be holding this month under your presidency,
I should like firstly to congratulate you on the way you
have discharged your duties-with
determination,
talent, patience and a sense of humour, as well as the
impartiality which was indeed warranted by the very
difficult item on our agenda.

(interpretntion

jlom

French):

101. Indeed, the French Government believes that the
use of UNIFIL thus strengthened will have to be seen
in the context of a redeployment effort to be studied
by the Secretary-General,
the Force Commander
and the contributing States, in the light of the need
to offset the evident shortcomings
of the present
arrangement and to enable UNIFIL
to effect a continuous link in the field between its two present emplncements.

95. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, for the excellent way in
which he presided over our work during the month of
January.

102. The principle of granting UNIFIL
the right to
defend itself and to return fire, if there is any attempt
to prevent it from performing its mission, should be
endorsed and its implementation
should be the subject
of close and realistic scrutiny by the Secretary-General
and General Callaghan, depending upon the situation
prevailing in the field,

96. When it renewed the mandate of UNIFIL
on
18 December 1981 [resolution 498 (198/)], the Council decided “to review, within two months, the situation
as a whole in the light of the letter of the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General
dated I4 December 1981 [S//4792]“.

103. We also believe that it is necessary to reaffirm
here Israel’s obligation to withdraw from the enclave
ofthe defkto forces, in accordance with resolution 425
(1978).

97. The special report of the Secretary-General on
UNIFIL,
dated 16 February, has provided us with
some very useful information in this respect. Although
the cease-fire which was decreed last July has been
generally respected, tension is still high in the area
and the situation “has remained extremely volatile”.
Attempts at infiltration
by armed elements which
UNIFIL has had to face; the continued existence of
de fkto forces still supported and supplied by Israel:
further violations of the territorial integrity of Lebanon
[S/14869, pclrcr. 21: that is the harsh reality which the
Secretary-General’s envoy, Mr. Brian Urquhart-to
whom I should like to pay a tribute for his very useful
mission-was able to observe in the field.

104. Finally, it seems essential today that the activities of the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice Commission be resumed with the least possible delay if
we wish to achieve concrete results in the field in order
to ensure peace.
10.5. In the light of the foregoing, my delegation
supports the resolution which has just been adopted
by the Council. In so doing, France urgently appeals
to all the parties to continue to respect the cease-fire,
to avoid any action likely to lead to violent reactions
and to make a determined effort to allow the UNIFIL
zone to be consolidated,

98. In the light of this situation, it is up to the Council to do everything in its power to preserve the present cease-fire and make it possible for the Force fully
to discharge its mandate, as laid down in resolutions
425 (1978) and 426 (1978). Need I repeat that France
has always been in favour of the full and strict implementation of these two resolutions.

106. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): Mr. President, I too should like to begin by
thanking you, on behalf of the United States, for your
dedicated, constructive
and extraordinarily
skilful
conduct Of the office of the presidency, which has
been a model of patient problem-solving
efforts by this
body.

99. France, which continues to uphold the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
10

107. We should like ASO to express our gratitude to
the representative
of the Soviet Union for the skill
and courtesy with which he conducted the presidency
last month.

108. In the past week, the Government of the United
States has worked alongside other Governments in this
body and alongside you, Mr. President, to negotiate
a text that would have the support of the Government
of Lebanon, the troop contributors and others who
support
this important
peace-keeping
operation.
We have also sought a text that would be acceptable
to Lebanon’s
neighbours and respect the vital national
interests of all concerned.
109. We believe that the Council has succeeded
in negotiating
such a resolution. An observer of the
Council’s activities might wonder why, in fact, it has
been so difficult ot find consensus on a question about
which there was so little disagreement,
notably the
question of whether the Council should or should not
support General Callaghan’s request that 1,000 troops
be added to the UNIFIL
contingent and we do regret
that the Council could not take the simple, straightforward step of enlarging the UNIFIL
forces without
adding to the resolution some elements that seemed
to us extraneous to the basic purpose of the resolution.
We regret that it is so difficult here to take constructive action without obstructive trd hominon
attacks on
one another.
110. The Government of the United States is none
the less pleased to support this resolution which provides General Callaghan the additional
1,000 troops
for the UNIFIL
forces that he has said he needs to
accomplish his task to provide the soldiers under his
command with the reinforcement and the leisure that
they require.
111. My Government
is committed
to the task of
extending and reinforcing peace in this deeply troubled
area. We are committed
also to restoring the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the Government of Lebanon. We believe that the cycle of violence
that afflicts the area is profoundly dangerous to the
security, peace and well-being of the region and should
be addressed in all its aspects and complexities.
We
expect that the reinforced troops of UNIFIL
will be
able more effectively to deal with the incursions and
violations of all kinds and from all sources. To help
achieve these goals, the Government of the United
States offers its moral, political, financial and diplomatic support. We also work through our bilateral
and regional diplomacy to achieve these goals.
112. We desire to express our gratitude and admiration to the representative of the Secretafiat for his
hard work on behalf of peace in this troubled region.

113. Finally, we offer our warmest wishes to General
Callaghan and to the UNIFIL
troops as they continue
their terribly important task,
114. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel
has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table to
make that statement.
11.5. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I was gratified to learn that
the representative of Syria had the good taste to peruse
some of my own writings published in learned journals. It is good that for a change he seems to he
engaged in some serious reading.
116. I must confess, though, that the full impact of
such reading could not yet be discerned in his rotatement. He did not really address himself to the question before us. He engaged, in the Council, in yet
another diatribe against my country and against my
people. Curiously enough, he spoke of exporting
“bloodshed”
[panr. 811. On this particular issue I believe he speaks with some expertise. What if not
exportation of blood has the bloody rCgime that he
represents been engaged in in recent years?
117. He did not speak about Syria’s bloody record
in Lebanon over the past few years. He skirted over
that by referring all of us to the so-called inter-Arab
peace deterrent force. I will not discuss the term; I find
it strange that a force should want to deter anybody
from peace. If that is the purpose-tb deter somebody
from peace in Lebanon-then
the Syrian army of
occupation has been singularly successful in recent
years. It has deterred peace in Lebanon.
118. But let us look at this so-called inter-Arab
peace deterrent force. This is not the first time that
Syrian representatives would like the Council, and
the United Nations, to believe that the Syrian army of
occupation acts, as it were, in Lebanon on behalf of
a wider objective, as a kind of regional peace-keeping
force, But, as is well known, all the other national
contingents which originally participated in that force,
and whose task from the very beginning was to cover
up the true character of the Syrian occupation, have
since been withdrawn. It is only Syria that participates
in this international force, as it were, this peace deterrent force in Lebanon. The representative of the
rkgime of the Assad Brothers Ltd. can thus no longer
hide behind such a transparent fig leaf.
119. Let me bring to the Council’s attention a resolution adopted only three days ago by the Foreign
Affairs Committee of the Kuwaiti National Council in
which it rejected the Kuwaiti Government’s proposal
to approve Kuwait’s participation in the financial
maintenance of that Syrian army of occupation masqilerading under the name of the inter-Arab peace
deterrent force in Lebanon. No reasons were given

.

tion of Palestine to the fOrefrOnt, 1 Still feel Sickened
and nauseated when I listen to someone here speaking
about the “bonds between our two PeoPleS” ljwr~~. 411,
What bonds is he talking about? Is he talking about the
Tommies that were booby-trapped, murdered and left
hanging? The British Tommies who were fighting
the Nazis and were arrested by the Zionist gangs and
killed? Is he speaking about the British High Con+
missioner, Macmillan, who was fired at in an attempt
to assassinate him when he was helping the Jewish
Agency achieve its goals
in Palestine? or iS it Lord
Moyne’s blood that makes us remember this collabora.
tion that existed between your two peoples?

for the decision, but parliamentary sources reported
in Kuwait that this rejection came “in the wake of
developments in Syria; the Syrian Government’s posltion in the Iraq-Iran war, which is contrary to Arab
interests; and also the fact that the inter-Arab deterrent force is no longer Arab”-in
other words,
it is solely Syrian. This was reported by the Associated Press on 22 February, three days ago.
120. Let me refresh the Council’s memory by recalling that Kuwait was among the seven Countries
which expressed their reservations concerning the
renewal of the mandate of the so-called inter-Arab
peace deterrent force on 19 January 1982 at the meeting
of the League of Arab States.

evact
polic:
merit
of thl
were
Zioni
a sin,
famil
the p
of th
liben
131.
force
their
them
heed
refus
there
their
move
read

126. Among the great leaders, Winston Churchill was
mentioned, I recall-1 do not have the text before methat it was Winston Churchill who was reported as
having said once that those guns in the hands of Zionists
merited for them the kind of treatment worthy of the
Nazis. That was, I think, after the murder of Lord
Moyne.

121. But the manner in which this army of occupation exercises its peace deterrent role became very
obvious also last year when it brutally massacred the
civilian population of Zahle--and I have referred to that
before. In retrospect it would seem that this was
nothing but a kind of dress rehearsal for similar peacekeeping activities which the Syrian representative’s
army performs in Syria proper. As members of the
Council know, for many weeks now a massacre has
been going on in the city of Hama, a city of more than
a quarter of a million inhabitants. Hafez el Assad and
his brother Rifa’at have been repressing with unbelievable cruelty a mass civilian uprising in that city,
the fifth largest in Syria. For two weeks whole neighbourhoods of the city were shelled. The entire city was
cut off from the outside world. The Syrian army
-peace-keeping,
I presume-went from door to door
. destroying districts by blowing up houses along with
their inhabitants. Civilians were attacked with tanks
and artillery. Thousands of men, women and children
were killed and wounded. So much for the peace
deterrent character of the army for which the Syrian
representative spoke before.

127. But I know that the British did help. They
brought General Wingate to train the murderers and
assassins of my people. They let them go free and
even established for them a Jewish brigade, when the
British were hanging our people just because they had
a bullet or a knife in their pockets.

132.
very
sent?
sion
.notec
Gum
-the ’
herean ir
elimi
terril

128. I am not a hypocrite. I do know that you personally, Sir, might not have agreed with those methods,
There is a change in Britain. But I cannot really sit
here quietly and coolly when something is said about
the “bonds between our two peoples”. For, during
the war, when the Nazis were in the area, it was those
Zionist gangs that blew up the headquarters of the
civil administration of Palestine-I
am talking about the
King David Hotel. If these are the bonds between
friends, then I do not think people need enemies in
this world.

122. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make
a statement in reply. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make that statement.

133.
we a
6,1
of
su
rel
in1

129. Then we are told that Zionism is the noblest
liberation movement in history. Liberation
movement of what? Against whom? What liberation movement is this? I can understand the Palestine Liberation
Movement because we are fighting to liberate ourselves from foreign occupation, from racism. I can
understand the liberation movement in South Africa,
where the people are up in arms against the apart/d
regime. But in the present case, I must ask: liberation
movement of what? Here in New York there is a big
place called the World Zionist Organization. Do they
plan to liberate themselves from American administration or from American traditions or from American moral values? I cannot understand what this
liberation movement is.

123. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organizationl: I hope that my being seated here in the place
that has just been vacated does not have any political
implications for the future.
124. Mr. President, thank you for allowing me to
make a short statement. Before I do so, however,
I wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. I do not really have to say
‘too much in praise of your person. We have known
each other for quite a long time and we have produced
something constructive and positive during the period
in which we have known each other. YOU know my
Country very well, so you are aware of how grateful
we are to our friends.

130. I recall that this so-called liberation
movement
from
the
very
outset
planned
the
achievement
of
.
.
Its aims by, according to Herzl, “spiriting
across”
the Palestinian people or, according to Jabotinsky-the
spiritual mentor of Menachem
Begin-forcing
the

125. Despite what your Government did against my
people and what it did to bring this issue of the quesI2

134.
conf
up tr
anon
make
prox
tory’
selvt
anyc
The]

il

135.
by tl
with
and
into
conk

evacuation of the Palestinians through an iron-fist
policy. And Mr. Weitz, the head of the Colonial Department-mind
you, the term is “Colonial Department”of the Jewish Agency, said in 1940, when the Nazis
were really giving us hell around the world, that the
Zionist programme would be attained only when not
a single village, not a single tribe, not a single Arab
family remained there. What sort of liberation is this at
the price of massacring people and throwing them out
of their homes? This is an insult to the concept of
liberation.

136. I heard the representative of the United
‘~~~,’
speaking about the “cycle of violence”
[Jl”“‘*
1
Perhaps my English-or
her English-is
Poor*
Th”E1k
is no cycle of violence; there is a startillg-Polnt
violence. The term “cycle” makes us lose the stztl’tinhrpoint. There is, of course, violence;
there
is cc’““t’r’that
the
violence; but the starting-point
is the fact
Zionist groups have forced out the PaleStinians~
making
them seek refuge in southern Lebanon.
We hav’
“’
intention whatsoever of converting
Lebanon
Into
”
Palestinian State. Lebanon is for the Lebanese
‘lnci
we are there as guests. We are going
bsck
to ““I
homeland in the Galilee, in Jerusalem,
in He.bron
;mrf
in Nablus. That will continue to be our aim.
1 ;lrr’
afraid that if we cannot find a peaceful
wa3 w’c shaI’
have to fight our way back.

131. What liberation
is this when the occupation
forces are every day throwing school-children out of
their schools, arresting them, shooting at them, killing
them? What liberation movement is this that does not
heed Council resolutions and since at least 1967 has
refused to withdraw from the occupied territories,
thereby enabling the Palestinian people to exercise
their right to self-determination?
This is no liberation
movement. This is a racist movement. One need only
read about that movement to know that this is a fact.

137. Next I would refer to the following
from
thc
statement made by the representative
of the UnitCci
States on 23 February:
which
PI-c“The PLO is . , . a political movement
sents its claims in the name of a collectivity
whose
members live under various political
jurisdictions.”

132. I merely wish to note here and to put on record
very clearly that the statement made by the representative of Tel Aviv is only a prelude to new aggression against southern Lebanon. I should like this to be
.noted very clearly. Troops are being concentrated.
Guns, airplanes and fleets-and
these are not merely
-the “noises of war” referred to by one gentleman
here-are being prepared for another invasion of, not
an incursion into, southern Lebanon, The aim is to
eliminate the Palestinian people and occupy Lebanese
territory.

[233/st meeting, pnecr. 7]

I suppose that the United States representative
fi,KWts
there is a thing called the Palestinian
people.
that the
United Nations has invited the PLO as the ~-epr’c~cntative of the Palestinian people to participate
in its
work, and that the United States is always
chumpioning-even
if it is only on paper-the
cause ~?f that
Palestinian people and asking that it should
be enablccl
to return to its home. What members
of a collectivity
are they talking about? Are they denying
us the right
to be referred to as a people? Are they trying
to of~literate our entity? That is not the way to peace.
I ;ISSLWC
the United States. They are making
it more
difficult
ultimately to reach any peaceful solution.

133. In the special report of the Secretary-Genera1
we are told that:
“The encroachments established in the UNIFIL
area
of deployment by the de &to
forces, which are
supported and supplied by Israel, have not been
removed, and violations of Lebanon’s territorial
integrity have also continued.”
[S/14869, paru. 21

138. Finally, I wish to say to you, Mr. President,
:\nd
the members of the Council that the PLO
and thct
Palestinian people are in Lebanon as guests
in prep;+
ration for a return to their homes in their
homcl;rncl;
that we respect, fight for and will defend-should
tllc
Lebanese ask US to help them-the
sovereignty,
tcrritorial integrity and unity of the Lebanese
people.

134. We understand that the UNIFIL
mission is to
confirm Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territory
up to the internationally
recognized borders of Lebanon. That very statement by the Secretary-General
makes it clear that Israel is there-even
if it is by
proxy. When will Israel withdraw from Lebanese terri.tory? The Lebanese people can take care of themselves. I do not think the Lebanese people want
anyone to patronize them and take good care of them.
They know how to handle their own affairs.

139. The PRESIDENT:
The
Lebanon has asked to be allowed
on him.

representative
to speak
rind

of
I eal~

140. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): It has become
pnrt of
the ritual, now that there are 10 or 12 resoIutions
on
this subject, that I should conclude
every
series
<,f
Council meetings by expressing to the President
ar1~ tic
members Lebanon’s appreciation and gratitude.
-phi%
is therefore no exercise of the right of reply,
i,s 1 ;,,~1
not interested in replying to psycho-pathetic
spuache%
about my Government and.me. May I SimpIy
take nl,tc
of the fact that the Israel] representative
has broatiened the scope of his didactic performances.
I sir1-

135. Mention was made of an arms build-up in Syria
by the Palestinians. But in no way does that compare
with the billions of dollars’ worth of United States arms
and armaments being donated to Israel, converting it
into an arsenal, a base, for further aggression and
converting the area into a site for a forthcoming war.
I3

cerely hope that his latest lecture has amused the
Council at the end of a very long day. I know it has
not distracted the Council nor me, and will not distract
us from the very serious business here.
In this serious vein may I, however, seek the
Council’s generosity to allow me to say that no amount
of rhetoric wi]] mask or undo the historic realities
stated and confirmed in this body. One of them, and
not the least important, is the call upon Israel to withdraw from Lebanon and cease a]] mi]itarY actions
against my country. May I repeat what I have already
said more than once before, here and in the Genera]
Assemb]y: my country is not for hire nor for Sale; it iS
not negotiable and it is not dispensable. There are
people dying to safeguard Lebanon’s independence.
I shall not dishonour them by discussing the subject
here.
142. Let me add one thing. Lebanon’s determination to safeguard and preserve its independence and
sovereignty and to restore its authority has led it to
seek this body’s assistance. We are grateful for the
Council’s action. We think that, with our friends in the
international community,
we need no unwelcome
assistance, and we shall never become accessories to
anybody’s strategy in the destabilization process that
is today tearing the Middle East apart.
141.

143. I turn now to the resolution. Every resolution
that has been adopted here has been a step forward,
and the present resolution will be looked upon as a
very important step indeed towards the full implemen‘tation of resolution 425 (1978) and the fulfilment of the
UNIFIL mandate. In this connection, may I suggest
that we should read the reproduction in the present
resolution of the text of resolution 425 (1978) in toto
as a signal of the determination to restore peace to all
of south Lebanon up to the internationally recognized
boundaries and to restore Lebanese sovereignty over
the whole area, unhindered.
144. I wish to say that every time we read the resolutions we are tempted to say they are not sufficient
-hence the very lengthy process of drafting resoIutions to which you, Mr. President, have contributed
in a very important manner with your patience and
wisdom. And may I add that it is probably very significant and a very good omen that you should have
been presiding here when the present resoiution was
adopted and that your predecessor presided over the
Council in March I978 when resolution 425 (1978) was
adopted. Her Majesty’s Government has thus presided
for the second time during a vote on the same resolution-that
is indeed a unique instance in the annals
of the Council.
145. Every time a resolution is adopted we ask ourselves, as does the representative of Ireland, what the
situation in south Lebanon would be if there were no
UNIFIL. Those who decry UNIFIL are many-there
are many in my country and there are some around this
table. I wish to say that I am very grateful that the
representative of Ireland has explained the vita] impor-

tance of UNIFIL,
the international
in our world.

not only for my country but also for
community and the future of peace

146. May I conclude by saying that, while my thanks
go to a]] the members who found it possible to vote
for the resolution, my thanks go also to those who have
not found it possible to vote for it. Their abstention
has not masked their contribution
to drafting a resolution which, I believe, will be important,
although
it probably does not answer a]] my Government’s
requests and does not include all the amendments that
members of the Council might have wished to see
included. Also, I wish to thank the Governments
of
the United States and of France, in particular, fat
their unique contribution, direct and bilateral-though
different and distinct-in
connection with my country’s plight. Their contribution to peace is more than
words can express, and I hope it will become even
more widely known.
147. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Isrnet
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
148. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It is regrettable that the
representative of Lebanon should insist on ignoring the
realities of the situation in Lebanon, Let me therefore acquaint him and the Council with a much more
accurate description of the developments
and the
situation in Lebanon:
“the origins of the tragic . . . events . . . [in Lehanon] are to be found in . . . Arab rivalries and the
assaults perpetrated by Palestinians
against . . I
Lebanon and . . . its people.
“[There has been] constant Palestinian
tion in the internal affairs of Lebanon
erable encroachment on its sovereignty.

intervenand intol-

“[In 19731, President . . . Franjieh , . . denounced
the illegal occupation of parts of Lebanese territory
by Palestinian elements . . .
“the Palestinians . . . increased the influx of arms
into Lebanon . . . They transformed most-if
not
all-ofthe refugee camps into military bastions . . . .
“common-law
criminals
fleeing from Lebanese
justice found shelter and protection in the camps.
. . . Those camps in fact became centres for the
training of mercenaries who were sent and financed
bY some other Arab States . . . . Palestinian elements
belonging to various . . . organizations
resorted to
kidnapping Lebanese-and
sometimes foreignersholding them prisoners, questioning them, torturing
them and even sometimes killing them, . , , They
committed a]] sorts of crimes in Lebanon . . , , They
smuggled goods. . . . They went so far as to demand
‘protection’ money , . , .

“It is difficult to enumerate all the illegal activities committed by those Palestinian elements . , . .

150. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Lebanon has asked to speak, and I now call on him.

“Whatever
grievances the Lebanese may have had
among themselves or in their relationship with their
Government,
the Palestinians had neither the right
nor the justification
to become a party to any internal
dispute . . + . [There are-]”

I5 I + Mr. TUl?NI (Lebanon): I thought the item on
the agenda was UNIFIL
and how we could enable
UNIFIL
to perform its mandate fully. What happens
between the Lebanese and the Palestinians-or
the
Lebanese and other Arabs-is a matter that the Lebanese are capable of handling by-themselves.

and I might disclose that this was said in 1976
“Fifty thousand dead, 100,000 injured, I million
Lebanese refugees in Syria, the Arab world, Europe
and America: . . . all that could not be justified by
any objective of the Palestinian revolution . . . .

152. The PRESIDENT:
The Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on the agenda.

“it became apparent that the Palestinians
had
designs on becoming a major factor in the battle
for political power in Lebanon. They openly allied
themselves, and continue to do so to this very hour,
with one group of Lebanese against another” .s
NOTES

149. That was said in the General Assembly on
14 October 1976. The speaker was Mr. Emil Ghorra,
the former representative of Lebanon, whom we have
had the privilege of welcoming here today-perhaps
he has already left; Mr. Ghorra, the immediate predecessor of Mr. TuCni. One wonders whether this
statement, so accurately describing the developments
in his country, was not the reason, or one of the reasons, for the fact that in the place opposite me is now
seated not Mr. Ghorra but Mr. Tukni.

para. 139.
s Ibid.,
Thirty-first
paras. 60 to 68.

15

Session,

Plencrry

Mcrtings,

32nd

meeting,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained t’rom bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et Ies agences dipositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Cinebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

g8-60989-April

1989-?#fD
