UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

.

_

1896 thMEETING:
23 MAR@hd%~~‘2y

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1896)

. ... ... ... .. .... .. ... ... .. ... ... ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for consideration of the
serious situation arising from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1896

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
a. ”
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1896th MEETING
Held
President:

Mr. Thomas

in New York

on Tuesday,

S. BOYA (Benin).

1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l896)

of the agenda

‘At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Zahawie
(Iraq) took a place at the side of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I call on the first speaker, the representative
of
Saudi Arabia, in exercise of the right of reply. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and
I give him the floor.

was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption

at 4 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should also like to inform the Council that I have
just received a letter from the representative of Iraq
in which he requests-to be invited, in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to participate without the right to vote, in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. If I hear no dbjection
I propose, in accordance with the usual practice of the
Council and the relevant provisions of the Charter, to
invite the representative of Iraq to participate without
the right to vote in the discussion in the Council.

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
for consideration of the serious situation arising
from recent developments
in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives
of the Libyan Arab Republic
and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12017)
The meeting

1976,

(Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia),
Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic)
and
Mr. PetriC (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

23 March

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
I assured you last night [1894the meeting] that I
would resume my statement today because the time
was short and I did not want to keep you late. On
the other hand, I am afforded the opportunity
of
replying to Mr. Herzog, although several of my
colleagues have already done so. However, I believe
that they were too involved with the incidents--or,
as
we call them, the latest events-in
Jerusalem rather
than with going to the core of the problem. Therefore,
my statement will be a continuation of the statement
I made last night as well as a reply to Mr. Herzog.

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for
consideration of the serious situation arising from
recent developments in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12017)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions which we adopted
at the 1893rd and 1894th meetings, I shall now invite
the representatives of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization to take their places at the Council
table and the representatives of Egypt, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to
take places at the side of the Council Chamber on the
understanding that, as is customary, they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when it is their
turn to speak.

5. Mr. Herzog and, to a lesser extent, almost everyone who has spoken in the debate has been going
around in circles without in the least getting dizzy.
It is true that the item before the Council revolves
around the recent events in Jerusalem, but these recent
events are but a small symptom. And even if the
Zionists today were to make amends, the cause of the
trouble in Jerusalem and the whole of Palestine would
remain with us until justice prevailed. There can be no
peace in that unhappy land until the Zionist leaders
once and for all realize that they cannot survive in
that region unless the rights of the indigenous people

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Herzog (Israel)
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took
places at the Council table and Mr. Abdel Meguid
1

of Palestine are restored. Otherwise,
peace.

there will be no

influential and the affluent. But the bulk of the Jews
of that period remained in Palestine.

6. Without even a vestige of bitterness or rancour,
once again I feel impelled to bring to the attention
of the Council irrefutable facts about the whole problem
and how it may be remedied. Remedied by whom?
I shall tell you later, but primarily by the Zionists,
who for over half a century have caused all the trouble
not only to themselves but also to the people of
Palestine-nay,
to the whole Arab world and now the
Moslem world and even to the Governments of the
countries that helped them. And in good time I shall
let. you know of those Governments that helped them.

11. The Zionists wish to forget that the Oriental
Jews-in other words, our Jews-originated
in westem Iraq, as I told the Council last night, in what was
called Mesopotamia.
And they wish us to forget that
Palestine had been’-inhabited by the Canaanites, who
are mentioned in ‘the Bible. When they came from
western Mesopotamia,
or Iraq, as we call it now, they
moved southward,! to the land of Canaan. These
Canaanites, incidentally,
were Semites. They were
tribes of the area,;‘the brothers and the cousins of
our Jews.

7. Let us therefore dispassionately
examine the
major arguments on which the Zionists have built
their case.

12. In my statement yesterday evening I told the
Council that Jerusalem had been populated by Semitic
people 2,500 years before Joshua captured Jericho and
later Jerusalem. I also time and again have proved that
after the destruction of the Temple by the Romans in
70 A.D. many of the Jews embraced Christianity,
and
later Islam when Byzantium abused Christianity and
used it merely as a means of ruling a people which
finally freed themselves from its yoke. This is the
historical argument.

8. First, there is the historical argument. The Zionists
claim that Judaism flourished in Palestine. This is
true. The Kingdoms of Judah and Israel were established there and lasted for a few centuries before
the Romans destroyed the Temple in 70 A.D. Incidentally,
another temple had been destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar
of Babylon and, by the way, the
Babylonians were Semites. Why? Because the Jews are
Jews. Those Zionists were innocent. I do not know
but I hope that some of these boys, our own Jews,
are here. They will understand if they are our own
Jews.

13. Now we come to the religious argument, which
the Zionists referred to. This argument is predicated
on two premises. The first premise is that God gave
Palestine to the Jews. And the second is that since,
as we mentioned, Judaism flourished in that region,
therefore the Jews had title to the land. This argument
is false because it is a concept based on fundamentalistic beliefs, and even in the day of electronics
neither Jew nor Gentile has found the means to communicate with God to verify whether this took
place or not-whether
God gave title to the Jews as
mentioned.
God does not parcel out land to every
Tom, Dick and Harry. But the Zionist take certain
passages from the Bible for their own purposes, in
order to build up an argument and brainwash the
innocent Jewish people with misconceptions.
Why
do they not cite King David?

9. Nebuchadnezzar,
as the Council knows, took
many of the leaders, but not all the Jews, as is claimed.
How could he remove all the Jews? He took the
leaders and the influential into exile. And who does
not know the very touching story of Esther in the
Old Testament? But Esther was fictional. The story of
Esther was a novelette; it had no basis in fact; it
was written during the days of the Maccabees,
200 years before Christ, who tried to rally the Jews .in
order to try to regain their nationhood.
How do we
know? Because we know all the wives of Ahasuerus,
the King of Babylon,. and almost all his concubinesalmost all because there were perhaps some secret
relations. There is nothing wrong with secret relations
with a few concubines on the side. Esther and Haman
and all these figures in the Bible did not exist in fact.
On what do I base my statement? On the work of
Jewish and Gentile scholars. I am not inventing this.
But, never mind, these things happen. Nowadays there
‘are many fictitious stories told about heroism so as to
rally the people to a cause. So I do not say that there
was something radically wrong about the Maccabees
trying to revive the spirit of nationalism.

14. Incidentally,
yesterday, in a slip of the .tongue,
I said that David was the son of Solomon. It was the
other way around. Solomon was the son of David.
Also, I should have said York instead of Norfolk as
having been at one time the capital of William the
Conqueror, who came from Normandy and slew King
Harold in 1066. My memory falters a little sometimes.
It was York, not Norfolk, which was the seat of the rule
of William
the Conqueror.
So I apologize to our
British coileague for that slip. We all make mistakes,
and I am the first to stand corrected.

10. As I said, the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel
were established there and lasted a few centuries
until the Romans destroyed the Temple in 70 A.D.,
which brought about the dispersal of many Jews. But
the farmers, the small shopkeepers, whether they were
Jews or Gentiles, remained there. Who left? The

15. What did David say? “The earth is the Lord’s,
and the fulness thereof ‘. He did not say ‘that there
was an exception-Palestine.
16. The Zionists want us to think that they have a
monopoly on God, and every country is fighting that
2

monopoly.
All right, those were the tribal days
when religions were expressed in allegories,
in
parables, in figures of speech, in metaphors, with
literary flourish. But do these Zionists sitting here
believe that God actually gave them Palestine and that
they have a monopoly on God? Good Lord.

the Moslems in Indonesia or in Pakistan. The fact
that they have a Semitic religion does not make them
Semites. Nor do I believe that the representatives of
France and the United Kingdom would claim to be
Semites-if
they are Christians, that is; I do not think
they are Jews. But those Zionists who were not born
in Palestine-in
fact have never seen Palestine-claim
that they are Semites. That is fiction; it is not true.
They are fooling themselves.

17. Here in the United States there is the Sherman
anti-trust law. Why do you not do something about
that? They cannot monopolize
the deity. And after
all, the concept of God varies. The fundamentalists
gave Him human qualities. The.liberals,
many of
whom are staunch believers, think that it is a moral
order, ethics, something that cannot be defined. And,
after all, there are many people who have different
concepts of the Creator of the universe, or the forces
of nature. Those Zionists have many learned men
-physicists,
engineers and scientists-and
they come
and sell their poor people the idea that God gave them
Palestine, as if He gave it to them on a platter. This
is fiction.

21. I derive a lot of my research from Jewish scholars
who rise above petty politics. The Jews are not one
people. I know French Jews who are as French as
any Frenchman who is not a Jew. I know American
Jews-not Zionists, because I have nothing to do with
Zionists-who
are as American as apple pie.
22. The Zionists try to brainwash these Jews. They
say to them, “You are Jews and you should come to
Israel and become Israelis”.
They do not want to
do that. Leave them alone. Religion is something
between a person and his conscience. Leave them
alone. They are happy. They have prospered everywhere they have gone-not
because the Jews are a
favoured people of God or the chosen people, as they
are called, but because they are a minority. Like all
minorities, they have faced a challenge and they have
achieved success. Their parents tell them, “Look, you
belong to a small minority in the world. Educate
yourselves. We will pay if we can. Be somebody.”
That is laudable. Indeed, minorities sometimes produce
great people-not
because God favours them over
others, but because they make the effort.

18. Finally, there is the ethnic argument, which the
Zionists have resorted to time and again. This argument
is based on the allegation that the Jews all over the
world constitute one people. I have told them time and
again a religion need not and quite often does not
determine a people. It is customs, traditions, what is
called a way of life and, even more, common interests
that determine a people. Here in the host country there
is an American people, but it has diverse origins:
Dutch., English, Irish and, since Theodore Roosevelt,
Puerto Ricans-and
at one time Cubans, but they got
themselves freed. It is diversified. And the Zionists
want to tell us that there is only one Jewish people,
and out of all Jews they are the people whose forbears never set eyes on Palestine because they were
descended from the Khazars, who came from the
northern tier of Asia and skirted the Caspian and came
and settled in what is today southern Russia, and in
the eight century A.D. embraced Judaism. They had
been pagans. I wish they had remained pagans. I wish
I were a pagan with them, too. Then there would
not have been any problem.

23. It really makes one wonder when the Zionists
say that the-Arabs are anti-Semites. They forget that
the Arabs are the Semites of the region. And none
other than these Khazars call us anti-Semites. Anyone
who opposes the Zionist movement is anti-Semitic. As
I have said time and again, anti-Semitism
flourished in
Europe. The Jews there had different habits, different
ways. Religion permeated the lives of all the people.
They were regarded as strangers and were discriminated against-wrongly
discriminated
against. They
were disabled; they could not do anything. That is why
they became such good financiers. They had to lend
money, and they became bankers. There is nothing
wrong with that. And then, when they were allowed
to learn professions, they distinguished
themselves
in medicine, in science. They are sometimes even
more successful because they belong to a minority.

19. Similarly,
Saint Augustine was instrumental
in
converting the British to-Christianity.
What is Christianity? It is a Semitic religion. Does that make
Semites of the British who are Christian? No. Those
Khazars are no more Semites than I am Chinese or
Latin American. There is no one pure people; there
are religions and nationalities. We have had two world
wars, with Christian fighting Christian. And I would
recall that in the days when they flourished, Judah
and Israel fought each other. They were our Jews,
not the Khazar Jews, who had nothing to do with
Semitism.

24. But the Zionists want to inculcate every Jew
everywhere with the idea that be is superior, that he
belongs to the chosen people. There is nothing wrong
with exclusivity in theory, but it is wrong in practice.
It leads to chauvinism, to self-righteousness, to a sense
of superiority.
We are all made of the same cloth.
But the Zionists use these false arguments in their
effort to indoctrinate Jews all over the world. Even
the Communists owe a lot to the Jews. And now the
Zionists say that communism is against the Jews, that

20. Yes, Judaism is a Semitic religion. So is Islam a
Semitic religion. So is Christianity a Semitic religion.
But that does not make Semites of our Moslem
brothers in Africa who are not of Arab origin, nor of
3

the Soviet Union is against the Jews. Nothing pleases
them. They want their own way all the time. I am
sorry; you cannot have your own way all the time.

31. Therefore, how is it that these Zionists still
are making so much hubbub in the world? Very simple:
as I said, minorities are usually aggressive, and the
Zionists have been a minority for a long, long time.
So they knew where they could use power for their
own benefit: nowadays, in the mass media-and
I am
not going to say in what countries; you know the
countries where they control the mass media, or a good
part of the mass media.

25. This argument about the hostility of the entire
world towards the Jews is false. Many Jews who are
not so conscious of their religion as to wish to set
themselves apart are liked; they are human beings,
just as we all are. They are not superior.
26. We said that Zionism can be equated with
racialism, and that is true. There is no such thing as
a pure race. All this is fiction. It is true that there
are different colours, but even the colours are mixed
up: the whites, the blacks and the yellows. But the
Zionists say, “We are exclusive; we are above the
others”. That is passe; it is finished. Religion can no
longer be used as a motivation for political ends. And,
as I said yesterday, even ideologies can no longer be
used for political ends. Unfortunately,
nationalism is
still being used for political and economic ends: beat
the drums, hoist the flags, and people march off to
war like sheep being taken to the slaughterhouse.

32. Then they s$bmersed themselves in banking,
and they began to pay for the campaigns of politicians:
There is a count$where
75 senators out of 100 toe
the line and say vonism is necessary. Necessary for
what? To victimize’the
indigenous people of Palestine?
And what business, as I have asked time and again,
did Balfour’s England and Truman’s America have to
interfere in our part of the world, which is 3,000 miles
away from England and 6,000 or 7,000 miles away
from the United States? You had your Monroe
Doctrine, Governor Scranton. What made you get
entangled? Oh, I know: Teddy Roosevelt. I used to tell
Mrs. Roosevelt, his niece: “Your uncle got us into
trouble”. Why? He took Cuba and the Philippines and
he started to throw his chest out. Why? Because you
became wealthy. But you can become wealthy and
still be aristocrats in spirit. And many of you are.

27. The Zionists are trying to use a noble religion,
Judaism, in order to brainwash, to inculcate, to
indoctrinate
every Jew in the world with the idea
that he should feel himself apart. He may be in the
happy position of being a Mendelssohn or an Offenbath, but all Jews should not be made to feel superior.
At one time they tried to influence Einstein in
Princeton. I knew him when he was in Princeton.
I am not going to quote what he said when I was in
Princeton-not
as a student, by the way; I lectured
there for one year. I know what went on.

33. What have we Arabs done? Did we come across
the Atlantic and dictate to you or to the British about
partitioning Palestine? I was present at Lake Success.
What have we done to you that you should support
the Zionists? We do not want you to be against the
Jews; we would like to be with the Jews ourselves if
they behaved as a people really imbued with religious
sentiments that would like to live in Palestine. But for
them to have a flag and to lord it over us? What for?
To preserve the balance of power because the Russians
might take the Middle East? Let them come; they will
be in trouble if they do come, I can assure them of
that. But they are very sagacious, those Russians,
and were even before they had communism.
Do you
know what they did? They made you fight a war in
Korea and in Viet-Nam,
and they looked on. They
watched the whole thing-not
because they are communists, but because they still predicate their policies
on the old national interests of States.

28. All this is finished. For the sake of the Jews, and
for your own sakes, stop it. You cannot always depend
on those Powers that are helping you. Indeed, some of
them do not really wield any world power.
29. How fortunate are the British that they ceded
power to the Americans and to the Russians. No
wonder our Chinese colleagues call the Russians and
the Americans super-Powers. The British and the
French and the Italians are still Powers to contend
with. But the British are fortunate to have extricated
themselves from the empire, because the empire
benefited only a small circle of people, and the blood
of the British was shed to kill and get killed for the
benefit of relatively few British.

34. We should have a new approach in the world,
lest the human species become extinct. What business
have you to interfere in one another’s spheres of
influence? You consider us in the Middle East-I
am
addressing our American friends-as
a sphere of
influence: economic, we, hope, not politicalunless
your CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] is doing something covertly which we do not know about. I hope
not. I will take issue with my good friend Mr. Bush
if it is.

30. And you Americans-the
host country-it
is only
200 years since you fought a war with the British;
you are great
to be sending a delegation to get the
_
Magna Carta. You say, “Well, you see, we forgot
all about that war of liberation.”
Get the Magna Carta,
but do not get stuck on that Magna Carta. The Magna
Carta is only a few centuries old. We had prophets in
our area that were greater than the Magna Carta, but
I am not going to say that we are greater than you-no,
because ethics, morality and religion should teach
people modesty, and not make one supercilious.

35. Why interfere? Why give billions to people who
are irking us, the Arab and Moslem countries from
Morocco to the Gulf to the confines of China? What
4

have we done to you? “Ah, those poor Jews suffered
at the hands of Hitler.”
Hitler was a European.
Nobody condones what Hitler did. But why should we
pay the price? And when will you stop?
36. Now, of course, I do not expect any American in
this year-it
is an election year+0
do anything that
will irk the Zionists, because the mass media are
with them, they handle the campa&n money, and there
are 40 charitable Zionist organizati$ons.that ask some of
the Congressmen to make speeches, and they give
them cash. How do I know? Some of the people who
got the cash told me. I am not inventing this. Mammon,
Mammon, for Heaven’s sake. And it is in the Bible:
“No man can serve two masters: I.. Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon.”
37. For some reason, I have’ always liked the
Jews--our
Jews-because
they are sentimental;
they are emotional. But those Zionists are calculating
Eastern European Jews. I am not saying this in a
nefarious sense. They are disciplined.
And, as
Mr. Herzog mentioned, we in the Arab world fight
one another; of course we do. The Arabs fight one
another, just as the Europeans sometimes tight one
another. There is nothing strange about fighting one
another. It is wrong and we should not do it, but we
are not perfect. This does not mean we should accede
to what the Zionists want.
38. So those Zionists have convinced themselves
that they have a case, and the Europeans and the
Americans, and more so the Western Powers, believe
that the Zionists have a case and a grievance because
at one time they had been persecuted. But by dint of
what logic should we be made to pay for the excesses
of a Hitler or of those who persecuted the Jews before
Hitler in the Middle Ages? By dint of what logic?
39. Zionism is a colonial movement of European
origin and has nothing Semitic about it. And I will
argue this point with any of you. It is a colonial
movement. At a time when we have removed the yoke
of colonialism
in Africa and in Asia, here comes a
new form of colonialism.
They are misguided; I feel
sorry for them. The Zionists have repeated this to the
Jews and to themselves. They remind me-in
order
to relieve the tension-of
Johah in a folklore story of
our region. Johah was a jokester; he was always
happy. One day he saw people running in one direction. He did not know why they were running; there
were two or three, chasing one another maybe-I
do
not know why. So somebody asked: “Why are those
people running?”
And he said: “Don’t you know?
There is a wedding at the end of the street, and there
is an open banquet for all who come.‘* So people ran;
and then they were telling each other: “There is a
banquet.” Finally, Johah said: “Good Lord, maybe
there is a banquet.” And he began to run in the same
, :
direction.

40. The Zionists are like Johah, but it is not ludicrous;
it is a tragedy. Their leaders began to inculcate the
Jews everywhere with the idea: you are the chosen
people of God; God gave you Palestine; we are an
exclusive race. They have repeated it so much that
finally they end up believing it, like Johah who believed
that there was a wedding at the end of the street even
though he had invented the whole thing. Now,
please-I
address a few words to the Zionists across
the table-knock
some sense into your heads before
you continue to indoctrinate
your innocent coreligionists whith something that may get them into
trouble.
41. This morning [1895th meeting] Mr. Herzog dismissed all the arguments of my colleagues from the
Arab world. How did he put it? This is vicious
diatribe, this is rhetoric, he said. Those who live in
glass houses-1 am paraphrasing-should
not throw
stones at others. You cannot solve problems by
resorting to such hackneyed similes and metaphors.
42. I can go on and on and tell you more about this
movement of which I have been seized, as 1 have said,
since 1922. But you are intelligent and the Zionists
are intelligent,
although, as I have said, they have
indoctrinated
themselves. It is high time that they
faced the facts and did not go by those refutable
arguments.
43. And what does the press here say once in a
while? “Oh, they have nuclear weapons now.”
Nuclear weapons, so what? And some of those countries that belong to the West say: “Should there be
another embargo, we will show those Arabs.” And, my
dear Governor Scranton, do you know how some of
them call us here? “Ayrabs”,
,not Arabs. We are
“Ayrabs”.
They do not know how to pronounce our
name. Where were you Americans,
British and
Europeans when we had three empires and we got
drunk with power and fell-and
rightly so. You were
barbarians. Now you call us “Ayrabs”.
We want
your prosperity. If you are prosperous, we will be
prosperous. We do not want to hurt anybody. “May
the material blessing we have not be turned into a
curse”, is what we pray.
44. But let me tell you, the Arabs have throughout
history been through many vissicitudes for 6,000 years,
and in Arabia many of us still live in tents. Come and
bum our oil. We will bum it if you do not. We will
go back to the tents and live happily there without
your gadgets and electronics. Use your electronics to
communicate,
if you can, with God Almighty to verify
the misconceptions
of those Zionists, not to lord it
over us.
45. I see that you, my friend from Panama, are
pleased. You will get the Canal free; it will be intemational waters soon. And Jerusalem and Palestine will
also become a land-1
hope in my lifetime, before
I make my exit from this world-for
Jew and

Gentile, as well as for those who do not believe.
Perchance if they go there and hear how people
revere the land, whether Jew or Gentile, they will be
touched by the devoutness and piety of the people
but not by the use of Judaism as a motivation
for
political and economic ends.
46. And now, for the last time this afternoon
-because
others have to speak-I
will say: Live
there, if you want to do so in peace. The core of
the question is not Egypt or Jordan or Syria, but the
Palestinian people. They will fight until doomsday to
regain their land, and any Arab or Moslem nation
which does not help them will be considered a traitor
by the people. Do the Zionists not have a lesson?
See what has happened? Who would have thought
that two world wars would liberate the African and
Asian peoples from foreign yoke?
47. One’ last word before it is too late. Those Americans may get tired of you; the people will get tired.
They will get tired of the Arabs too, but we can afford
it-120 million-you
cannot afford it. We like you as
Jews and we warn you as Zionists to beware lest the
invisible Creator of the world chastise you.
48. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
First of all, may ,I say to you, Mr. President, that
I am very grateful personally for your kind comments
at the opening of this hearing and likewise for your
extraordinarily
calm and measured leadership
in
this question, which, of all those facing us, is among
the most passionate.
49. Likewise, I am equally grateful to all representatives who have been kind enough to give me the kind
of welcome that is very warming.to the heart. I hope
that I can live up to some of the very kind things that
have been said.
50. On purpose I have been here personally for
each and every representative who has spoken and
I plan to be here, if I possibly can, for all the other
speakers on this very difficult problem-with
one
exception. To him I have already personally apologized
and should like to do so publicly. Yesterday,, in tli?.
middle of the comments of the representative
of
Egypt, I had to get up, and leave because I was
scheduled to be at a small luncheon for the Ambassador from Japan, whom.we are very sorry to have
leave the Council. But I did read what he had to say,
and I was here for his reply this morning.
51. Now I too would like to indulge, for just a couple
of minutes, in some personal comments from notes,
very well aware that it’ is impossible for a barbarian
to equal the gentleman from Saudi Arabia, with his
inimitable
wit and remarkable eloquence and, most
important
of all and truly and seriously, his very
extraordinary knowledge of history. But nevertheless
I shall try, because I want to make it meaningful
and personal. Just a few comments about what has
happened here so far in these deliberations.

52. First of all, I still am quite concerned, and say
so openly, at the decision that was taken concerning
procedure, not-and
I want this thoroughly understood-because
the United States Government or, as
far as I can make out, any other Government
here,
did not want the Palestine Liberation
Organization
to be heard. Quite the contrary; we did, and we
welcome the hearing: But I am concerned personally
because I think that$nless a major international body
of deliberation abid$s by rules it writes for itself we
can in- the future regret it, and I can see on the horizon
the number of times that could be forthcoming when
forgetting rules and*simply
doing what the majority
wants-whatever
the majority may be-could
later
come back to haunt that majority. I think it is very
important for us to have rules of procedure and to
abide by them.
.:
.
53. Secondly, with regard to the event which is
purported to have initiated the recent difficulties in
the West Bank and Jerusalem, there were many
references made by other speakers about media
reports, some of them based on hear-say, on what
other persons had said. This is natural and understandable, but it does lead us away from what is
extremely important, and that is the facts-important
in any kind of deliberation but particularly in a deliberation which has to do with such a very emotional
part of the world, more so, 1 suspect, than anywhere
in the world, because of its long and enduring
varied cultures, the remarkable differences and extraordinary religions, and the other emotions that are
there in such depth.
54. Events have taken place over the last several
years which have deeply hurt us all: terrorist raids
and equally senseless retaliations and reprisals. These
and other ‘events have meant human killing, and a
good deal of it, and last but by no means least, very
intense and very wide-spread human suffering. It se-ems
to me that it is our responsibility
in this international
body not to add fuel to those fires as they individually
or collectively arise, but to do everything we can to
lessen tensions, to deal with facts, and to help in
every way possible to bring peace there and everywhere else in the world.
55. As several of you have said, and said correctly,
in my judgement, the big issue here is not each of the
events to which I have referred, as deplorable as they
may be. The big issue is the question of the occupied
terrotories and the people that are there vis-a-vis
IsraeI’s right to be and to be secure-to
which, as
everyone knows, we Americans are strongly and
deeply dedicated.
56. Yesterday, when I left this room, I went to that
small luncheon and sat next to a very lovely woman,
and we were discussing this very major issue, and
she said to me, rather yearningly, “Can it ever be
resolved?” That is clearly the major question here,
and the one to which we should be devoting all our

efforts. My answer to her was something quite simple
and simple to say, it is very difficult to do.
57. And one last personal comment to you all. I
really would greatly appreciate it, over the next few
weeks and months that I am here, if any one of you
and all of you would be kind enough to talk with
me in the corridors or at the social functions or anywhere else so that I can get as deep and penetrating
an understanding as possible of what each of you and
your Governments
are thinking ‘and wanting about
this, the most critical problem, I think, that besets
this world.
‘/ 1
58. And now for some written comments.
59. At the outset it is especially noteworthy, I think,
that Israel has joined in our deliberations,
and my
Government warmly welcomes Israel’s decision to do
so. For the events that have brought us together today
are a corollary and a consequence of the tragic
dispute that has occupied the Council with such
regularity over the years. As’ such, they raise two
categories of issues that we must have in mind if we
are to deal with them constructively.
60. First is the question of bringing to an early end
the situation that gives rise to these disturbances and to
other forms of violence in the Middle East. So long as
the situation persists, we can expect continuing tension
and occasional violence, however much we might and
must regret it. It is not necessary for me to belabour
this point; surely it is evident to all of us.
61. The occupation of territories in the 1967 war
has always been seen by the world community to be
an abnormal state of affairs that wouid be brought to
an end as part of a peace settlement. In resolution 242
(1967), adopted shortly after the end of the 1967 war
that led to the occupation, the Council established the
basic bargain that would constitute
a settlement.
This bargain was withdrawal of Israeli forces in return
for termination of all claims or states of belligerency
and respect for and acknowledgement
of the sovereignty, the territorial integrity and the political independence of all States in the area and their right to
live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries
free from threats or acts of force.
62. My Government has committed itself to do ail
it can to bring about this settlement-in
the words of
resolution 338 (1973), to implement
resolution 242
(1967) in all its parts and to further negotiations
between the parties concerned under appropriate
auspices aimed at establishing a just and durable peace
in the Middle East, which is what we are here for. We
are engaged at this moment in an effort to regain
momentum, as all members of the Council know, in the
negotiating process that, has brought some unusual
progress and that must bring more.
63. The second focus,$f our consideration must be
the conduct of the occupation itself. Together with the

request for this meeting, the letter of complaint circulated by the representatives
of the Libyan Arab
Republic and of Pakistan [S/12017] identifies three
issues: the administration
of the Holy Places, the situation in Jerusalem, and Israeli actions in regard to the
civilian population of the occupied territories, including
the Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
64. The position of the United States on these issues
is clear and of long standing. I propose to review it
today once more to point out that there are proper
principles and procedures under international
law
and practice which when applied and maintained will
contribute to civil order and, over the longer run, will
facilitate a just and lasting peace.
65. First, there is the matter of the Holy Places and
practice of religion in the occupied areas. The deep
religious attachment of Moslems, Jews and Christians
to the Holy Places of Jerusalem has added a uniquely
volatile element to the tensions that inhere in an
occupation situation. The area known to Moslems as
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and to Jews as the Temple Mount
is of particular sensitivity. Israel’s punctilious administration of the Holy Places in Jerusalem has, in our
judgement,
greatly minimized
the tensions. To my
Government
the standard to be followed in administering the Holy Places is contained in article 27 of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.’ All parties to the
Arab-Israel conflict are signatories of the Convention. Article 27. prescribes, inter ah:
“Protected
persons are entitled, in all circumstances, to respect’for their persons, their honour,
their family rights, their religious convictions and
practices, and their manners and customs.”
With regard to the immediate problem before us-a
ruling by a lower Israeli court which would have the
effect of altering the status of Al-Haram-it
is our view
that Israel’s responsibilities under article 27 to preserve
religious practices as they were at the time the occupation began cannot be changed by the ruling of an Israeli
court. We are deeply gratified that the Supreme Court
of Israel has upheld the Israeli Government’s position.
-66. The status of the Holy Places is, of course, only
one facet, however important-and
‘it is very important-of
the problem of the status of Jerusalem
itself. The United States position on the status of
Jerusalem has been stated here, on numerous occasions
since the Arab portion of that city was occupied by
Israel in 1967. Ambassador Yost said in 1969:
“The part of Jerusalem- that came under the
control of Israel in the June 1967 war, like other
areas occupied by Israel, is occupied territory and
hence subject to the provisions of international
law
governing the rights and obligations of an occupying
Power.” [1483rd meeting, para. 97.1

Ambassador

Goldberg

70.

DACTU
(Romania)
(interpretation
from
Before taking up the problem now under
consideration by the Council, I too should like to carry
out a pleasant duty and extend a friendly greeting to
the new Ambassador of the United States, Mr. William
Scranton. I should like to associate myself with you,
Mr. President, and with my colleagues who have
spoken before me in wishing Mr. Scranton a very
cordial welcome on behalf of the Romanian delegation,
as well as our.wishes for success. I should like to tell
him that it will always be a pleasure for us to develop
the most earnest and constructive co-operation, both
personally and officially, in our joint activities in the
active, patient and tenacious search for positive solutions to the important problems which come before the
Council, as he very rightly said a few minutes ago,
so as to lessen tensions and to help to bring peace
everywhere.

said in 1968 to the Council:

Mr.

French):

“The United States does not accept or recognize
unilateral actions by any States in the area as altering
the status of Jerusalem.” [142&h meeting, para. 45.1
67. I emphasize, as did Mr. Goldberg, that as far as
the United
States is concerned,
such unilateral
measures, including expropriation
of land or other
administrative
action taken by the Government
of
Israel, cannot be considered other than interim and
provisional and cannot affect the present international
status nor prejudge the final and permanent status of
Jerusalem. The United States position could not be
clearer. Since 1967 we have restated here, in other.
forums and to the Government of Israel that the future
of Jerusalem will be determined only through the
instruments
and processes of negotiation, agreement
and accommodation.
Unilateral
attempts to predetermine that future have no standing.

71. Having studied the letter of 19 March to the
Council President from the representatives
of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan, and after having
listened to their statements as well as to those made
by the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
and the representative
of Israel, the
Romanian delegation would like to make the following
statement.

68. Next I turn to the question of Israeli settlements
in the occupied territories.
Again, my Government
believes that international
law sets the appropriate
standards. An occupier must maintain the occupied
areas as intact and unaltered as possible, without
interfering with the customary life of the area, and any
changes must be necessitated by the immediate needs
of the occupation and be consistent with international
law. The fourth Geneva Convention1 speaks directly
to the issue of population transfer in article 49: The
occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of
its own civilian population into the territory it occupies.
Clearly, then, substantial resettlement of the Israeli
civilian population in occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem, is illegal under the Convention and
cannot be considered to have prejudged the outcome
of future negotiations
between the parties on the
location of the borders of States of the Middle East.
Indeed, the presence of these settlements is seen by
my Government as an obstacle to the success of the
negotiations for a just and final peace between Israel
and its neighbours. The real issues of peace and
stability in the Middle East are very difficult indeed,
and unilateral acts, such as civilian population transfers, have been taken which serve to inflame emotions
on both sides.

72. The events in Jerusalem and in other towns of
the West Bank are the outcome of the occupation
of Arab territories by Israel in 1967. The situation
created in the Arab territories occupied by Israel is
not the internal affair of Israel, but a:question which
concerns the international
community
as a whole,
since these are territories occupied as a result of an
international
armed conflict.
In conformity
with
international
law, these territories are not part of the
State of Israel. That is why the Romanian delegation
believes that the present debate in the Security Council is fully warranted. The Organization has repeatedly
affirmed the principle that the territory of a State cannot
be subjected to military occupation resulting from the
use of force, nor can it be the object of acquisition
by another State as a consequence of recourse to the
threat or use of force.

69. I welcome the opportunity
this meeting of the
Council has provided to review the issues involved in
the administration
of the Holy Places, the status of
Jerusalem and, in addition, the question of Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories. Now, as for
prospective action by the Council, my Government
will apply three tests. First, do the facts and judgements on which the draft resolution is based correspond
to the actual situation? Secondly, will the Council’s
action in ‘practice advance the proper administration
of the areas involved? Thirdly, and most important
of all, will the Council’s action help or hinder the
peaceful settlement process, the framework for which
was established by resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973)?

73. Romania considers that the occupation of foreign
territories is in complete contravention
of the principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations
and the provisions of other basic documents of the
world Organization.
Moreover, and we have proof of
this, the occupation of foreign territories engenders
states of tension, entails the danger of new conflicts
and constitutes a permanent source of the violation
of human rights. It is for these reasons that Romania
has always emphasized the need to evacuate occupied
Arab territories and to find a just solution to the
problem of the Palestinian people by enabling it to make
its own decisions, to establish an independent State
and to enjoy all the rights which flow from that
condition.
8

74. The events which have recently taken place in
Jerusalem and in other parts of the occupied Arab
territories show that with the passage of time the situation becomes more complicated
and more serious.
The question now being considered by the Council
is not new. If previous resolutions of the Council on
the subject had been implemented,
if the Israeli
authorities
had respected
the recommendations
adopted unanimously
by the United Nations, we
should not have had to meet once again today.

78. The Romanian delegation believes that the Coun- -.
cil should, after the present debate, request the Israeli
authorities to put an end to demographic and other
changes in the occupied territories and to cease acts
of repression and all other measures of persecution
aginst the Palestinian population.
79. In conclusion, I should like to say that Romania
supports the proposals aimed at creating and maintaining the proper conditions to allow for. the continuation of diplomatic efforts to establish a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. One of the essential
goals of these efforts is in fact that of enabling the
Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate national
rights so that it too may live a free and independent
life.

75. Romania disapproves of the actions and the
measures aimed at changing the status of the occupied
territories,
since it believes that neither Israel nor
anybody else has the right to change by force the situation in those territories. It is necessary for the Israeli
authorities to respect the resolutions of the United
Nations which state that it is inadmissible to change the
demographic characteristics of the city of Jerusalem.
My country is strongly in favour of the observance
and implementation
of resolutions concerning the
respect of human rights in the occupied Arab tenitories. At the same time, we are aware that a total
solution to the situation we are now debating can be
attained only after a political settlement of all the
problems facing this region is reached, namely, the
withdrawal by Israel from territories occupied in 1967
and the solution of the problem of the Palestinian
people. In that connexion, I should like to recall the
position of my country, which considers that in order
to arrive at a political settlement of the conflict in the
Middle East it is necessary for Israel to withdraw its
troops from all the territories occupied during the 1967
war, to recognize the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination,
including the right to establish its
own independent
State, and to achieve a just and
durable peace which will ensure the existence, the territorial integrity and the right to free and independent
development for all the States of the region, including
the Palestinian State to be created and the State of
Israel.

80. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The representative of Yugoslavia has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
81. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): In exercising my right
of reply, I should like simply to state the following.
It is very reassuring that the United Nations, the
overwhelming majority of its Members and the international community as a whole have so far not permitted
Israel to take refuge in labeling as anti-Semitic
the
just condemnation
of its aggression, occupation,
annexation and State terrorism and the, insistent and
ever-growing demand for its withdrawal from occupied
Arab territories and for the implementation
of the
inalienable Palestinianrights.
There is no way in which
the defence of the’charter
and the condemnation
of
its wholesale violation and of the non-implementation
of all relevant United Nations resolutions can be simply
deflected by the transparent device of labeling them
anti-Semitic.
82. There is no need for the representatives of Yugoslavia to answer accusations about anti-Semitism.
The Yugoslav people, who during their national war
of liberation suffered the terrible loss of 1,700,OOO dead,
were together with the Jewish people, many of whom
fought side by side with the other Yugoslavs.

76. We consider that the Palestinian people is an
essential party to the Middle East conflict and that
without the participation
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization it will not be possible to find a lasting
solution. That is why we welcome the presence of its
representative in this Council debate. To disregard the
interests and the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people would only perpetuate and worsen the
conflict, with unforeseeable consequences for the
peace and security of the region and of the whole world.

83. I was not surprised to note the reuetition of
attacks on my country taken from certain mass media
here which have been directed against non-aligned
Yugoslavia and some other non-aligned
countries,
particularly in recent months. A very objective television broadcast shown recently in New York about
Andrija ArtukoviC-a
leading Nazi quisling condemned
as a war criminal, who as a minister of police of the
fascist Ustachi organizations was directly responsible
for the murder of tens of thousands of Jews and
hundreds of thousands of other Yugoslavs during the
Nazi occupation of Yugoslavia in the Second World
War and who lives undisturbed on the Pacific Coastwas not even noted.

77; Romania is convinced of the need to intensify
even more the efforts made within the context of the
United Nations and substantially to increase the contribution of the Organization
and of the Security
Council to the solution of the conflict in the Middle
East. As we affirmed in the debate which took place
in this chamber in January of this year, the Secretary-.
General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, should be encouraged to
renew his efforts towards peace in the Middle East
[1879th meeting].
9

84. It is also unfortunate that nothing is ever said
about the virtual collusion in the activities of the same
quisling fascist emigre circles and the Jewish Defence
League against my country and some others. This
activity took the form of a recent bombing of the
building of the Yugoslav Mission to the United Nations
and other forms of harassment of the Yugoslav representatives here. A glaring example of such harassment
is also provided by the leaflet sent to my Mission by
the Jewish Defence League, in which it said, inter

secure and peaceful existence of every country and
people in the region, including that of Israel.
88. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union, who
has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
89. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)(interprejation
from Russian): I am glad that
Ambassador Herzog has appeared here, although,
possibly, he was preparing a new anti-Soviet tirade. He
has had recourse to what is a customary tactic for
Israeli representatives.
He spoke about anything
except the question which is on the agenda. Yesterday [1894th meeting] he recalled Alice in Wonderland
in an attempt to draw us into a discussion of problems
behind the looking-glass, although they can hardly be
said to be relevant. Today [1895th meeting] he had
recourse to attempts to intervene in the internal affairs
of other countries and insulted all those countries
which criticized the position of Israel. Incidentally,
by way of a factual amendment, I should like to point
out that there was one delegation-the
Chinese delegation-to
which the Israeli delegation did not reply.
3ut that is just by way of a piece of factual information.

alia ,

“We applaud all who harass your representatives,
diplomats, women and children. We applaud all
who smash your windows, deface your buildings,
damage your property and interfere in your normal
routines.”
The leaflet-as at least some of you know-ends with
the following address: “Jewish Defence League
International Office, Jerusalem, Israel”. I have it here.,
85. We will not be lectured to about democracy and
human rights by those who for so many years, to the
revulsion of the whole civilized world-and
by “civilized” we mean the really civilized world, the one that
respects the Charter of the United Nations and was
and is against any aggression-have
been perpetrating
aggressions, illegal occupation, acts of State terrorism
and wholesale denial of fundamental national and
human rights.
86. As we have already stated in the Council, there
is no democratic aggression, there is no democratic
suppression of the people’s rights through illegal
occupation, there are no democratic bombs that rain
down from State planes on civilians, children- and
women. An aggression, an occupation, a terrorist act
does not become more acceptable just because somebody claims that it was committed by a so-called
democratic country, and least of allv,when the perpetrator says this. Yugoslavia has always condemned
any aggression, any oppression of peoples in whatever
disguise it came and by whatever argument it was
justified. In a word, and to conclude, nothing, no
polemical tricks, no attempts to lead us astray, no
taking refuge in irrelevant and extraneous matter can
or should deflect the Council, the United Nations
and the world community from insisting on a just
etasting
solution for the Middle East crisis, whose
persistence brought ua four tragic wars and which, if
not effectively dealt with. now, will lead us into the
fifth, with possible catastrophic consequences.

90. Now, with regard to the Soviet Union, the representative of Israel expressed the hope that the Soviet
Union would remain outside the situation in the Middle
East. Well, that is certainly not an original or novel
thought. I could say that the strategic device of Israel
is to isolate the Arab countries, victims of Israeli
aggression, from their friends, the Soviet Union and
other socialist countries, in an attempt to impose
humiliating Israeli conditions on the victims of Israeli
‘aggression.
91. If there are people who are inclined to heed the
advice of Israel about whom they should choose as
friends, that is their business. The Soviet Union
imposes friends on no one, but the fact remains that
the Soviet Union’s just and principled position with
regard to the Middle East settlement is the major
obstacle to the annexationist plans of Israel, and it is
precisely for this reason that the Israeli representative
is so furious in his attempts to slander the Soviet
Union
92. My last point is that the. substance of the statement of Ambassador Herzog amounted to an attempt to
demonstrate that he alone is right and all the others
are wrong. He did not notice how in this way he found
himself in the position of a lieutenant in the anecdote
who was marching along with his regiment and thought
that he was the only one was marching in step and
that the rest of the regiment was out of step. I suspected that in Israel there were ignorant lieutenants,
but, General Herzog, I did not know that in Israel
there were illiterate generals; I discovered that today.

87. We are not a debating society here to score
points and excel in debating skills. We are here to
search for and find peace in the Middle East. There
are two basic requirements for that-the
immediate
withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967 and the implementation
of
the inalienable national rights’of the Palestinian people.
Israel must cease to obstruct the achievement of the
two above essential requirements for the only solution
of the Middle East crisis that would guarantee the

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.
Nofe

’ United

Nations,

Treaty

Skies,

vol. 75, p. 287.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

:00300

83-60801-August

1984-2,200
