OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
P&CjV

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l961)

. . ,. . . , , . . . , . . . . . .. . . . .. . . .. . . .. . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ThesituationinNamibia

,......

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. .. . .

1
1
1

S/PV. 1961

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Recort/,~ qf tllcr,Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolrrtior~s trod
Decisiotw of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1961st MEETING
Held lin New York on Wednesday, 13 October 1976, at 3 p.m.
p,aesident: Mr. Iqbal A. AKHUND

(Pakistan).

(Yugosimia) rind Mr. Muvie
reserved

prese,Tt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic,‘Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of&eat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l961)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia
T}7e /neeting

WNS cnlied

Adoption

to order

lrt 4.00 p.m.

of the agenda

The situation in Namibia
I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions previously taken by the Council [i954th c//d
1956th to 1960th //wcti//gs]
I shall now invite the
President and other members of the United Nations
Council for Namibia,
and the representatives
of
Algeria, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic
Kampuchea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mauritius,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Niger,
Nigeria, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia to
participate in the Council’s discussion without the
right to vote.

(Zambia) took the pinres
for the/u nt the side of tAe Council cho171brr.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I have received
letters from the representatives of Bangladesh,
Botswana, the German Democratic Republic and
Liberia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the debate. I therefore propose that the
Council agree, in accordance with’the provisions of
Article 3 1 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
3. I shall invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when it is their
turn to speak.
At the i//lqitrrtio//
qf‘ the Preside//t,
Mr. KrriscJ/
(Bc717gitrtl~.sh), Mr. Mogrr1r7i (Botsnvnrr),
Mr. Fic/ri//
(CPU//C/// Dc///cx*rcrtic~ Repuhik)
rrnd
Mrs. BrooksRc117tlc~iph (Liherh)
took the piau~s I.c’sP/.I’c~.~~//’ t//r///
tit the side c?J’tite Co/l//c*ii c~/7cr17~iw1~.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritius, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity. I welcome him to the Council and invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
5. Sir Harold WALTER (Mauritius): Mr. President,
1 thank you for giving me this opportunity to address
the Council. I promise you that I shall be as brief as
possible, because I believe that facts and facts alone
should be conveyed to the tired and distracted brains
of the distinguished
gentlemen constituting
the
Council.

At the in\Qtcrtio//
of the President,
Mr.
Ktr1/7cr17rr
(hsidwt
of the United
N(/tic/ns Corrnc’ii jbr No///ikr) c117dother I~~~II~/XJIX of’tk
dcir,g:otio//
tool; pic/c~cs
t/t the Cor///c*ii
tcrhic c//d
Mr.
Rrrkai
(Ai,w/Yc/),
6. I should like in the first place, following the
Mr. Bwcrki/u lB///*r~//di), Mr. Aitrru~17 (C~rhcr), Mr. Krcrt
tradition that exists in all United Nations agencies and
Chh
(Ik//roc*rc7tic* Ko11rp1~c~h~a),
Mr.
Ahdei Meg/lid
in the United Nations proper, to offer you, Mr. Presifk?‘pt), Mr. Wotiqjo
(Etiriopitr),
Mr. Feiii (Ghrr//r/),
dent, my sincere congratulations on your elevation
Ml*. Cisdo
(G//i//cc/), MI*. MC/i//a (Kenycr), Mr. RCIIWto this high office. I can assure you that your path
f(!f;h fMtr~itr,~~a.sc~a~),
Mr.
M/w7/77ix/
(Mrriawi),
will not be easy, The problems besetting you bristle
Sir Hcr~c~i~iWcritcr
(Mtr7lritiu,y),
Mr.
Bc17gciiorr17
with difficulties. But you can rest assured that we will
~M~~~()cYw), Mr. Ckissono
(Mozo///hiclrrP),
Mr. WI*give you our entire co-operation to make your task
‘il(lli()gcJ (Niger),
Mr. Gc//h c$(Ni,qe/*ic/),
Mr. J~I/*O.VWIi easier.
(P(~l~,ld), Mr. B~IIYM~\~
(.fi’r,;rdi
Atwhirr),
MI*.
Minoh
7. The Council has heard all the statements made so
(Si(‘l’ra Lcc//7~), Mr. f;/,,y,sp/7 (S(////oii(/),
Mr. Ka/7c/iofar in regard to Namibia. I therefore do not think
/‘(U/Iv (Sri Lc////ic/), M/A. St///rr//l ( Yc177c/7),
Mr. Mini&

.

I should go into the details or the paraphernalia
surrounding the problem of Namibia. To my mind it is
the simplest problem that the United Nations has ever
had to deal with. What is involved is the illegal
occupation
of the country by individuals
whose
mandate has expired and who have been told to withdraw with elegance and grace but seem to understand
only the way of force to get out. These seem to be
individuals
who revel in the life of a paradise of
injustice, in the creation of tribalism and in the destruction of blamibian nationalism.

take place under the auspices of the United Nations,
which should decide on the modalities for it.
Il.
I fail to see why whose are willing to help to
avert bloodshed and a bloodbath in that part of Africa,
I am sure that if the will is there, we can convert this
hell of injustice into a paradise of justice. If a sense of
justice is accepted by all the gentlemen sitting around
this table, there should be no difficulty at all in the
realization of this. After all, what right has South Africa
to talk? The Territory was given to it under trust,
under a Mandate, and the Mandate has been terminated. And is it going to tell all the Powers of this
world, “I am your lord and master; I will get out
when I want, and I am going to impose the conditions
you must fulfil for me to accept the withdrawal of
my forces and myself ‘?

8. I. can do no better than repeat to the Council
that the Organization
of African Unity will accept
nothing less than the conditions laid down by the
President of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) when he addressed the Council
11956th nwrting].
These are the minimum conditions
acceptable:

12. I am sure that the super-Powers here present
can use their good influence to ensure that the conditions for which we are asking-which
are our
minimum demand-are
enforced and that a declaration
is made to that effect by those on missions of good
will and peace.

-First,
that SWAP0 is the sole representative of
the people of Namibia. That’ has been accepted by the
United
Nations and the Organization
of African
Unity.
-Secondly,
that SWAP0 should be the only party,
apart from the United Nations, to talk with South
Africa directly. If South Africa wants to bring its
puppets into the conference, by all means let it do
so-but as part of its own delegation, not as a party
to the conference.

13. May I in this connexion digress for one minute?
Why cannot the United States of America, in its
wisdom and in its mission of good will for peace
around the world, accept Angola as a Member of the
United Nations? Cannot it be magnanimous enough
to understand that victory is there? Must it take another
21 years to accept Angola as a Member of the United
Nations? I am sure the United States will listen to
this appeal.

-Thirdly,
that the conference should be convened
by the United Nations and held under its auspices.
-Fourthly,
that there should be a release of
political prisoners prior to the conference. This stands
to reason, because the brains are inside, and only the
few brains that have been able to escape the repression and oppression of South West Africa by South
Africa are outside.

14. That is all I have to say, and I hope the members
of the Council will understand that we really mean
business. If this fails, Viet Nam will have been a picnic
in comparison to what will happen in South West
Africa,

-Fifthly,
that there should be a commitment
South Africa to withdraw its forces from Namibia.

by

As regards the modalities of this conference,
would be discussed during the conference.

they

15. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
16. Mr.

Democratic Republic)
Mr. President, may I on
behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic congratulate you on your assumption of the
important duties of the President of the Council for the
month of October and wish you success in YOUI’
responsible task. I am happy to note that friendly
relations exist between the German Democratic
Republic and your respected country. I wish to thank
you, Sir, and the other members of the Council for
this opportunity to speak here (as representative Of
the German Democratic Republic) and put forward
our view on the question before the Council.

9. Those are the conditions which would be conducive to creating the proper atmosphere for the early
independence of South West Africa. A date should be
fixed for independence. I believe that 31 December
I978 is the date that has been fixed, but it should be
much earlier.
10. As regards the difficulties that would surround
the advent of independence, that would be a matte1
for South Africa’ to deal with. What concerns the
whole conference is the creation of an interim government with SWAPO, the working out of a constitutional
conference, the release of the political prisoners and the
withdrawal of the South African forces. It should

FLORIN

(German

fintP~pretr,tiol?~‘c)r?t

Russicrn):

17. During the discussion certain representatives
have, in view of the continuing crimes against the
2

people of Namibia, recalled the brutal repression by
German imperialists during the period of the Kaiser’s
empire. l should like in this connexion to point out
that the representatives of the labour movement had at
that time already raised their voices in protest and
condemned the crimes of the German colonial forces.

18, Today, on behalf of my delegation, I wish not
e,,ly to condemn in the most emphatic terms possible
the injustices inflicted upon the Namibian people in
the past but also to endorse equally emphatically the
accusations levelled at the colonialists of South Africa
aad their associates regarding their cruel aggression
against and repression of another people.
19. The people of the German Democratic Republic
has nothing in common with the reactionary forces of
German origin operating in Namibia who are still
marching in Windhoek along a Kaiserstrasse and
around squares named in honour of dyed-in-the-wool
Fascistssuch as Goering and Goebbels, who continue
to uphold Goebbels’ laws of racial discrimination
and
to uphold other Nazi ideals and who to this day are
enjoying consular facilities in Namibia.
20. The people of the German Democratic Republic
stands shoulder to shoulder with the Namibian people
in their just and noble struggle under the leadership
of SWAP0 against the, illegal occupation of Namibia
by the Republic of South Africa and for the exercise
of its right to self-determination.
21. In the course of the present debate attention has
frequently been drawn to the fact that the Vorster
rkgime is stubbornly ignoring all Security Council
resolutions on the question of Namibia, that even those
vague promises that have been made here from time
to time have not been kept and that, in flagrant violation of international
law, the Vorster regime continues openly to occupy Namibia.
The same thing
happened to resolution 38.5 (1976), which calls upon
Pretoria to adopt, by 31 August of this year, concrete
measures to grant full independence to Namibia.
22, May I recall that during the recent debate on the
question of Namibia some members of the Council,
here in this forum, recommended
on a number of
occasions that South Africa be given one more chance.
South Africa seized that chance; indeed, nothing else
could have been expected. But it did so not for the
Purpose of complying strictly with the decisions of the
United Nations, but in order to engage in diversionary
manoeuvres so as to gain time for its invidious attempts,
through new and shady tactics, to retain the system of
racist and neo-colonialist
domination
in the last
remaining bastions of racism and colonialism
in
southern Africa,. including Namibia.
23. What exactly is the nature of these diversionary
maa@uVres? What are the purposes behind them, and
who are pursuing them? The answers to all these
questions were given with complete clarity by most of

the representatives who have spoken before the Council: for instance, the representative of Mauritius
]1959th mcctirt~], ‘who, in very convincing terms,
analysed the Turnhalle puppet show. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania
presented irrefutable facts. No one could disagree
with the following statement of his:
“Thus, the logical question the Council should ask
itself is whether this repeated and contemptuous
flouting of the Charter does not warrant a reconsideration of South Africa’s continued membership
in the Organization.”
[f/M., para. 65.1
24. The arrogance of the South African racists stems
from a very well-known fact: the profit motive is
impelling the official representatives of international
monopolies to co-operate with Vorster’s npurtheid
regime. They are not disturbed by the fact that in the
present instance they are dealing with a Fascist whom
the British authorities were obliged to arrest during the
Second World War for his speeches in favour of
Hitler and of the racist theories of Coebbels.
25. In unlawfully occupied Namibia the black population is undergoing cruel oppression and exploitation;
they are but a huge reservoir of cheap labour for the
monopolies that are operating there. The black workers
receive less than one-tenth of the wage of whites, and
their average life expectancy is about 35 years. A
system of ghetto-style police zones has been set up,
and, as has rightly been pointed out here, the international monopolies are mercilessly despoiling Namibia
of its natural resources. Decree No. 1 of the United
Nations Council for Namibia’,
which prohibits the
plundering of those natural resources, is completely
ignored. It is quite clear that neither the Pretoria
authorities nor the imperialist monopolies have any
intention of relinquishing Namibia as an object of
exploitation;
therefore, they wish the people of
Namibia to remain under South Africa’s colonial yoke.
26. In connexion with the South African armed
aggression against the young People’s Republic of
Angola, the Council, in its resolution 387 (1976),
condemned the utilization by South Africa of Namibia
to mount aggressive acts against neighbouring
African States. The President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam
Nujoma, in his statement of 28 September [1956ilr
meeti,zg], explained in detail ,how the expansion of the
military facilities for South African troops was continuing in Namibia. Indeed, as was recently stated in
the press, a major air force base was being established
there, under the code-name of “Operation Threshold”.
That base, like the other South African military bases
in the Territory of Namibia, is being established
allegedly for the purpose of protecting the sea lanes
of the West in the southern Atlantic. In the publication
,?eur7e
Af,.ique reference is made to plans to establish
a South Atlantic pact which would supplement the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Therefore, the policy of the Western countries towards

the Vorstcr r@gimc is determined, particularly with
respect to Namibia, by the special interests of the.
imperialist circles, which do not coincide at all with
the interests of the African peoples,

programme, one that is reasonable, realistic an(t
designed to save the people of Namibia furthet
suffering and to give it an opportunity to exercise its
right to self-determination. The delegation of the
German Democratic Republic most emphatically supports that programme.

27. Namibia could tong ago have been a free country
i~r~tlik Member of the United Nations. I can confirm
whnt has just bcerr said by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mauritius, namely, that the problem of
Numihia is really a very simple one. Indeed, if the
Council adopted :I decision calling for the immediate
withdrnwat of South African colonial forces from
Namibia and the trnnsfcr of power direct to SWAPO,
the only legitimale representative of the people of
Namibia, on the underslanding that otherwise all the
members of the Council would forthwith sever all
r’cl:l~ions-pclliticul, economic or military-with
Pretoria, 1 am convinced lhat the majority of Member
SLatcs would follow that example, and that the
ruling circles in South Africa would then under stand
the seriousness of their position. So far, however,
proposal of this kind has been adopted because of Ihe
posilion of certain Powers. This, in our opinion, is
highly revealing.

32. It is how up to the Council to draw conclusions
from the past 10 years and from the prevailing situation, as well as from the emerging shape of things to
come, and to adopt the appropriate decisions.
33,. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialis
Republics) (intcrprrfa[ion J~>rll K/rssirr/r): First of
all, Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the
Soviet Union I should like to congratulate you tnost
heartily on your assu’mption of the important post of
President of the Council for the month of October
and to wish you every success in your task. I think
that the greatest success in your task we could achieve
in the course of this month would be to settle the
question of Namibia by adopting decisions that would
be in accordance with the interests of the Namibian
people and of the cause of peace in that part of
Africa. As the representative of a friendly neighbouring
country with which the Soviet Union has enjoyed
fruitful and extensive co-operation on a bilateral basis,
as well as in the international arena, you, Mr. President, may rely on the full co-operation of the Soviet
Union during the entire period in which you will be
carrying out the duties entrusted to you asPresident of
the Council.

28. We have heard a tot of five words during the
general debate at the current thirty-first session of the
Gcncrat Assembly. For instance, it has been said that
the decisions of the Africans would he respected, In
practice, however, we have seen just the opposite so
far, If that wcw nol SO, the People’s Republic of
Angola would long ago have been admitted to membership in ihe United Nations, because that is unquestionably the wilt of us all, and not only of the African
SMCS.

34. May I likewise express our profound gratitude to
your predecessor in the Chair, the representative of
a friendly Arab State, Ambassador Kikhia, who most
effectively conducted the work of the Council in the
course of the past month,

29. ‘The attempts to intimidate national liberation
movemenls must slop also. Those who deplore the
fanning of the flames of war and of racial hatred should
address their words, not h) the nationat liberation
movements and their supporters but COthe Vorster
r6gimc
and its supporlers. The Vorster rbgime has
been warring with lhe Nnmibian people for several
decades. This is the war that must be stopped, So
lung as it is not, the armed struggle of the Namibian
pcoptc will not only continue but will unquestionably
be intcrrsificd. The President of SWAP0 and the reprcscnlolivcs of African States who have spoken here
have said as milch in to :mibiguous terms, and in
doing so, they are merely basing thcmsetves on the
lessons of history.

35. I should like to emphasize the special importance
of the participation in the current debate of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of a number of African
and non-aligned countries, as welt as of the leader of
the fighting peofite of Namibia, the President of
‘SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma; we warmly, welcome theit
presence here and their contribution to our work.
Their presence here and their participation in the work
of the Council are evidence of the great significance
that the people of Namibia and the whole of Africa
attach to the present debate. Their presence wilt
unquestionably not only help all of us to appreciate
more clearly the dangerous character of the situation
that has been produced in Namibia but wilt also help
the Council to arrive at just decisions.

30. If today the Preloria rkgime and those Western
circles close to it feet compelled lo begin a political
and diplomatic game, this is the result of the change
in the relationship of forces in the world and of the
successful struggle of the African peoples, particularly
the Namibiun people, l3ut diplomatic and political
game-playing is not likely to solve the problems.

36. The United Nations has been discussing the
question of Namibia in one way or another and with
varying degrees of urgency for more than 30 years,
and throughout this whole period progressive mankind
has been .dgbt;ing;.&r tthhctibercltjon of Namibia. We
are now on thb’ \;‘&ge of taking more decisive and
effective measures for the immediate liberation of

31. The President of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma, put
l’orward before the members of the Council a detailed
4

~1

Namibia for the immediate settlement of the problem
that has become the key element in the strengthening
cfpeace and security in southern Africa and elsewhere.
AS is well known, in resolution 385 (1976), which
was adopted unanimously,
the Council formulated a
number of minimum demands addressed to the Power
now occupying Namibia, and we feel that this was
a very mild resolution. What did the Council ask for
in that resolution? The Council simply said to those in
Pretoria who have taken over Namibia and are holding
cs to it in spite of decisions of the Council and
the General Assembly: “Gentlemen,
please quietly
leave Namibia; please withdraw your administration
and your armed forces and hold elections under the
supervision of the United Nations; give the people
of Namibia freedom and the right to decide their own
fate”. How many more demands we could have made.
The demands formulated by the Council in that resolution are an absolute minimum.
-

Namibian people, the Government of South Africa
has resorted to manoeuvres and subterfuges which are
obvious not only to diplomats but to the reader of any
newspaper and the man in the street everywhere in
the world. In our opinion, Pretoria’s manoeuvres do
not bring closer but rather remove further the
possibility for the Namibian people to reach its lawful
goal, namely, its immediate’ accession to genuine
independence.
40. Fully realizing that neither the Security Council nor any other organ of the United Nations could or
would recognize the legality of the organization by
South Africa of a constitutional
conference on
Namibia, because it was convened by racists for racist
purposes, in order to perpetuate its oppression of
the people of the Territory, and because the only
organization that genuinely represents the people of
Namibia, namely SWAPO, was not admitted to that
conference, although it has been recognized by the
United Nations as the authentic representative of the
people of Namibia, the Pretoria Government, like so
many unscrupulous power-holders, is trying to force
us to recognize this unlawful gathering as a response
to the demands laid down by the Council in resolution 385 (1976). This is hare-faced mockery of the
Organization;’ the Council and the authority of the
United Nations are being flouted. This is a flagrant
violation by South Africa of the obligations it
voluntarily assumed under Article 25 of the Charter
to comply with the decisions of the Council.

37. South Africa showed no inclination
to take
advantage of this opportunity-its
last chance to save
itself. It did nothing to carry out that decisions of the
Council. On the contrary, it tightened its grip on
Namibia. So what is left for the Council to do if we
do not wish to keep the question any longer on our
agenda, if we genuinely wash to bring about the liberation of Namibia and to see the freedom and independence of the people of this much tormented
country? We must, in accordance with the decisions of
the Council, analyse the situation that has developed
there and the steps taken by the South African Government to implement resolution 385 (1976) and the Council’s other relevant resolutions and consider what
measures it should take to ensure the implementation
of these resolutions.

41. The criminal activities of the South African
occupation regime in Namibia during the present year
have shown that the racists have no intention of leaving
the Territory. We have realized that the Government of
South Africa has not shown any intention of complying
with the decisions of the United Nations demanding
that it cease its unlawful occupation; on the contrary,
it has launched a feverish programme of activitiy to
strengthen its military and police presence in the Territory, which go hand in hand with its merciless exploitation and plundering of the country’s natural resources
and the flagrant exploitation of its human resources.
This was discussed in the Fourth Committee of the
General Assembly yesterday in connexion with the
question of transnational monopolies. The story of
what is happening in Namibia and in South Africa
itself is drenched in blood.

38. Our delegation has listened carefully to the statements made by the representatives of SWAPO, by the
representatives of African countries and of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, in which it was convincingly demonstrated
that during the past period
not only did South Africa fail to take any positive
steps to implement the decisions of the General Assembly and the Council with regard to Namibia, but it
constantly strengthened
colonial
regime in that
country, cruelly repressing any attempts at resistance.
39. It is not difficult to understand in these circumstances why SWAPO, which is the only legitimate
representative of the Namibian
people, the United
Nations Council for Namibia, which has made every
effort to study the question and bring us closer to a
decision, and the whole of the international community
have indignantly rejected South Africa’s so-called
Proposal on the future of Namibia. Indeed, instead of
clearly and unequivocally
admitting to the Security
Council that South Africa is administering
Namibia
ilk%ahY, that it recognizes the errors of its past
waysand is ready to implement the Council’s decisions
and to withdraw its military and police forces from the
country it is occupying and to transfer power to the

42. Parallel with these activities, the racist regime of
the Republic of South Africa has considerably
increased its military expenditures. It has built a major
military base, with the assistance of NATO countries, a base which is in fact the biggest base in
Africa, let alone in southern Africa. The South African
regime has considerably increased its armed forces.
According to press reports, which are probably played
down rather than exaggerated, the military budget
increased by 36 per cent in the past year alone.
Purchases of military equipment from a number of
Western countries have greatly increased. Why‘? Who
5

inalienable right to free and independent deve
ment, a development
along the path of SC
progress.“2

is threatening South Africa? Perhaps the people of
some island in the Atlantic Ocean or the Indian Ocean?
No; there is no such threat, The truth is that this is
all being done in somebody’s interest. Whose: In the
interest of continuing the domination
over Namibia,
in the interest of maintaining neo-racist regimes.

45. The racist regime in South Africa does not in
to leave Namibia.
According to a statement
Mr. Malan, in Namibia it is necessary to set I
strong army capable of maintaining whatever situs
the Pretoria regime wishes to have maintained thl

43. We are also disturbed by the well-known fact
that South Africa has definitely decided to develop its
nuclear potential. South Africa’s policy of escalating
military ‘preparations
is clearly calculated to retain
Namibia as a base for the struggle against the national
liberation movements in the neighbouring countries,
that is to say, against the young independent States
which are its neighbours-and
you know what laws
have been adopted in South Africa, including the one
which gives it the right to continue in hot pursuit all
the way to the equator if necessary. This is no
accident. All this is tied together. Namibia has been
converted now into a bastion, a base and a strong point
for hostile activities against neighbouring African countries and for the organizing of diversionary
movements, provocation and aggression. The scale of these
activities, which are a serious threat to peace and
security in that part of the world, is well known to the
Council. Over the past year alone the Council has been
obliged to warn South Africa of the serious consequences that might ensue if it continued such a
dangerous and aggressive course of action.

46. The delegation of the Soviet Union stro
condemns South Africa’s dangerous and aggre:
policy. We are opposed to any attempts to pro
the just and speedy settlement of the Nam:
problem. We support all the just demands of SW
and its supporters. The manipulations and equi\
tions disguised as talks must stop, and Namibia
be given full independence forth with in accord
with the decisions of the Council, particularly
lution 385 (1976). I think that we were very pro
reminded today of our responsibility
by the rl
sentative of Mauritius. I think that that we canu
otherwise than endorse his statement unreservec
47. .The dangerous course being followed bj
Pretoria authorities requires the Council to act. It
adopt urgent and effective measures. Past exper
has shown that the absence of any firm and enel
action by the Council may be interpreted by the r#
as a lack of will on its part to implement its deci
or to protect international peace and security. Bu
is precisely what the racist regimes and their prott
want of us. Realizing that the situation in Nami
a threat to international peace and security->
is something that no one would wish to deny now,
in view of the fact that South Africa has not car
with the Council’s minimum requirements fc
liberation of Namibia and South Africa’s withc
from the Territory laid down in resolution 385 (
the Soviet Union considers that the Council mu
time adopt the sternest and most effective me:
against the racist regime of South Africa, as prc
for in Chapter VII of the Charter.

44. Particular alarm has been caused here in the
United Nations and in world public opinion -and first
and foremost in the African countries-by
the feverish
attempts of the racists of South Africa to associate
certain Western Powers, particularly the members of
NATO, with its nefarious designs to perpetuate its
domination
over Namibia. Trying to conceal from
Africa and from the whole world the real purposes of
the increasing mutual contacts at all levels, the racist
regimes and the imperialist circles which support them
represent themselves as the champions of the peaceful
settlement of the problems of southern Africa and
profess to support the principle of majority rule in
Namibia and in Southern Rhodesia, or Zimbabwe.
However, none of us are deluded by statements of that
kind. At the thirty-first
session of the General
Assembly the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Gromyko, stated:

48. Namibia
is the responsibility
of the 1
Nations; that is why we are obliged to do ever
in our power to put a speedy end South A
occupation of Namibia.

L‘ . . . in actual fact everything possible is still being
done to repress the just struggle of the peoples of
Zimbabwe
and Namibia
and of the indigenous
people of the Republic of South Africa for their
legitimate rights and for an end to the hateful policy
of racism. Every possible method is being resorted
to, from direct suppression and violence to attempts
to divert the national liberation
movement from
genuine independence and freedom through political
gimmickry
and financial hand-outs.

49. At its thirteenth session, the Assembly of
of State and Government of the Organization of /
Unity, after specifically considering the ques’
sanctions against South Africa, emphasized
decision that:
“The strict application of sanctions in all I
would not only help to speed up the liquida
rrprrrtlwitl
in South Africa but would also m
important contribution to the liberation of the
of South Africa.”

“What is being sought from these people before
the eyes of the whole world? A renunciation of their

That applies also to Namibia.
6

50, 111the view of the Soviet delegation that all
members of the Council have an interest in preserving
peace and security in Africa and in the liquidation
,,f the remnants of colonial and racist rCgimes and
must therefore make every effort to ensure that the
Council at last heeds the appeals of the anti-colonialist
majority in the United Nations and adopts effective
measures against the racist rkgime of South Africa,
which is illegally occupying Namibia. Such measures
might include the proposals advanced by a group
ofcouncil members, namely, the speedy imposition of
an embargo on the delivery to South Africa of any
kind ofweapons and military materiel and of any equipment for producing them, together with an embargo
on the transmission of military information
in any
form.
51. The delegation
of the Soviet Union firmly
supports those proposals.
We consider that the
immediate cessation of any military co-operation with
the racist rCgime of South Africa, and the adoption
of effective measures to prevent the recruitment of
mercenaries for service in Namibia of South Africa,
are the minimum measures that all Member States
and the whole of the international
community
are
bound to take if they are really-and
not just in
words-willing to respect the Charter and if they are
really against the racist, aggressive policy of South
Africa in Namibia.
52. Assistance and support of all kinds must be given
to the Namibian people, which has elected, under the
leadership of its sole lawful representative, SWAPO,
to fight for its liberation
and for the immediate
cessation of the racist occupation.
53. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the
Council must also sternly condemn Vorster’s constant
manceuvring with respect to the so-called constitutional conference, The only purpose of those manauvres is to evade strict compliance with the demand of
the United Nations that free elections be held in
Namibia under its supervision and control,
54. It is also necessary to put an end to the cooperation of a number of Western countries and transnational corporations with the racist rbgime of South
Africa, because such co-operation
only helps to
Perpetuate the illegal occupation of Namibia by the
Pretoria rtgime.
55. The implementation
of these measures would
help not only towards the liberation of the people of
Namibia but would also towards the strengthening of
Peaceand security throughout the African continent.
%a What is expected of us now? The representative
of SWAP0 has stated the requirements; they are the
minimum that is required to complement the implementation of the Council resolution. The Council must
now come forward, not with strong words, but with
strong actions, work, deeds, Namibia
must be

liberated-not
at some time in the future, but
immediately,
without delay. The people of Namibia
must be masters in their own country, of their fate and
of their future-nobat
some time in the future, but now,
today, immediately.
We must reject out of hand
any manceuvres or equivocations aimed at perpetuating
the colonial occupation of Namibia and do everything
we can to assist in the speedy and successful solution
of the problem of the liberation of the Namibian people.
57. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement,
58. Mr. MOGAMI (Botswana): Permit me also to
convey to you, Mr. President, and through you to the
members of the Council our sincere tanks for affording
US this opportunity
to participate in the reslimed
debate on Namibia. I should like also to take this
opporthnity to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
October.
59. The Council is meeting again to consider the
question of Namibia at a time when the world is
focusing attention on the situaGon in southern Africa.
It is often the case that this body has to meet time
and again on this question because of the continued
intransigence of the racist Government of South
Africa. The Chairman of the Group of African States
for the month of September reminded Council two
weeks ago [195htlz meeting, pa,a. 591 that it has over
the years adopted 16 resolutions on the question.of
Namibia alone; but, predictably, the South African
Government has ignored all of theh, in defiance of
international opinion.
60. In resolution 385 (1976), the Government of
South Africa was given until 31 August 1976 to
terminate its illegal occupation of Namibia. When
adopting that resolution the Council decided also to
“remain seized of the matter” and to convene later on
these very meetings, for the purpose of reviewing
South Africa’s compliance with the terms of that
resolution. In the event of non-compliance by South
Africa, the Council would during these meetings
consider the appropriate measures to be taken under
the Charter.
61. South Africa, as we all know, has not complied
with that decision. Instead, the international community is watching with increasing concern the
deceptive manceuvres through a bogus so-called
constitutional conference, which is supposed to lead
the international Territory of Namibia to independsnce
in two years. After the exposure by the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice” of the
illegality of South Africa’s presence in and occupation
of Namibia, we can correctly assert that South Africa’s
defiance of the decisions of the United Nations, and
of the Security Council in particular, regarding Namibia, is aimed at prolonging its occupation of the Terri-

there is no justification whatsoever for South Africa’s
continued
repressive occupation
of Namibia.
In
determining efforts intended to avert a racial bloodbath in that inflamatory cauldron in southern Africa, we
should all take account of the fact that it is often
through short-sighted schemes of the nature that we
see today in Namibia
that emerging
nations are
sometimes eventually plunged into conflicts of serious
proportions, with harmful consequences for security
and stability and serious threats to world peace.

tory, while consolidating
in the mean-time the racist
structure of society and government in South Africa
itself.
62. South Africa’s intention
is to end its illegal
presence in Namibia only when a puppet administration has been established in the Territory to act as a
buffer between South Africa and the forces struggling
for freedom, racial equality and liberation in southern
Africa. That will not only guarantee continued
exploitation
of Namibian
resources by South Africa
but will also help preserve the exploitative presence
of Western economic interests in Namibia, which are
being used by racist minority regimes in the region
to influence Western opinion, and thus assure those
regimes sympathy and protection
by some major
Western countries.

66. In an atmosphere already charged with political
tensions as a result of minority rule and racism, the
military threat posed by South Africa’s illegal presence
in Namibia to the territorial integrity of the surrounding
African countries makes it even more compelling for
the Council to demand nothing short of South Africa’s
immediate withdrawal from the Territory.
After all,
what other fears can there be of South Africa’s withdrawal, since such a withdrawal will lead to national
independence in accordance with the wishes of the
population of Namibia,
which is what we seek to
achieve? Instead, we have witnessed with increasing
concern and uneasiness acts of military provocation
perpetrated
from Namibia
against the PeopIe’s
Republic of Angola and the Republic of Zambia. The
so-called Security Act, which gives the armed forces
of the rrpcrt~heicl State in that subregion unlimited
scope for military operation in the whole of Africa
south of the equator, cannot be said to contribute to
security and stability in the region.

63. That is the crux of the matter. South Africa
ignores international
opinion in the full knowledge
that it can count on the unfailing support of its
traditional allies. It is that support, of course, which
renders the resolutions of the Council on Namibia
ineffective. In this regard I should point out that
repeated warnings have been given concerning the
inherent danger of, and the serious consequences that
could result from, the short-sighted and self-serving
schemes, arrangements and other such formulas under
which Namibia is supposed to accede to independence.
It should be pointed out that any efforts which seek
to assist the liberation struggle in southern Africa
on the basis of conditional
and tacit acceptance of
racist structures of society or governments are doomed
to inevitable failure.

67. The response of South Africa to resolution 385
(1976) has been to proceed with schemes which have
completely disregarded the role and significance of
SWAP0 in Namibia as the authentic representative of
the people, in spite of SWAPO’s
preparedness to
meet and discuss with South Africa the question of
the transfer of power in Namibia. Those schemes and
arrangements have totally disregarded the authority
and wish of the United Nations to supervise the
conduct of free elections leading to the independence
of Namibia, despite the Organization’s
legal authority
over that Territory. Those schemes and arrangements
-by whatever name they are called, “Turnhalle talks”
or any other name-have
made no provision for the
release of political prisoners and the return of politicaI
exiles to Namibia. As a matter of fact, we are instead
witnessing increasing imprisonment
and repression by
South Africa’s administrative apparatus in Windhoek.
The participants in the so-called talks do not even
voice concern or express condemnation
of those acts
of repression.. My delegation dismisses those schemes
and arrangements as purely tribal in nature, and
devoid of the essential requirements
necessary for B
people freely to exercise its inalienable
right to selfdetermination and accession to national independence,
as laid down by the United Nations Charter. They
are lacking in legitimacy, We ask that note be taken
of these observations.

64. The attempt to destroy the national unity of the
Namibian people through schemes which deny the
entire population of the Territory the right to choose
and shape a social system and government of their
own can justifiably be interpreted as a sinister move
to extend the immoral bantustan policy to Namibia
and to turn the Territory into a confederation of tribal
homelands under the contro1 of the puppets of South
Africa. Indeed a constitutional
conference of handpicked tribal elements and others who support apnrthcid policies cannot be expected fully to satisfy the
demands of a genuine Namibian political leadership.
My delegation rejects those South African sponsored
proposals as falling far too short of resolution 385
(1976).
65. The international character of Namibia is unquestionable. South Africa should meet with the leadership of the major African liberation
movement,
SWAPO, which the Organization of African Unity, the
non-aligned movement and the United Nations recognize as the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people, rather than with hand-picked, pliant tribal
elements whose allegiance does not even cut across
tribal affiliation, to arrange for the transfer of power to
a free Namibia.
Except for the self-serving interest
the aim of which is the survival of racist structures,

68. In his statement two weeks ago [195&h nzeefingh
the President of SWAP0 outlined in his conclusiofl
8

several conditions that would assist the transfer of
power to a genuine Namibian political leadership, We
see nothing in those conditions that is inimical to the
cause which the Council wishes to defend. As the
basic issues are so very clesir and since South Africa
has been given more than ample time to pull out of
Namibia, and thereby respect, not defy, the authority
ofthe Council, the whole world is indeed watching the
Council’s deliberations with the keenest concern. We
hope, therefore, that Council will not relent in its
commitmknt to bring about South Africa’s withdrawal
from Namibia.

tunity to express the deep concern of my country
Over the situation prevailing in Namibia.
Recent
events in Namibia and other parts of southern Africa
have proved that the racial conflict in that region has
now reached crisis proportions threatening to engulf
the entire area in a fearsome bloodbath,
75. Racial discrimination and .domination must yield
place to freedom and racial justice. The people of
Africa have served notice on the world community
that they are no longer prepared to accept as a dole
what is their inalienable right. If the international
community will not help them, they will help themselves, whatever the cost.

69, My delegation believes that any constitutional
advancement over Namibia should be decided upon
with the full participation
of SWAPO, which is the/
authentic representative of the people of Namibia.
South Africa should withdraw from Namibia forthwith
so that free elections can be conducted under the
supervision of the United Nations. And in order to
achieve this, it is essential that all the political prisoners
be released immediately
and the Namibian exiles be
allowed to return home. South Africa should dismantle
its military apparatus, withtiraw from the international
Territory, and allow free political activity by all
Namibians.

76. The task before the Council is to decide how it can
help the people of Namibia to achieve its legitimate
rights and aspirations.
It should devote itself
exclusively to the proposition that its deliberations
have the capacity to avert human tragedy.
77. The essential conditions for ending the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa and for the
transfer of power to the people of Namibia under
the aegis of the United Nations have been laid down
by Council in its resolution 385 (1976). The Council,
after lengthy deliberations and with great care, decided
on those conditions as representing the minimum
requirements for guaranteeing the full exercise of the
right to self-determination of the people of Namibia.
Instead of complying with those conditions, as it was
asked to do, the racist and colonialist South African
Government decided to equivocate about them in its
reply to the United Nations and proceeded with
actions in Namibia which amounted to a rejection of
the conditions. It has imposed on the people of
Namibia the intolerable system of (rprr~hcitl. It has
continued to plunder the Territory of its natural wealth.
It has continued its oppressive rCgime and militarization of Namibia. Finally, it has embarked on a
policy of bantustanization of Namibia with a view to
perpetuating its illegal occupation of the Territory.
Proposals by South Africa on the future of Namibia
have been condemned by the United Nations Council
for Namibia as ambiguous, equivocal and lacking in
legitimacy. My country, which is a member of the
Council for Namibia fully supports these views.

70, For other reasons, sometimes obvious, the Council has been unable to assert its authority over Namibia
and has instead taken ineffectual measures simply to
keep the issues under consideration and maintain a
symbolic interest in the Namibian question. Western
Powers, and particularly the Western permanent members of this Council, which have in the past repeatedly
shielded South Africa by the use of the veto and by
their rejection of mandatory action, have an overriding
responsibility to ensure that Namibia is led to independence without much delay.
71. The, prestige of the Council is at stake. The
Council must proceed to take appropriate measures
under the Charter to compel South Africa to comply
with its resolutions, Failure to do that will inevitably
lead to the erosion of its prestige and its ability to
deal with situations which are likely to threaten
international peace and security. The Council should
now demonstrate its concern for the oppressed and
exploited people of Namibia so as not to betray the
trust which they have placed in it.

78. The time has come for the Security Council to
take appropriate action fo fulfil its obligations under
the Charter to secure South Africa’s compliance with
the conditions laid down by the Council to ensure the
transfer of power to the people of Namibia. The
Vorster rbgime has continued to defy the Council with
impunity, The Council should now consider action
against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter.
When the Council last discussed this proposal, it failed
to take any action because some members were not
convinced or persuaded that inter+naiional peace and
security were in fact threatened. My delegation wishes
to point out to them that developments have shown
t,hat their hopes and premises have proved wrong
and
that’, in the interim, enough blood ha!; been shed.

72. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement,
73~ Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, I take
this opportunity to congratulate you and your country
on Your assumption of the high office of President of
the Council. Permit me with feeling to refer to the
Personal friendship and good-fellowship
which we
havc enjoyed with you for more than two decades.
74, 1 should also like to thank you and the other
members of the Council for allowing me this oppor9

79. The struggle of the peoples of Namibia and of
other parts of southern Africa leaves no room for any
doubt that racial conflict in the region will inevitably
escalate into a brutal war which will affect not only
the countries of the area but other nations as well.

Africa’s annexation of South West Africa. She stated,
further, that if the South African Government felt
that the Mandate over South West Africa had lapsed
with the demise of the League of Nations, it must
agree that its authority to administer the Territory
had lapsed also-unless,
of course, it was merely
exercising the rule of force.

80. We also believe that the international community,
both collectively and individually,
must necessarily
fulfil its moral, political and historical obligation to
refrain from extending the kind of co-operation to the
racist re’gime in South Africa which enables it to
continue its illegal occupation of Namibia. Instead, we
should demonstrate our solidarity with the people of
Namibia by extending to them inoral and material
support in their just struggle for freedom and selfdetermination against a racist, colonialist oppressor.
Rather than prolong the agony of southern Africa,
we must recognize the tragic consequences of delay,
which can only add to the heavy responsibility in terms
of the human lives that it would cost.

86. In 1956 the Liberian delegation sought to bring
the Territory under the Trusteeship System and
therefore submitted a draft resolutions. Because of the
powerful lobbying and control over the United
Nations by the colonial Powers and their allies, the
draft resolution was revised, and in its final form it
requested the Secretary-General to explore ways and
means for a satisfactory solution of the question of
South West Africa and to take whatever steps he
deemed necessary with a view to finding such a
so1ution6.
87. When the South West Africa Committee proposed that the violation of the Mandate over South
West Africa should be taken to the International Court
of Justice under the provisions relating to compulsory
jurisdiction,
the legal interpretation
of that proposal
placed the responsibility for so doing on those States
that were former members of the League of Nations.
The Liberian representative took the initiative and
drafted a resolution for the purpose, in which she,
with other sponsors, called upon Member States of
the United Nations that were former members of the
League of Nations to take the case of South West
Africa to the International Court of Justice because of
South Africa’s violation,
at the expense of the
indigenous population of South West Africa, of the
sacred trust of the Mandate. Again, responding to that
grave challenge, the Liberian Government, although
Liberia is a poor country, initiated the suit against
South Africa before the International Court of Justice.
It was joined by the Government of Ethiopia. Both
Liberia and Ethiopia were original members of the
League of Nations. The majority opinion of the Court
evaded replying to the issues raised by Liberia and
Ethiopia with regard to the violation of the sacred
trust of the Mandate; that judgement of the Court,
delivered on 18 July 1966’, in the case which Liberia
and Ethiopia had brought against South Africa in
respect of the administration
of its Mandate over
South West Africa
evoked considerable
harsh
comment on and cri;icism of the Court throughout
the world.

81. If the international community has to wait for
more Sowetos and even more bloodshed before it is
,moved to act, we might as well go into recess and
leave the world to those who would rather preside
over the peace of the graveyard.
82. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Liberia,
Mrs. Brooks-Randolph, former President of the General Assembly. I invite her to take a place at the Council table and to make her statement.
83. Mrs.
BROOKS-RANDOLPH
(Liberia):
Mr. President, permit me to begin by extending hearty
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am confident
that with your varied experience you will diligently
guide this Council to a successful outcome on this
important matter which, in one way or another, affects
all men of conscience. Concomitantly, I should like to
pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Kikhia
of the Libyan Arab Republic, for the manner in which
he so skilfully and efficiently presided over this Council
for the month of September.
84. As members of the Council are aware, Liberia
has always championed and promoted the cause of the
indigenous people of Namibia by actively fostering
their political emancipation, and it continues to feel
great concern regarding
theil
socio-economic
problems.

88. In his statement at the twenty-first session of
the General Assembly, the Foreign Minister of Liberia,
Mr. J. Rudolph Grimes, proposed the establishment
of an trtl hoc+ committee for South West Africa. He
said:

8.5. In 1954, after reviewing the legal aspects of the
question of South West Africa in connexion with
South Africa’s failure to place the Territory under the
Trusteeship
System of the United
Nations, the
Liberian representative in the Fourth Committee4
stated that, since South A’frica elected not to do that,
it could not deny its obligations and responsibilities
as derived from the Mandate, which embodied certain
.nternational
col,tractual obligations barring South

“As a first step, therefore, the Liberian delegation proposes that the Assembly should establish afl
r/l/ /XX’ committee whose members will immediatel>’
be appointed by the President of the Assembly
10

which should report Lo the present session of the
General Assembly on or before 30 November 1966
o,l the ob.jectives, terms of reference and composition of a United Nations commission
for South
West Africa, to be established prior to the adjournment of this session. The said commission would
have among other functions at least the following:

and social and economic development do not come to
a people on a silver platter but that sometimes there
must be even the sacrifice of human life, and that this
has caused the weakening of the iron grip that the
South African Government has had on Namibia in the
past.
92. And now my delegation would like to state that
it has no doubt whatsoever that the situation in
Namibia today poses a very serious threat to international peace and security as a result of the intransigence shown by the South African regime in its
failure to relinquish its illegal control over Namibia,

‘+((I) A speedy termination
of the Mandate, of
which South Africa has proved itself unworthy,
and which it continues to violate in the most essential
respects, so that the inhabitants
of South West
Africa may be led towards self-government
and
independence:
“(/I) A speedy abolition
tory; and

of rrl.‘trlthcitl

93. South Africa, as a signatory of the Charter, has
pledged under Article 56 “to take joint and separate
action in co-operation with the Organization for the
achievement of the purposes set forth in Article 55”.
Article 55 requires the promotion of “universal respect
for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language, or religion”.

in the Terri-

“(c) Ensuring all technical and other assistance
to the inhabitants of the Territory necessary for their
material wellbeing and social progress.
“The t/r/ /SOL*committee should recommend the
ways and means by which the United Nations can
effectively assert its supervisory powers and establish the United Nations presence in South West
Africa, and should study the administrative,
financial and personnel programmes which would be
involved. The Secretary-General
should be requested to assist the committee in its work.“*

94. In violation of that sacred legal commitment, the
racist minority Government of South Africa not only
continues to practise npmrtlzcid in South Africa but
also cultivates the heinous and barbaric policy of
racial discrimination in Namibia, a Mandated Territory which is now a United Nations responsibility as
a result of the revocation of the Mandate.

89. The proposal of the Foreign Minister of Liberia
was accepted and was incorporated in paragraph 6
of resolution 2145 (XXI). That paragraph reads as
follows:

95. The Council, by its resolution 385 (1976), once
again demanded South Africa’s unconditional withdrawal and laid down conditions for the peaceful
transfer of power to the authentic representatives of the
people of Namibia. In its reply to the Council, the
racist minority regime once again has resorted to
misleacling tactics to disguise its intention of continuing
its colonial and racist control over that Territory.

“Estcrhlishcs
an Ad Hoc Committee
for South
West. Africa-composed
of fourteen
Member
States to be designated by the President of the
General Assembly-to
recommend practical means
by which South West Africa should be administered,
SO as to enable the people of the Territory to
exercise the right of self-determination
and to
achieve independence, and to report to the General
Assembly at a special session as soon as possible
and in any event not later than April 1967.”

96. We cannot accept the so-called constitutional
conference at which supporters of aprrrtheid and handpicked tribal elements claiming to be representatives
of the Namibian people prepare formulas which, under
would ensure the further
a pseudo-independence,
consolidation
of racist policy and the continued
plunder and illegal exploitation of Namibian resources
by South Africa and its allies. Also, the hand-picking
of people by the Administering
Authority when a
Territory is moving towards independence has the
evil effect of entrenching the strife between indigenous
peoples which sometimes erupts after independence.
And those who are responsible are the very ones who
preach that black men or the African people cannot rule
themselves.

That was the paragraph which led to the establishment
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, of which
Liberia is a member.
90. Equally important was a statement made by the
Liberian representative in the Fourth Committee that
the People of the Territory themselves, Namibia’s
indigenous people, would have to take some action,
even resort to force, if the South African Government
cairtinued to ignore world public opinion and the
resolutions of the General Assembly and other world
forums.

97. In a statement issued on 18 August [S/121851,
the United Nations Council for Namibia condemned
the latest stratagem of the South African administration in Windhoek as completely unacceptable, lacking
in legitimacy and ambiguous.

91, We believe, therefore, that the people of Namibia
%e awakening to the harsh reality that independence
11

withdraws from Namibia, thus granting to the people
of the Territory their legitimate right to determine their
own future and paving the way for them to do so.

98. My Government
insists on its demand that the
future of Namibia
and the form of independence
Namibia as a unitary State will adopt can be determined
only by the Namibian
people itself, and by no one
else. We in Liberia never can and never will accept
the divisive concept that the Namibian
people is
composed of several nations. We regard this as an allout and flagrant attempt by the South African Government to undermine the indivisibility
of that nation,
to perpetrate the ignominious bantustan policy in that
Territory
and to promote the balkanization
of the
country as well as the continuation of its present status.

104. We believe and insist that the South African
Government should unconditionally
and immediately
open constitutional
talks with the parties directly
concerned with the Namibian issue, with a view to
granting full independence to the Namibian
people.
To that end we demand that the principal parties to
any such constitutional
conference must be, first,
SWAP0 which is the authentic representative of the
people of Namibig-and
other African political
associations could associate with SWAPO; secondly,
South Africa, which is the de .fl~ro though not the
dcjlrr(~ authority in Namibia; and, thirdly, the United
Nations, which is the de jlrre authority in Namibia,
In addition, we insist that the said constitutional conference be held outside the Territory of Namibia and
outside South Africa, and that the United Nations be
represented. by the United Nations
Council fol
Namibia.

99. Let us not belabour the issue. The facts are well
known, and South Africa’s intentions and designs are
an open secret in the world community.
We regard
South Africa’s continued occupation of Namibia as an
affront to all of us, and I am driven to say that we
consider its continued presence in Namibia to be most
offensive to this Organization. South Africa should be
forced to respect the territorial integrity of Namibia
and its indivisibility,
and the Namibian
people
should be given its legitimate right to determine its
own destiny.

105. It might be useful to observe that in early 1975
Prime Minister John Vorster of South Africa Stdted
“We do not want an inch of South West Africa’s
territory, and I would be only too pleased to get South
West Africa off our backs.” Here and now WC
challenge Mr. Vorster to live up to his words-now
and not in 1978. Chapter VII of the Charter, which i!
not limited to diplomatic,
political
or economic
pressure, should be invoked and brought to bear on the
South African rCgime with a view to its relinquishinj
its control over Namibia.

100. During the eleventh session of the General
Assembly, in 1956, when I served as Vice-Chairman
of the Fourth Committee,
I statedY that I considered
that the question of South West Africa was no less
important than the other problems facing the United
Nations and saw no reason why it should be relegated
to the background, especially as all the members of the
Committee had stressed its urgency.
101. The Government of Liberia continues to view
the question of Namibia as a serious special case for
the United Nations. The General Assembly, through
its resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V), by which it
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and
provided for the establishment
of a Council to
administer the affairs of Namibia,
and the Security
Council, by affirming in its resolution 301 (1971) the
advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice3
that South Africa’s continued presence in Namibia was
illegal, together established a firm legal base enabling
the United Nations to use the best channels available
to it to bring about a peaceful transfer of power
from South Africa to the people of Namibia.

106. Finally, let me share with the Council soml
thoughts of my President, Mr. William R. Tolbert, 01
the right of a people to self-determination:
“By both the circumstances of her birth ove
129 years ago and the hostile environment
il
which she existed during her early years, condition
which have contributed to the shaping of her unalteI
able convictions, Liberia has been impelled alwaY
to give uncompromising and constructive support t#
oppressed peoples struggling for their freedom an’
their inalienable rights. We solemnly reaffirm ths
support and renew here our commitment
to buttres
the legitimate efforts of all peoples striving to attai
self-determination
and independence.”

102. Liberia now, as over the decade, maintains and
steadfastly continues to stand resolute in its contention
that the people of the international Territory known as
Namibia must without compromise obtain their inalienable rights to self-determination,
independence
and
territorial integrity.

107. We say South Africa must get out of Namibiz
not in 1978 but immediately.
108. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the.representativ
of the United States, who wishes to make a statemer
in exercise of his right of reply.

103. As has been my Government’s
policy, we insist
that there must be democratic elections in Namibia now
under the auspices of the United Nations and that the
world community
must now more than ever before,
with greater zeal and effectiveness exert concrete
efforts to ensure that the Government of South Africa

109. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America
I just wish to state that the United States delegatio
deeply appreciates the comments of the For&
Minister of Mauritius, who represents both Mauritit
12

and the Organization Of African Unity, and promises
the Minister that the United States Government will
give full consideration to his remarks, as he has every
right to expect.
The meeting

3 Legal Corweqrterwes
for States of f/w Cor~tinrted
Preserice
of
So//t/? Afiicw
h Nomibin
(South
West Ajikw)
rlotlc~itlrstntidi~/~
Srcrrrit\~
Coumil
Resolrrtim
276 11970).
I.C..J.
.~ ,. Ad~hrv
~~ _ thinion.
‘
Reports 1971, p. 16. ’
4 Official
Records
of the Genernl
Assembly,
Niath
Sessiotr,
Fourth
Comtlrittee,
407th meeting.
s Ibid., Eleverrtlz Session, Ameses,
agenda item 37, document

mse at 5.40 p.m.

A/C.4/L.445.
’ Ibid., document A/3541, para. 27.

’ Smith West Africa, Second Phnke~ Jutlguwrlt,
I.C.J. Reports
1966, p. 6.
* Official
Records ofthe Gerlernl ASSPIJI/(Y, Twerlty$rst
.SCJ.SS~CJH,
P/CIINI:\’Meet&s,
1414th meeting, paras. 78 and 79.
p Ibid.,
Elel~euth Session,
Fowth
Committee,
581st meeting,

para. 6.

13
