VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force with the
necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
Concerned that the Secretary-General is continuing to
face growing difficulties in meeting the obligations of
the Forces on a current basis, particularly those due to
the Governments of troop-contributing States,
Recalling its resolutions 33 / 13 E of I 4 December 1978
and 34 /7 D of I 7 December 1979,
Recognizing that, in consequence of the withholding
of contributions by certain Member States, the su-.,lus
balances in the Special Account for the United Nations
Emergency Force and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force have, in effect, been drawn upon
to the full extent to supplement the income received
from contributions for meeting expenses of the Forces,
Concerned that the application of the provisions of
regulations 5.2 (b), 5.2 (d), 4.3 and 4.4 of the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations would aggravate the
already difficult financial situation of the Forces,
Decides that the provisions of regulations 5.2 (b),
5.2 (d), 4.3 and 4.4 of the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations shall be suspended in respect of the
amount of $6,825,999, which otherwise would have to
be surrendered pursuant to those provisions, this
amount to be entered in the account referred to in the
operative part of General Assembly resolution 33 / I 3 E
and held in suspense until a further decision is taken by
the Assembly.
76th plenary meeting
I December 1980

35/113.

Financial emergency of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the financial situation of the United Nations, 14
Recalling its resolutions 3049 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, 3538 (XXX) of 17 December 1975 and 32/104
of 14 December 1977,
Noting with concern that the short-term deficit of the
Organization has increased by more than 100 per cent
since 31 December 1976,
Recalling the request in its resolution 32/ I 04, addressed to all Member States, particularly those among
them whose efforts can promote an accord, to negotiate
with the aim of bringing about a lasting solution to the
financial problems of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind that a partial or interim solution of
parts of the problem could enhance the liquidity of the
Organization and might facilitate the achievement of
further progress towards a comprehensive settlement,
which is desired by all Member States,
I. Invites the Secretary-General, after consultation
with groups devoted to the conservation and protection
of nature, to issue postage stamps on that subject.
including, as appropriate, endangered species of the
planet;
2. Decides that the provisions of regulations 5.2 and
7.1 of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations
shall not apply to the sale proceeds of the above14

A/C.5/35/ 13.

233

mentioned postage stamps so that a portion of the
revenues so earned, after deducting the cost of producing the stamps, shall be earmarked for promoting, under
United Nations auspices, the noble cause of conservation and protection of nature and endangered species:
3. Further decides that the remaining revenues shall
be placed in a special account;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give appropriate publicity to the above-mentioned postage stamps
with the aim of mobilizing the support of the philatelic
community and organizations devoted to the conservation and protection of nature:
5. Invites Member States to exert all possible efforts
to reach a comprehensive accord and place the finances
of the Organization on a sound footing and to give due
consideration to the useful suggestions that were put
forward during the debate on the item at the thirty-fifth
session of the General Assembly;
6. Requests the Negotiating Committee on the
Financial Emergency of the United Nations to keep the
financial situation of the Organization under review and
to report, as appropriate, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session:
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
(a) A progress report on the status of the project on
the issuance of the special postage stamps:
(b) Detailed information regarding the extent, rate
of increase and composition of the deficit of the
Organization, as well as voluntary contributions received from Member States and other sources:
8. Decides to include in the prnvisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Financial emergency of the United Nations: rep'brt of the Negotiating
Committee on the Financial Emergency of the United
Nations".
89th plenary meeting
JO December I 980

35/114.

Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of
the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency

The General Assembly,
Concerned with the growing need for effective
administrative and budgetary co-ordination within the
framework of the United Nations system,
Recalling its decision taken at its 2440th plenary
meeting, on 15 December 1975, to consider in depth
the item entitled "Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency"
normally in off-budget years, 1 j
·
Having noted with appreciation the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on the administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency, 10
I. Concurs with the observations and comments of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as contained in its reports:
" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtieth Session. Supplement No. 34 (A/10034). p. 146, item 98.
"A/34/684. A/35/4XI and Add. I.
