S/2001/988

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 October 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 22 October 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As requested by the Permanent Representative of Papua New Guinea to the
United Nations, I am forwarding, for the attention of the Security Council, his letter
to me, dated 14 September 2001 (see annex), requesting assistance from the United
Nations for the implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement, especially in
the area of weapons collection and disposal.
Members of the Security Council are aware of the role played by the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville, in conjunction with the Peace Monitoring
Group, in support of the process that led to the Bougainville Peace Agreement, a
copy of which is attached to the letter from Ambassador Donigi (see enclosure 2). It
is my intention, with the concurrence of the Council, to respond positively to the
request from the Government of Papua New Guinea, which is supported by the
Bougainville parties. In addition to the existing mandate, as specified in my letter of
2 June 1998 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/506), the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville will accordingly perform the
following functions, as spelled out in part E of the Bougainville Peace Agreement:
(a)

Continue its work in conjunction with the Peace Monitoring Group;

(b) Chair the Peace Process Consultative Committee Subcommittee on
Weapons Disposal, which is comprised of representatives of the parties and the
Peace Monitoring Group. The functions of the Subcommittee include promoting
public awareness and developing, managing and implementing the process of
weapons disposal;
(c) Report to the Peace Process Consultative Committee Subcommittee as
and when councils of chiefs/elders inform the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville that the ex-combatants in their respective communities are ready to
disarm, the remaining Papua New Guinea Defence Force and Police Mobile Units to
withdraw and weapons to be placed in containers;
(d) Carry out such inspections and inquiries as it may consider necessary to
each stage of the weapons disposal process, verify the collection and storage of
weapons, and report its findings to the Peace Process Consultative Committee;
(e) Hold one of the keys for the dual-locking systems in the containers in
which the weapons are stored;

01-59677 (E) 261001

*0159677*

S/2001/988

(f) If called upon by any of the parties to do so, verify and certify, with the
assistance of the Peace Monitoring Group, whether there has been substantial
compliance by the parties in the handing over of weapons and whether the weapons
are securely contained, thereby making it conducive to the holding of the first
election for an autonomous Bougainville Government, or whether those elections
should be deferred and, if so, for how long.
It is my hope that the implementation of the Agreement, especially the handing
over of weapons by the ex-combatants, will clear the way for post-conflict peacebuilding activities and help ensure that the people of Bougainville benefit materially
from the return of a lasting peace to the island.
The United Nations Political Office in Bougainville will carry out these
activities in close consultation with the Department for Disarmament Affairs and the
United Nations Development Programme. Its expanded mandate will require the
setting up of a sub-office in Buka and additional resources. The overall financial
implications for the Office are estimated at $2.3 million for the period from January
to December 2002 and will be covered from resources provided for special missions
during the biennium 2002-2003. As in the past, I will keep the Council regularly
informed of the progress in the work of the Office.
I should be grateful if you would kindly make the text of the present letter and
its annex available to the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2001/988

Annex
Letter dated 14 September 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
This week is certainly not a week of celebration, in view of the disaster that
has befallen this city of ours. I am certain that everyone at the United Nations and at
the Missions to the United Nations have been touched in some way. Some of our
countries have also lost citizens. Papua New Guinea has been spared in this respect,
but the enormity of the murderous intent with which the perpetrators have
consummated their plans has just begun to be felt by many. We grieve for those who
have lost their lives and we pray for those who have been wounded, the families of
those lost and the many brave souls who are working tirelessly in the rescue
operations.
Amidst all this carnage and this sad and sorrowful occasion, we feel much
humbled in presenting to you a signed copy of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
(see enclosure 2).*
Attached also is our aide mémoire (see enclosure 1),* setting out a brief
summary of what the Government of Papua New Guinea seeks from the Security
Council. We draw your attention in particular to paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of the aide
mémoire.
Consistent with the statement by the President of the Security Council on 14
August 2001, we therefore seek the endorsement of the Security Council of the
request of the Government of Papua New Guinea, as contained in paragraph 7(2) of
the aide mémoire.
We would be grateful if you could communicate the present letter of request,
on behalf of the Government of Papua New Guinea, to the President and members of
the United Nations Security Council, together with the Bougainville Peace
Agreement and the aide mémoire.
(Signed) Peter D. Donigi
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

* Enclosures to be reproduced in language of submission only.

3
