134

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

corporations, whether public or private, operate in
Namibia of the illegality of such operations and the
position of the Council in this regard;
8. Authorizes the United Nations Council for Namibia to contact administering and managing bodies of
foreign corporations operating in Namibia, with particular emphasis on those which are not under direct
governmental control, to warn them of the illegal basis
on which they are operating in Namibia and of the
position of the Council in this regard;
9. Calls upon those States which have resident
or non-resident consular representation in Namibia,
whether ordinary or honorary, to terminate such representation.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/149.

Action hy intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations with respect
to Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 91 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 92
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia with the responsibility of administering N amibia until independence,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council,
Taking into account the statements of the representative of the South West Africa People's Organization, 93
who participated in an observer capacity in the consideration of the item by the Fourth Committee, and conscious of the urgent and pressing need of Namibians
outside Namibia for concrete assistance from the specialized agencies and other institutions within the
United Nations system,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system to take all effective measures, within their respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full and
speedy implementation of the Declaration and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly
in the provision of moral and material assistance, on a
priority basis, to the peoples of colonial Territories and
their national liberation movements,
1. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to prepare, in consultation with the United Nations Council
91 Ibid.,

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
92Jbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.l), chaps. I, VI,
VII and IX.
9 3 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 30th and
45th meetings.

for Namibia and within their respective spheres of
competence, programmes of assistance to the people
of Namibia and their liberation movement, the South
West Africa People's Organization;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for the indicative planning
figure granted to Namibia and requests it to continue
to co-operate with the United Nations Council for
Namibia in the elaboration of programmes of assistance
to Namibians;
3. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations and conferences within the United Nations
system to consider granting full membership to the
United Nations Council for Namibia so that it may
participate in that capacity as the Administering Authority for Namibia in the work of those agencies, organizations and conferences;
4. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to consider favourably granting a waiver of the assessment
of Namibia during the period in which Namibia is
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia;
5. Requests all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure
that the rights and interests of Namibia are protected
and to invite the United Nations Council for Namibia
to participate, in its capacity as the Administering
Authority for Namibia, whenever such rights and interests are involved;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to continue to examine this question and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/150.

Dissemination of information on Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 94 and the relevant chapters of
the report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 95
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well as
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council relating to the question of Namibia,
Stressing the urgent need to arouse world public
opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting
effectively the people of Namibia to achieve selfdetermination, freedom and independence in a united
Namibia and, in particular, to intensify the widespread
and continuous dissemination of information on the
struggle for liberation being waged by the people of
Namibia, guided by their liberation movement, the
South West Africa People's Organization,
9 4 Jbid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
95 Jbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, II,

VI, VII and IX.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the mandate given by the Ge~e~al
Assembly to the United Nations Council for Namibia,
and mindful of the pressing need for the Office of Public Information of the Secretariat to intensify its efforts
to acquaint world public opinion with all aspects of
the question of Namibia,
l. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to send a mission to the headquarters of the
specialized agencies and non-gove~nme1;1.tal. organi~ations to discuss the question of d1ssemmat1on of mformation and assistance to Namibians;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Office of Public Information of the Secretariat, in cooperation with the United Nations Council for Namibia:
(a) To acquire and distribute appropria_te_ films _on
Namibia, including the new film on Namibia which
was shown at United Nations Headquarters on Namibia Day, 26 August 1976;
( b) To prepare, in consultation with the South
West Africa People's Organization, a film on the contemporary situation inside Nami~ia an~ the. struggle
of the Namibian people for genume nat10nal mdependence;
(c) To continue publicity through television, radio
and other media;
(d) To continue to give publicity to the United
Nations Council for Namibia and the South West Affrica People's Organization on tt:levision in the Uni!ed
States of America and other ma1or Western countries,
in order to mobilize support in those countries for the
genuine national independence of Namibia;
3. Requests Member States and the United Nations
Postal Administration to issue commemorative stamps
on Namibia until genuine national independence for
Namibia is achieved;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to direct
the Office of Public Information to continue to make
every effort to generate publicity and disseminate information with a view to mobilizing public support for
the independence of Namibia;
5. Decides to make adequate budgetary provtsion
in order to meet the additional costs required to expand the circulation of the Namibia Bulletin and to
add German to the languages in which it is published;
6. Decides to observe the week of 27 October as
a week of solidarity with the people of Namibia and
its liberation movement, the South West Africa People's
Organization, as proposed by the President of Senegal
at the Dakar International Conference on Namibia and
Human Rights, 96 and requests the United Nations
Council for Namibia to prepare a commemorative programme for that purpose;
7. Requests the Secretary-General urgently to undertake, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, the preparation of a comprehensive
United Nations map of Namibia reflecting therein the
territorial integrity of the Territory of Namibia;
8. Further requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to follow the implementation of the present
9 6 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24 ), vol. II, annex II,
para. 25.

135

resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/151.

United Nations Fund for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to terminate
the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and assume
direct responsibility for the Territory until its independence, and resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Recalling further its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of
12 December I 973, by which it appointed the United
Nations Council for Namibia trustee of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge
its responsibility with regard to the Territory in accordance with resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent
resolutions of the General Assembly,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility for
Namibia, the United Nations accepted a solemn obligation to grant all possible support to the Namibian
people in their struggle for self-determination, freedom
and national independence in a united Namibia,
Convinced of the need to grant all possible material
assistance to Namibians and their dependants who are
victims of South Africa's repressive and discriminatory
policies,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia on the United Nations Fund for
Namibia, 97
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia on the activities of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia and approves the conclusions
and recommendations contained therein;98
2. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
3. Decides to allocate to the United Nations Fund
for Namibia the sum of $US 300,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1977;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to continue to appeal to
Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and private individuals for generous voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
5. Invites Governments to appeal once more to
their national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
6. Appeals to all States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, as well as other organizations having a special interest in Namibia, to make financial contributions to the
United Nations Institute for Namibia through the United
Nations Fund for Namibia;
vol. II, annex XIII.
Ibid., annex XIII, paras. 89-106.

i>7 Ibid.,
~8
