S/PV.7047

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7047th meeting

Tuesday, 22 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

13-52525 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1352525*

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Namibia, Nicaragua, Norway, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carl
Hallergard, First Counsellor of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.

2/68

begin

its

22/10/2013

Mr. Feltman: The Council meets today at a
moment of heightened Middle East diplomacy.
Discussions are ongoing on both immediate crises and
long-standing sources of tensions in the region, from
the Syria catastrophe to the Middle East peace process
to questions regarding nuclear proliferation. We believe
that last month’s general debate in the General Assembly
in New York reaffirmed the importance of the United
Nations as a forum for engagement between States and
for real diplomatic progress when there is international
unity as opposed to division. While the challenges on
each front should not be underestimated, it is important
to maintain and even increase the momentum behind
diplomacy. We encourage and remain committed to
supporting the Security Council and its members in
fully exploring all the opportunities at hand to resolve
peacefully, though dialogue, the difficult issues that
bedevil peace and security in the region.
Central to many statements by world leaders
in the general debate was the urgent importance of
shaping more favourable dynamics across the region
and addressing the decades-long Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The test will be whether and at what pace
current efforts can be sustained and gain traction in
response to such concerns and expectations. Many
have acknowledged the opportunity at this juncture to
save the two-State solution and realize the vision of a
viable independent Palestinian State living side by side
in peace with a secure Israel.
On 27 September, for the first time in 17 months,
the Quartet principals met in New York. They were
joined by the Israeli and Palestinian chief negotiators
for a joint briefing on the progress of the negotiations.
Minister Livni and Mr. Erekat reiterated their personal
and official commitment to reaching a comprehensive
permanent status agreement, and asked for the Quartet
and the international community’s support. Both
stressed that their shared objective is to end the conflict,
based on a vision of two States for two peoples.
The Quartet reaffirmed its determination to lend
effective support to their efforts during the prescribed
time frame. Acknowledging the leadership of Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas, the Quartet commended
their efforts and their commitment to remaining
engaged in the negotiations. Quartet partners stressed
the importance of reversing negative trends on the
ground in order to advance the direct talks. The
Representative of the Quartet, Tony Blair, briefed

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the group on the Palestinian Economic Initiative,
which aims to bring transformative economic growth
to the Palestinian economy, running in parallel with
the renewed negotiations. The Quartet discussed the
humanitarian needs of Gaza’s residents and emphasized
the importance of increased access to Gaza through
legal crossings, while welcoming recent steps taken by
Israel in that regard.
In discussing the importance of international
support for the negotiations, the Quartet commended
the League of Arab States for its constructive role
and recognized that many others in the international
community have made important contributions. The
Quartet envoys will meet again soon as part of their
now monthly meetings to report on progress. Since the
Quartet meeting, negotiators have picked up the pace
of talks and have stated their commitment to abiding
by the understanding of not revealing the contents of
such discussions. It is encouraging to see an intensified
dialogue that demonstrates that both sides are taking
ownership.
On 25 September, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians met at the ministerial level and expressed
its full support for the ongoing peace negotiations. The
Secretary-General called on donors to step up efforts to
assist the Palestinian Authority, stressing that
“[t]he situation is volatile and the status quo in the
occupied Palestinian territory is not sustainable. In
the long run, the occupation is deeply damaging to
both Israelis and Palestinians”.
Most participants welcomed the positive gestures
announced by Israel, including the easing of restrictions,
as yielding visible improvements on the ground in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Despite the welcome intensification of negotiations,
there have been worrisome developments on the ground
that we cannot ignore. I wish to reiterate the unequivocal
call by the United Nations on all to refrain from violence
and incitement, reinforce calm and reverse negative
trends in order to preserve the tentative opening in the
political process.
During the reporting period, Palestinians shot
and killed two Israeli soldiers in apparently unrelated
incidents on 20 and 22 September. President Abbas
publicly condemned the incidents, and Israeli and
Palestinian security officials held coordination meetings
to prevent an escalation of violence. Palestinians injured

S/PV.7047

seven Israeli soldiers, including one on 17 October
when a Palestinian attacked an Israeli military base
with a bulldozer prior to being shot dead. Israeli
security forces carried out a total of 334 operations.
One resulted in the killing of an Islamic Jihad militant
in the Jenin refugee camp. Demonstrations, including
some against the barrier, resulted in numerous injuries.
During the reporting period, Israeli forces injured at
least 290 Palestinians, including 114 children and two
women. A total of 311 Palestinians were arrested.
The Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) reported
numerous incidents of stones and Molotov cocktails
thrown at both civilian and military targets. It
announced the arrest of Palestinian terror suspects and
the confiscation of weapons and improvised explosive
devices. Palestinian security forces, continuing their
work to maintain security in the West Bank, safely
defused three unexploded devices. Intra-Palestinian
clashes with armed militants during a large security
operation on 5 October in Jenin refugee camp resulted
in several injuries, including to Palestinian security
personnel, and about 100 arrests.
Settlement activity is an obstacle to peace and
against international law. Clashes between Palestinians
and settlers were also ongoing. In an incident still under
investigation, a Palestinian beat to death one Israeli
settler, a retired IDF colonel, in the Jordan Valley on
11 October. In another Palestinian attack, five Israeli
settlers were injured, including a nine-year old girl, on
5 October in the settlement of Psagot near Ramallah.
Israeli settlers injured eight Palestinians, including
three children. So-called price tag attacks included the
desecration in two instances of tombstones in Christian
cemeteries in Jerusalem and a mosque in the Palestinian
village of Burqa on 10 October. On 6 October, Israeli
security forces reported the arrest of 14 Israeli minors
from Jerusalem, allegedly involved in such attacks in
recent months.
Multiple incidents of settler attacks against
Palestinian farmers and orchards damaged over 1,080
trees and saplings. This is of particular concern given
that the olive-picking season — a source of livelihood
for thousands of Palestinians — is currently under way.
We welcome the enhanced efforts of the Israeli military
in recent years to provide protection for Palestinian
farmers and facilitate access to their olive groves at this
time of year, and we urge that such efforts be expanded
year round.

13-525253/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In a worrying development, clashes broke out on
the Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount between Israelis
and Palestinian worshippers, in what Palestinians see as
growing provocations on that holy site. This drew sharp
criticism, including from the Palestinian Authority and
Jordan. Incitement from any quarter must cease and the
sanctity of holy sites of all faiths must be respected.
The demolition of a total of 58 structures — the third
such incident of collective demolitions in recent months
—displaced the 48-member Bedouin community of Kfar
Makhoul. On 3 October, the Israeli military demolished
the tents subsequently established by the community,
some with assistance provided by international
humanitarian agencies. Such incidents reinforce the
United Nations conviction that Palestinians require
access to a fair planning and zoning regime so às not
to be compelled to resort to the building of structures
without an Israeli permit, which leads to demolitions.
We also remind Israel of its obligations to facilitate
humanitarian assistance to communities in need.
We welcome the recent implementation by the IDF
of some of UNICEF’s recommendations from its March
2013 report “Children in Israeli military detention”. We
encourage further measures to improve the treatment of
Palestinian children in Israeli military custody.
The calm in the Gaza Strip is showing worrying
signs of erosion. On 13 October, the IDF announced
that it had uncovered a mile-long tunnel constructed
with slabs of concrete, from Gaza into Israel — the third
tunnel discovered in a year. Hamas senior leadership
claimed responsibility for the construction, suggesting
its potential use for kidnapping operations to facilitate
the release of Palestinian prisoners. We condemn the
construction of such tunnels, which are in violation of
the November 2012 ceasefire understanding. The use
of hundreds of tons of cement in the construction of
the tunnel, when cement is critically needed for civilian
goals in Gaza, is also deeply disturbing. Furthermore,
in rejecting Hamas’ stated justification for the tunnel,
the United Nations continues to reject any incitement
to violence or attempted denial of Israel’s right to exist.
In another violation of the November ceasefire
understanding, Palestinians launched a total of five
rockets and one mortar shell into Israel, resulting
in no injuries or damage, while another nine rockets
reportedly dropped into Gaza. Israel conducted seven
incursions into the Gaza Strip. Israeli forces shot one
Palestinian militant dead on 30 September and injured

4/68

22/10/2013

another on 17 September. Three Palestinian civilians
were reportedly injured by Israeli live fire in the border
area.
Following the tunnel discovery, the Government of
Israel temporarily suspended the transfer of construction
material through the Kerem Shalom crossing into
Gaza. We fully recognize Israel’s legitimate security
concerns, but we remind Israeli officials of the needs
of Gaza’s residents, including for construction material
for civilian use that must enter Gaza through legal
crossings. The people of Gaza are suffering from the
rise in food insecurity, a significant energy problem
affecting the health, water and sanitation sectors, and
restrictions imposed on movement of people for medical
and educational reasons, with Rafah crossing open for
16 out of 36 days during this period.
We are grateful for Turkey’s donation of $850,000
to the Palestinian Authority for the purchase of fuel to
generate electricity for essential health and sanitation
services in Gaza, to be implemented with United
Nations assistance. While longer-term engagement will
be needed to address structural issues affecting service
provision to Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, this is a
welcome stopgap measure to provide a safety net and
mitigate the humanitarian situation in Gaza. Turkey
also donated 10,000 metric tons of flour to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) — a critical contribution to
the Agency’s emergency food assistance.
On 2 October, a man convicted of murder was
executed in Gaza. The United Nations position against
such executions is well-known.
At a complex juncture for the Middle East, we
remind Member States that UNRWA continues to face
serious financial difficulties. A deficit of $48 million in
its budget for education, health and poverty mitigation
work threatens the provision of essential services to
more than 5 million Palestinian refugees in Palestine,
Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. In a special meeting chaired
by the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States on 26 September, participants
agreed to sustain and increase support to the agency.
Reports of Palestine refugees fleeing Syria being lost
in boat that capsized off Egypt, and an increase in the
death toll of Palestinian refugees in Syria from the
escalation of fighting in Dera’a, Yarmouk and other
camps in Rif Damascus, underline the urgent need
to address the extreme vulnerability of Palestinian

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refugees in the current conflict and thereby uphold the
promise of sustained engagement with UNWRA.
In Lebanon, security continues to be affected by
cross-border shelling and shooting from Syria, leading
to the injury of at least three soldiers on 28 September.
President Sleiman condemned a missile attack by a
Syrian helicopter on the border town of Aarsal on
7 October. Progress has been made in the investigations
into the bomb attacks in the southern suburbs of Beirut
on 15 August and in Tripoli on 23 August, leading to
several arrests. The Lebanese army and security forces
deployed heavily around the southern suburbs of Beirut
to assume security responsibility in place of Hizbullah,
and also in Tripoli. In a welcome development, nine
Lebanese pilgrims who had been held in captivity for
17 months in Syria were released on 19 October and
returned to Lebanon. At the same time, two Turkish
pilots who had been abducted on 9 August in Beirut
were also released.
In the light of the multiple impacts of the Syrian
crisis on Lebanon, on 25 September on the margins of
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General convened
the inaugural meeting to launch the International
Support Group for Lebanon. The high-level meeting
reaffirmed international support for Lebanon’s stability
and policy of disassociation, for President Sleiman
and for the institutions of the State, and encouraged
assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces, refugees,
host communities, and the Lebanese Government.
We anticipate an expansion of the International
Support Group to embrace additional countries and
organizations that share the goal of helping Lebanon,
and we welcome the World Bank’s recent meeting on
Lebanon.
The tragedy in Syria continues to test our collective
resolve and ability to end the violence there. While
important progress has been made on the chemical
weapons file, it will by no means bring an end by itself
to the appalling suffering of the Syrian people. The
Secretary-General continues to insist that the only way
to bring peace to Syria is an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process.
We are working hard to convene the Geneva conference
in mid-November. Joint Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi is in the region on a tour that will include visits
to Syria and key States that can bring influence to bear
on the prospects for peace. I myself returned late last
week from visits to London and Moscow, where the
focus was on convening the Geneva conference. The

S/PV.7047

conference will aim to help the Syrian sides launch a
political process, which would lead to an agreement
on how to fully implement the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) and establish by
consent a new transitional governing body with full
executive authority. We highly value the Security
Council’s strong support to that effort, as reflected in
resolution 2118 (2013), of 27 September.
We are working at all levels and hope that a common
vision for a political solution can soon emerge among
the Syrians, in the region and globally. We continue
to call on all who truly wish to work for peace and a
new democratic Syria to focus not on military actions
or transferring arms to either side of the conflict but,
rather, on ensuring the holding and the success of the
Geneva conference. With a political process, however
difficult it may be, there is hope that a new Syria
will emerge. Without it, there is little on the horizon
but the further destruction of Syria and the further
destabilization of the region as a result of the conflict.
The situation in the Golan continues to be volatile,
with ongoing heavy clashes between the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces and armed members of the opposition
occurring inside the area of separation, jeopardizing
the ceasefire between Israel and Syria. On 9 October,
the Israel Defense Forces informed the United Nations
Disengagemetn Observer Force (UNDOF) that Syrian
artillery fire had hit an IDF position, wounding two
IDF soldiers, and that the IDF was going to retaliate.
UNDOF asked the IDF not to take such action, and also
asked Syrian authorities to stop the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces from firing towards the ceasefire line to prevent
escalation between the two sides. Subsequently, the
IDF fired at a Syrian position in the area of limitation
on the Bravo side, wounding two Syrian soldiers. Upon
inspection of the location, UNDOF observed the impact
of artillery fire on the Alpha side.
In conclusion, let me return to where I started,
with an acknowledgment of the emerging opportunities
for diplomacy before us across a range of issues that
foment tension across an interconnected region. On the
Middle East peace process, we should do all we can
to take advantage of the opening that now exists. That
can only help the Palestinian and Israeli people, and
the entire region. After 20 years of talks and too many
negative developments on the ground, we do not need
lengthy negotiations. What we and the parties need are
decisions — the right decisions — and leaders who are
committed to usher in an agreed political solution. The

13-525255/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations, through the Quartet, alongside broader
engagement with all the relevant partners, stands ready
to contribute to what we all so fervently hope to see
come to fruition, that is, the creation of two States for
two peoples living side by side in peace and security.
Despite the difficult regional context and the challenges
on the ground between Israel and Palestine, this is not
an opportunity that either can afford to lose.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, Sir, I
congratulate Azerbaijan on its presidency of the Security
Council this month under your able leadership. We also
express appreciation for Australia’s skilled leadership
of the Council during the month of September. I also
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
When we addressed the Security Council at the
most recent open debate, in July (see S/PV.7007), we
appealed to the international community to act upon
its political, legal and moral obligations towards the
question of Palestine and Palestinian-Israeli peace. We
stressed the need for meaningful steps to support the
peace process towards the fulfillment of the decadeslong promise to assist the Palestinian people to realize
their rights and justice, including a just solution to the
plight of the Palestine refugees, and to realize their
freedom in their independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security on the basis of the 4 June
1967 borders — the foundation of peace in the Middle
East.
Our message to the Council and our calls for action
to salvage peace prospects remain as urgent today
as prior to the launch of direct negotiations between
the parties nearly three months ago, on 29 July. If the
situation persists as is, marked by Israeli impunity and
recklessness, yet another opportunity to make peace a
reality will be lost.
This must be a matter of concern for the Council
and international community as a whole. Support
for peace negotiations, as resoundingly pledged just
weeks ago from the General Assembly rostrum, and
by the Quartet in its most recent statement, whereby
it “reaffirmed its determination to actively support
the pursuit of a comprehensive resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict” (see SG/2202), requires
6/68

22/10/2013

more than just commending the decision to resume
negotiations and encouraging perseverance. It requires
meaningful action to help the parties overcome the
persistent obstacles, including by ensuring respect
for the parameters of the solution, on which there is
international consensus, towards the actual achievement
of a final peace agreement.
In September, before the General Assembly,
President Mahmoud Abbas reaffirmed in the clearest
terms the abiding Palestinian commitment to a peaceful,
negotiated solution, based on the parameters enshrined
in the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map. He stressed, inter alia, that
“The goal of the peace that we seek is defined
and the objective of the negotiations is clear to
all, just as the terms of reference and the basis
and foundations of the peace process and of the
agreement we seek are longstanding and within
reach.” (A/68/PV.12, p. 26)
Moreover, he reconfirmed our readiness to engage in
good faith in the negotiations, stressing
“I assure Members that we shall respect all of
our commitments and foster the atmosphere most
conducive to continuing the negotiations seriously
and intensively, while providing guarantees for its
success and aiming at a peace agreement within
nine months.” (supra)
The State of Palestine is upholding that commitment
and acting with seriousness of purpose in pursuit of the
Palestinian people’s inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations. We have conducted ourselves with
the utmost responsibility, in line with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and United Nations
resolutions, including of the Security Council, fully
cognizant of the high risks and consequences entailed
in the failure to seize the small opportunity that remains
for realizing the two-State solution.
We have seriously engaged in several rounds of
negotiation with Israel, maintaining our focus on the
overall objectives of peace and coexistence, despite the
striking imbalance of power and the cyclical distractions
and complications caused by the occupying Power. We
have done so despite the hardships being endured by
the Palestinian people under occupation and despite the
challenges faced by our Government in addressing the
needs of our people under such conditions, including
the deliberate impairment of our capabilities to meet
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

their needs and to allay their concerns regarding both
their daily subsistence and their future.
At this juncture, we reaffirm our gratitude for
all efforts made by the international community in
support of the negotiations and the goal of peace. We
recognize the efforts and leadership of the United
States, as well as the European Union, the Russian
Federation and the United Nations — as members of the
Quartet — by the ministerial committee of the League
of Arab States and by all other concerned States from
around the world. Moreover, we recognize the efforts
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee and the support of
the donor community, and we stress the importance of
such assistance to Palestine for alleviating the negative
impact of the occupation and the ongoing financial
crisis on our people and our Government institutions.
However, despite the genuine efforts being exerted,
tangible progress remains elusive and hopes are
diminishing, as the challenging situation on the ground
persists and provocative Israeli actions and declarations
undermine the spirit and intent of the negotiations.
The Security Council must be aware of the
vastly negative impact that unlawful Israeli policies
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem — the territory that constitutes the State
of Palestine — are having on the ground and on the
Palestinian conviction in the fairness of the political
process and the potential for its success. Illegal and
provocative Israeli actions, whether by the Government,
its occupying forces or its extremist settlers, are
raising deep doubts about Israel’s true intentions in
the negotiations, reinforcing the notion that it is only
using this period to further entrench its settlement
enterprise and de facto annexation of Palestinian land,
while simultaneously attempting to ease international
pressure in that regard.
Over the past months, Israel has continued its
settlement activities, in grave breach of international
law, total contradiction to the objectives and spirit of the
negotiations and flagrant disregard of the global calls for
cessation. Moreover, it has done so with full knowledge
that those illegal actions are further undermining the
contiguity of the Palestinian territory and the viability
of the two-State solution and aggravating already high
tensions.
Since the resumption of negotiations, Israel has
advanced the approval of over 3,000 settlement units
and the confiscation of hundreds more dunums of

S/PV.7047

Palestinian land, in addition to a barrage of provocations
and incitement, including by Cabinet officials and
Knesset members. In that regard, we refer to a report by
the Israeli non-governmental organization Peace Now,
which exposed, among other things, a 70 per cent rise
in the construction of settlements in the first half of
this year.
Such illegal actions and tactics must be rejected
by the international community, which must remain
vigilant in its calls for a full halt to all Israeli settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The international consensus
on that issue must remain firm. We furthermore call on
all States to pursue measures to cease and prohibit any
support to settlement activities, in fulfilment of their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
We also recall in that regard the responsibilities
undertaken by the Quartet members, and highlight the
call, made in its 27 September statement, for
“all parties to take every possible step to promote
conditions conducive to the success of the
negotiating process and to refrain from actions that
undermine trust or prejudge final status issues.”
(see SG/2202)
The Quartet also stressed the need for actions by all
the parties concerned, consistent with and supportive
of that call.
In that regard, we also draw the Council’s immediate
attention to the dangers arising from constant Israeli
provocations and acts of aggression in occupied East
Jerusalem, particularly at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
Al-Aqsa Mosque. Such actions, particularly by Israeli
settlers and Jewish extremists, have escalated and are
dramatically fuelling tensions. We condemn and reject
all reckless attempts to inflame religious confrontation,
which would have grave consequences for the region
and wider international community, endangering
international peace and security. We call on the
Security Council to closely monitor developments
in Jerusalem and to act responsibly, in line with its
Charter duty, to demand a halt to all such incitement,
provocations and inflammatory rhetoric and to avert a
further destabilization of that critical situation.
In addition to the illegal measures being
carried out in connection with Israel’s settlement
campaign — whether the construction of settlements
and the wall, the confiscation of land, the forced
displacement of civilians, the demolition of homes

13-525257/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

or the constant terror, violence and destruction being
perpetrated by Israeli settlers — Israel, the occupying
Power, also persists with its collective punishment
and systematic human rights violations against the
Palestinian people. Military raids, excessive force
against civilians, including peaceful protesters, the
arrest and detention of more civilians, including
children, and the abuse and maltreatment of the
thousands of Palestinians who remain captive in Israeli
prisons and detention centres continue unabated.
Moreover, the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
remains of grave concern, as Israel’s illegal blockade,
now well into its sixth year, continues in collective
punishment of the entire population, exacerbating
poverty, widespread socioeconomic ills and despair.
We therefore reiterate to the international
community two calls in particular. We call for the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population in
accordance with humanitarian law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention — an obligation longacknowledged yet unfulfilled. And we call for the
lifting of that inhumane blockade on our people and
for the sustained opening of the Gaza Strip crossings to
allow for the normal movement of persons and goods,
in accordance with humanitarian law as well as past
agreements between the parties.
It is against that backdrop that peace talks
continue — an environment hardly conducive to the
pursuit of peace. Yet, the Palestinian side remains
committed to the goals of peace, justice and coexistence.
We stress that peace and justice are two sides of the
same coin, interdependent and mutually reinforcing.
We are prepared to undertake our responsibilities
to resolve all final status issues — Jerusalem,
refugees, settlements, borders, security, water and
prisoners — for the achievement of a just, lasting peace
and the independence of a sovereign, contiguous, viable
and democratic State of Palestine, living side by side
with Israel in peace and security on the basis of the pre1967 borders.
For a credible process to be sustained, however,
the reality on the ground must be redressed. Serious
efforts are needed to close the wide gap between that
reality and the hopes, expectations and requirements
for a successful political process. Israel must show in
word and deed that it is willing and able to uphold its
responsibilities and legal obligations and act forthwith,
both at the negotiating table and on the ground, to
make peace possible. That obviously necessitates an

8/68

22/10/2013

end to all of the illegal, destructive policies of the
military occupation. The international community
must be unrelenting in that demand. The alternative is
a continued rise of tensions and instability, sabotaging
the final opportunity to realize the two-State solution,
an alternative that we, along with the international
community, clearly seek to avert.
In conclusion, I am compelled to reiterate our grave
concerns about the situation of the Palestine refugees
in Syria. All are aware of the horrific impact of the
conflict on the civilian population in Syria, including
the Palestine refugees, and the massive suffering being
endured. We call again for intensive efforts, including
by the Security Council, to ensure the protection of
all civilians and to promote a political solution to the
conflict as rapidly as possible.
We stress that the vulnerability of the Palestine
refugees stems directly from the failure to resolve the
problem for over six decades, due to Israel’s deliberate
denial of their rights, a fact that reinforces the imperative
of a just solution for their plight in the context of any
final peace agreement and regional peace. Until that day
comes, we recognize the extraordinary efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and all humanitarian organizations working in Syria
and the neighbouring countries to aid and alleviate the
suffering of the refugees and displaced persons in this
time of crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Winston Churchill, one of the
architects of the Organization, is remembered for his
speeches that rallied a nation in the dark hours of the
Second World War. His words inspired a generation
when he told the British people, “Let us therefore brace
ourselves to our duty [so] men will still say ‘This was
their finest hour’”. And indeed it was their finest hour.
They stood tall knowing that if they did not stand up
for human life and human dignity, their very survival
would be at stake. It was a lesson for the ages, and today
they are remembered as a beacon of light during some
of the darkest days that the world has ever known. With
much of the Middle East in turmoil, the world is once
again being called upon to defend liberty, democracy

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and human rights. History will look back and judge
which nations stepped forward with conviction,
conscience and courage.
This morning, I would like to speak about those
three qualities, beginning with conviction. As the
political landscape of the Middle East evolves, the
international community must demonstrate resolve.
Last month, Iran’s new President, Mr. Hassan Rouhani,
took centre stage at the General Assembly. He arrived
in New York on a charm offensive, waving to excited
fans with one hand while waving off sceptics with the
other. Since his election, Rouhani has tried to reinforce
the image that he is a moderate. He was published in an
American newspaper, appeared on network television
and even started using social media.
I have news for President Rouhani — embracing
Twitter does not make him a reformer, but embracing
human rights certainly would. The Iranian regime
is notorious for violating women’s rights, targeting
religious and ethnic minorities, and denying
fundamental freedoms to its citizens. Rouhani is like
the Emperor with new clothes, cloaking himself as a
moderate when Iranian radicalism remains clear to the
naked eye.
Unlike his predecessor, whose hateful rhetoric
about wiping Israel off the map made him easy to
dismiss, the new Iranian President has a strategy
code-named “SLY” — S-L-Y — Smile, Lie and Yield
minor concessions. Rouhani has perfected the art of
saying one thing and doing another. But you do not
have to believe me, Mr. President; you can read about it
in his 2011 memoir describing his time as Iran’s chief
negotiator. Here in his own words is what he said:
“While we were talking to the Europeans in
Tehran, we were installing equipment in Isfahan ...
By creating a calm environment, we were able to
complete the work in Isfahan.”
While Rouhani provides diplomatic cover, Iran
is marching towards a bomb. Since the June election,
Iran has installed thousands of new centrifuges, and
just last month, the new president declared that Iran
will not give up one iota of its nuclear rights. Make no
mistake — the Iranian programme is not for peaceful
purposes. Seventeen different countries peacefully
produce nuclear energy without uranium enrichment
or plutonium production, and yet Iran insists that its
enrichment infrastructure and technology are its right.
It is not Iran’s right; in fact, it is wrong.

S/PV.7047

When negotiating with Iran, the international
community must, as Prime Minister Netanyahu said,
distrust, dismantle and verify. Everyone, including
Israel, wants to find a diplomatic solution. But one has
to wonder why Israel and a minority of other countries
are the only ones standing on the front line warning
the world that an Iran with nuclear weapons does not
threaten Israel alone. It threatens the entire region, from
Saudi Arabia through the Gulf States to Morocco. Their
voices are harder to hear, but if one tunes into the right
frequency, one discovers that they are frightened. They
know that if Iran gets nuclear weapons, it will threaten
their lives and lives throughout the region. It will not
just alter the balance of power in the Middle East. The
repercussions will be felt in Europe, the United States
and across the globe.
The world has stood at this crossroads before. On
the eve of the Second World War, Churchill warned of
the impending danger when he said,
“They should know that we have passed an
awful milestone in our history, when the whole
equilibrium of Europe has been deranged... This is
only the beginning of the reckoning ... [unless] we
arise again and take our stand for freedom as in
olden time.”
Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past and leave a
minority to stand alone against a common enemy. The
danger is real, but this is not the first time that Israel’s
warnings have been brushed aside.
When we warned the world about Al-Assad’s
chemical arsenal, we were told, “Do not worry, he will
not use chemical weapons because that would not be
rational”. Today the entire world knows that the dictator
in Damascus used chemical weapons against his own
citizens. And the only reason that Al-Assad has agreed
to give up those weapons is the very real threat of an
American military strike. One does not need a PhD in
physics to know that pressure works.
The Iranian economy is crumbling under the
weight of crippling sanctions, and that pressure is
getting results. Yet some States have suggested easing
the sanctions. That suggestion reminds me of a boxer
who is clinging to the ropes in the final round. Give
him a moment to rest and he will turn around and attack
with more vigour. We must keep up the pressure until
Iran agrees to play by the rules. Let me be clear — any
sort of partial deal will be completely ineffective in
containing the Iranian threat. Any diplomatic resolution

13-525259/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

must ensure that Iran has no centrifuges, no enriched
uranium and no plutonium track. If Iran does not agree,
then the sanctions must not be eased; they should be
increased.
Now is the time to demonstrate conviction. We
cannot allow the world’s most dangerous weapons to
reach the hands of the most dangerous actors. The
Security Council showed its resolve when it adopted a
series of resolutions against Iran. Having come so far
and worked so hard, now is not the time to give in. Iran
cannot be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons.
The second quality I want to speak about is
conscience. We have all seen the horrific images that
have emerged from Syria: men and women sprawled
on the floor convulsing, young children foaming at the
nose and mouth and then lying motionless. No one with
a conscience can stand by as the people of Syria continue
to be massacred, whether by chemical weapons or the
routine brutality of the Al-Assad regime.
The cynics in this Chamber will accuse Israel of
shedding crocodile tears. The Jewish people and the
State of Israel know all too well how evil can prevail
when people shut their eyes and turn their backs. To the
Syrian people I want to say, here and now — “I know
that our two nations have a long history of conflict
and that we are separated by politics and religion. But
we are eternally linked by our common humanity. We
are horrified by the pain and suffering that you have
endured. As we speak, our hand is extended to your
people. And we will continue to offer humanitarian
assistance to all those who need it regardless of race,
religion or gender.”
It is hard for most of us to conceive that anyone,
much less a Government, would use chemical weapons
against its own innocent civilians. Is it logical? Is it
rational? Not at all. Many in this Chamber said that
countries would never use weapons of mass destruction.
Surprise, surprise — it turns out one cannot apply
rational thinking to irrational players.
How many in this Chamber believed that when
Bashar Al-Assad became President, he would be the
new hope for Western-Arab relations? After all, here
was a young London-trained ophthalmologist, with a
beautiful wife, who drank high tea and ate scones at
the Ritz. It turns out the eye doctor is just another spin
doctor and his murderous rampage has Syria spinning
out of control.

10/68

22/10/2013

We applaud the steps that have been taken by the
international community so far, but the removal and
destruction of Syria’s weapons must remain a priority.
The international community must ensure that the
process is properly monitored, verified and completed
while abiding by the agreed timelines. It must also
ensure that no entity takes advantage of the process
to advance its capacities and knowledge of chemical
weapons.
Let me be absolutely clear. We cannot trust that a
regime that lies in bed with Iran and Hizbullah is not
lying when it commits itself to eliminating its deadly
arsenal. Together, Iran, Syria and Hizbullah form
the trio of terror. The trio is intent on acquiring the
ABCs of terrorism — atomic, biological and chemical
weapons — so it can more effectively murder innocent
men, women and children. The clock is ticking and time
is running out. Our conscience tells us that the sooner
Syria’s stockpile of chemical weapons is destroyed, the
sooner we will safeguard the people of Syria and bring
greater stability to the Middle East.
The problems plaguing the Middle East are
centuries old and, contrary to what some in this
Chamber believe, cannot be solved overnight. How
many here thought that the so-called Arab Spring would
bring about democracy? I am reminded of the lyrics of
Leonard Cohen’s song “Democracy”: “It’s coming from
the feel that this ain’t exactly real, or it’s real, but it ain’t
exactly there.” Leonard Cohen could have written this
song to describe the Middle East today. The promise of
democracy in the Middle East “ain’t exactly real and it
ain’t exactly there”. The region continues to be defined
by bloodshed, repression and instability.
This brings me to the third quality I want to speak
about, and that is courage. We all want to see peace
in the Middle East. Israel welcomes the resumption of
the negotiations. Israel desires peace and is committed
to serious and meaningful negotiations with a positive
outcome. Israelis envision the day when we can live
free from divisions, hatred and violence. But making
peace requires courage. It requires leaders courageous
enough to embrace partnership and promote tolerance.
On the very same day that CNN beamed images
of Mahmoud Abbas talking about peace at the United
Nations, official Palestinian television delivered a
very different message. The Palestinian Authority and
Fatah held ceremonies to honour terrorists responsible
for the murder and maiming of innocent Israelis. At

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7047

a memorial held in Ramallah, a Fatah official read a
speech on behalf of Abbas, praising terrorist Abu
Sukkar who killed 15 Israelis and wounded more than
60. This murderer was described as “the most noble
among the noble”. At another event on the same day, a
member of Abbas’s Fatah’s Central Committee glorified
terrorist Dalal Mughrabi, who hijacked a bus and killed
37 civilians, 12 of whom were children. This attack was
described as “the glorious deed of a hero”.

divided the British mandate over Palestine, speaks of
the creation of a Jewish State no fewer than 25 times.
The resolution declared that “independent Arab and
Jewish States… shall come into existence”. The Jews
welcomed the plan and joyously declared a new State
in their ancient homeland. But the Arabs rejected the
plan and, joined by the armies of five Arab nations,
launched a war of annihilation against the newly born
Jewish state.

Examples of incitement are all too easy to find
in Palestinian society. Their results can be found in
the death of Gal Kobi, who was shot in the neck by
a Palestinian terrorist last month. They can be found
in the death of Tomer Hazan, who was kidnapped and
murdered by a Palestinian acquaintance. They can be
found in the death of Seraiah Ofer, who was brutally
beaten to death outside his home by Palestinian men
wielding metal bars and axes. As horrific as these
crimes are, President Abbas only found his voice to
condemn these attacks to a Jewish audience in New
York City, while speaking in English. We have yet to
hear President Abbas condemn these attacks in his
native Arabic, speaking to his own people.

Sixty-five years later, we still do not hear the
Palestinians talk about two States for two peoples.
Sure, Palestinian leaders call for an independent
Palestinian State, but they insist that the Palestinian
people return to the Jewish State. This is a euphemism
for the destruction of the State of Israel and a major
hurdle to peace.

The time has come for the Palestinian leadership
to clearly and unequivocally condemn violence and
terrorism. The time has come to stop poisoning the
minds of Palestinian children. The time has come to
start teaching tolerance, mutual respect and coexistence
; after all, the next peace agreement will depend on the
next generation wanting peace.
For years, Member States have been listening
to debates on the Middle East. In all this time, have
they ever heard a Palestinian representative say
anything constructive about Israel? No. We only hear
demonization and delegitimization. It is time to stop
the blame game. The United Nations library will
have to open a new fiction section for the countless
letters sent to the Security Council by the Palestinian
representative, distorting the truth. We need to speak
truthfully about the problems plaguing the Middle
East. It seems that those States which are so heavy on
the criticism of Israel are also light on the facts. Allow
me to dispel a number of myths.
Myth number one — some nations seem to believe
that a great injustice was done to the Palestinian people
when the United Nations voted to partition then-British
mandate Palestine into two States. In fact, in 1947
resolution 181 (II) of the General Assembly, which

Myth number two — some in this Chamber are
convinced that the root of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the settlements. In fact, from the time
Israel gained its independence in 1948 until 1967, the
West Bank was in Jordanian hands and Gaza was in
Egyptian hands. Throughout this time, there was not a
single settlement. Yet the Palestinians still sought our
destruction. And where were the Arab States? They
did not lift a finger to create a Palestinian State and
instead sought our destruction. Today, just 2 per cent of
the Israeli population lives in settlements, but they are
blamed for 100 per cent of the problems. I have said it
before and I will say it again — the settlements are not
the major hurdle to peace; the real obstacle to peace is
the Palestinians quest for the so-called right of return.
Myth number three — the Palestinian delegation
has sent letters to the Council accusing Israel of denying
people freedom of worship. The only denying taking
place is the denial of facts on the ground. One of the
first acts Israel undertook after reuniting Jerusalem in
1967 was to abolish discriminatory laws and safeguard
access to religious sites for people of all faiths. This was
in contrast to pre-1967, when everyone but Jews could
access Jerusalem. Since Israel introduced religious
freedoms in 1967, people of all faiths have been able to
visit the holy sites of Jerusalem.
In contrast, the Palestinian leadership breeds
incitement and stirs up violence on the Temple Mount.
They even went so far as to accuse Israel of altering
the nature of Jerusalem. In fact, it is the Palestinians
who are altering the nature of Jerusalem; they are
destroying artefacts and distorting history in an effort

13-5252511/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to erase all traces of an ancient Jewish presence. The
world’s silence in response to these crimes has been
deafening. Ever since King David laid the cornerstone
for his palace 3,000 years ago, Jerusalem has served
and will continue to serve as the eternal capital of the
Jewish people.
Instead of accusing Israel of restricting freedom of
movement, the Palestinians should be concerned with
holding free elections. Let me remind the Council that
Abbas’s term expired in 2009. Since then he has been
extending his term without holding elections.
Where are all the concerned voices from the
defenders of democracy? Did any Member State in this
Chamber say something, or raise his voice about the
issue of elections? I am sure that many countries would
enjoy the chance to cancel or postpone elections when
the polling does not look good. Let me also remind
everyone of an important truth: in real democracy one
election does not earn one the right to rule forever.
Myth number four — Israel has been accused of
creating a humanitarian crisis in Gaza by restricting
the free movement of goods. In fact, every month,
trucks carrying hundreds and thousands of tons of
goods — including food, medical equipment and
construction materials — pass from Israel into the
Gaza strip.
In his past reports, the Special Representative has
criticized Israel for restricting the entry of construction
materials. How many here have asked us to allow
cement into Gaza so that the Palestinians could build
houses? Yet when we do, in exchange for our goods and
goodwill, Israel is repaid with tunnels of terror.
Just a week ago, the Israel Defense Forces
discovered a two-kilometre tunnel originating in Gaza
and ending just outside an Israeli community not far
from homes, kindergartens and playgrounds. The
tunnel was built by Hamas using 500 tons of cement
that had been earmarked for construction. I will repeat
that again: 500 tons of cement. To understand how
much that is, the Statue of Liberty weighs 225 tons. Just
imagine how many schools, hospitals and homes could
have been built.
In taking responsibility for building the tunnel, a
Hamas spokesman said,
“This tunnel was made by the hand of the fighters
of Al-Qassam. They will not sleep in their efforts
to hit the occupation and kidnap soldiers.”

12/68

22/10/2013

Instead of building houses, Hamas is building
smuggling tunnels; instead of building schools, they are
building terror networks. That is the reality that Israel
has to live with every day. Instead of using construction
materials to build a better future for the Palestinians
and the Palestinian people, the leadership in Gaza is
committed to destroying the State of Israel. It may just
be my hearing, but I have yet to hear the countries that
demand Israel allow more cement into Gaza condemn
those crimes.
Myth number five — some countries around this
table believe that international forces should be on
the border to guarantee a future peace agreement.
That is interesting, because history has shown that
Israel cannot rely on others to ensure its security.
While we support the work of United Nations forces
on our borders, history has shown that Israel cannot
rely on the international community to ensure its
own security. That was the case with the first United
Nations Emergency Force in the Sinai desert, and with
European Union Border Assistance Mission in Rafah.
The recent involvement of certain United Nations
bodies has hardly been helpful. In his remarks earlier, the
representative of the Secretariat spoke about an incident
last month in Kfar Makhoul. The report neglects to note
that, following a review by Israel’s Supreme Court, the
buildings in question were determined to have been
illegally constructed. In the light of that important
fact, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) needs reminding that its
role is the coordination of humanitarian aid, not aiding
in the obstruction of justice. In that regard, OCHA
systematically abuses Israel’s authority on the ground.
It seems that the only thing the Office for Coordination
is not doing is coordinating with Israel.
It is time to stop pointing fingers and laying the
blame at Israel’s doorstep. Israel remains committed
to two States for two peoples. We are ready to make
an historic compromise to realize the creation of a
demilitarized Palestinian State living side-by-side with
the Jewish State of Israel. Israelis and Palestinians
will have to work together to create new and lasting
solutions to old problems. That will only be possible
if our work is built on a foundation of truth, mutual
recognition and security.
A great convulsion is shaking the Middle East,
from the Straits of Hormuz to the Straits of Gibraltar.
The tremors have shattered States and toppled
Governments, and the ground is still shifting. The
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

region stands at a crossroads, and it is not yet clear if
freedom and moderation will triumph over tyranny and
fundamentalism.
Let this be the moment in history when all peoples
seek understanding instead of making accusations,
when nations strive for harmony instead of dissonance,
and when our family of nations shows the conviction,
conscience and courage to make peace possible.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his excellent
briefing.
Today I will focus on three topics, namely, Syria,
Lebanon and Middle East peace.
On 27 September, the Security Council confirmed
that the use of chemical weapons anywhere was a threat
to international peace and security (see S/PV.7038). In
so doing, the Council fulfilled its role as a guardian
of global stability by voting unanimously to require
the expeditious and total destruction of Syria’s deadly
chemical weapons programme. That welcome vote
was a necessary response to the Syrian Government’s
ruthless and repeated use of chemical weapons against
its own people. But to have meaning, resolution 2118
(2013) must be implemented immediately and with
great rigour. Under the joint leadership of the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), implementation has
already begun. I commend the brave men and women
of both organizations for their courage and professional
dedication, and welcome the appointment of Special
Coordinator Sigrid Kaag.
Make no mistake, what we are attempting is without
precedent. Never before have international experts
been asked to locate, secure and destroy a vast quantity
of nerve agents, toxins and other chemical arms in a
country torn apart by conflict. The responsibility
for complying with resolution 2118 (2013) rests with
Syria’s leadership, which built those weapons of mass
destruction, then lied about them, proceeded to use
them and promised, under international pressure, to
cooperate in eliminating them.
The Secretary-General has aptly pointed out that
a red light for one form of weapon does not mean a
green light for others. The vast majority of the human
carnage in Syria has been, and continues to be,

S/PV.7047

inflicted by Government bombs, mortars, shells and
bullets. As innocent people continue to be targeted, the
country is disintegrating. That has devastating human
consequences, and its repercussions are spreading
across the region.
My Government believes that the only viable way to
end the horrific violence in Syria is through a political
transition, based on the Action Group for Syria Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), which calls for a
transitional governing body, with full executive powers
and chosen by mutual consent. As President Obama and
Secretary Kerry have consistently stated, given the role
of the present regime in the monstrous crimes of the
past two and a half years, Al-Assad has no part to play
in a political transition. The United States supports the
consultative efforts now being made by Joint Special
Representative Brahimi and will continue consultations
of its own with, among others, Mr. Brahimi, Russia,
the London 11 and the Syrian opposition, so that the
“Geneva II” conference can be convened urgently.
It is imperative to make diplomatic progress,
and it is beyond urgent to take additional steps to
relieve suffering both inside Syria and among the
more than 2 million Syrians refugees who sought
refuge in neighbouring countries. The United States
strongly endorses the Council’s recent presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/15) demanding secure
passage for humanitarian relief. But statements alone
are meaningless without changes in behaviour on
the ground. We on the Council must track progress,
report any and all obstruction and press urgently for
compliance with the basic standards enshrined in the
presidential statement. Winter is fast approaching, and
the despair of families across Syria is only growing
worse.
If I may, I would like take this occasion to highlight
two alarming and time-sensitive issues that warrant the
Council’s urgent attention.
First, in Moadamiya people have been under siege
and without access to basic necessities for almost one
full year. We have credible reports that residents are
eating leaves of trees and that people have died of
malnutrition-related causes. The regime continues to
trap an estimated 12,000 people, of whom 7,000 are
women and children. They are begging us — this week,
in fact, begging us —to save them from death. All
parties must allow humanitarian agencies unhindered
access to evacuate the remaining civilians and deliver
lifesaving treatment supplies in that area. The parties

13-5252513/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

have to respect their obligations under international
human rights and humanitarian laws to protect civilians
and to allow the safe access of neutral and impartial
humanitarian organizations to all people in need.
Again, the situation is urgent.
The second issue is the daily assault on medical
neutrality. This conflict is going to be remembered
even 100 years from now for the obliteration of the core
principle of medical neutrality. According to the recent
report of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
“[t]he denial of medical care as a weapon of
war is a distinct and chilling reality of the war”
(A/HRC/24/CRP.2, para. 3)”; “Government forces
have engaged in agonizing cruelty against the sick
and wounded.” (ibid., para. 33)
The attacks against medical facilities and on those
requiring treatment is barbaric and must halt
immediately. The provision of emergency help and
necessary medical equipment should not be subject
to any sort of political litmus test. People in dire need
should be helped regardless of their sect or where they
come from in Syria.
The Syrian health-care system is shattered. The
World Health Organization (WHO) reports that, as of
June, in Al-Raqqa, Dayr Al-Zour and Homs more than
70 per cent of health centres had been damaged or are
out of service. Nearly 40 per cent of the 1,724 primary
health-care centres across the country are either badly
damaged or completely closed. Worse, nearly 70 per
cent of Syria’s health professionals, up to 80,000, have
fled the country, according to WHO. Some members
have seen the statistics that of the 5,000 doctors in
Aleppo before the war, 36 remain. Many governorates
now lack qualified medical expertise for trauma,
anaesthesia and specialized laboratory personnel. In
two northern governates, there is hardly any female
staff to cope with reproductive health emergencies or
to respond to gender-based violence. The regime must
immediately lift any bureaucratic locks on the delivery
of urgently needed medical aid and seize targeting
medical workers. Non-State actors too must respect
medical neutrality and facilitate access.
In conclusion, we appeal urgently to Council
members that have influence on the regime to put
pressure on the regime to fulfil its obligation under
international humanitarian law as it relates to medical
neutrality. The United States will continue to urge

14/68

22/10/2013

opposition groups to facilitate medical access in areas
under their control. For the sake of the Syrian people
and the sake of the sanctity of medical neutrality
everywhere, we have to do more to address that problem.
Lebanon is among the neighbouring countries most
affected by the Syrian civil war. Because of the nature
of that conflict and because of the influx of refugees,
Lebanon faces enormous humanitarian, economic
and security challenges. More than one fifth of the
population of Lebanon are now refugees from Syria. A
recent meeting in New York of the International Support
Group for Lebanon demonstrated that the permanent
members of the Council, the European Union, the
League of Arab States, the United Nations and other
international institutions shared a common agenda in
support of Lebanon as it faces current challenges and
promoted a policy of dissociation from the Syrian
conflict. At that meeting, Secretary Kerry announced
that the United States would contribute an additional
$30 million to help Lebanese communities cope with
the rising demand for public services, including those
related to infrastructure, education and health. That
is in addition to the $74 million in new humanitarian
assistance, which is Lebanon’s share of the $340 million
in refugee-related aid announced by President Obama
during his visit to the General Assembly.
My Government commends Lebanon’s cooperation
with the World Bank and the United Nations in
developing a plan to address its heightened needs.
We look forward to reviewing that plan and we hope
it will provide a firm basis, along with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1701
(2006), for further internationally supported efforts to
maintain Lebanon’s political progress, security, social
cohesion and economic well-being. In the meantime,
we call on the international community to help reduce
the extraordinary burdens that Lebanon, through no
fault of its own, has been compelled to bear.
Turning finally to the ongoing negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians, Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas made clear in front of the General
Assembly their commitment to reaching an enduring
peace agreement that ended their conflict. President
Obama, Secretary Kerry and Special Envoy Martin
Indyk remain deeply engaged in achieving a final
status accord within the nine-month time frame set for
the negotiations.
In addition, the international community continues
to demonstrate strong support for the peace process,
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

most recently through several special events on the
margins of the General Assembly, including the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee and the Quartet principals
meeting, as well as the special meeting of supporters
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which conveyed
continued support for the Agency and its mission.
As a compliment to the political track,
international support for the Palestinian economy and
the Palestinian Authority is crucial. We also recognize
the need to address the humanitarian needs of the
civilian population in Gaza, and wish to highlight the
continued efforts we are making to promote economic
development in both the West Bank and Gaza, including
more than $348 million in debt relief for the Palestinian
Authority that the United States has provided just
this year. Private sector debt relief and direct budget
support to the Palestinian Authority are vital, and we
encourage donors to meet their existing commitments
in providing additional support. To stimulate shortterm economic growth, we work with the Palestinian
Authority to encourage immediate investment in highimpact micro-infrastructure projects in the West Bank.
The United States has also provided $25 million in
funding for those projects.
The United States condemns in the strongest terms
any calls for violence. We are especially concerned
about the recent discovery of attack tunnels emanating
from Gaza into Israel. In addition, we remain concerned
about ongoing incidents of violence in the West Bank,
as well as recent clashes around holy sites in Jerusalem.
We stress the importance of maintaining calm in those
sensitive places. We urge restraint on the part of all
sides and call upon all parties to avoid taking actions
that undermine final status negotiations. Following
the bold lead of both Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas, it is essential that we all work to build
the trust and confidence necessary for lasting peace.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to confirm our
support for the resumption of the negotiations between
Israel and Palestine on 29 July. We trust that they
will be substantive and continuous and outline a clear
path towards a two-State solution, a cessation of the
conflict and the establishment of lasting peace based
on international legal documents known to all of us,
including Security Council resolutions.
We take note of how difficult it is to reach consensus
on the two-State solution. The parties are seeking fully

S/PV.7047

to solve all final status issues, where in many cases it will
not be as easy to find a compromise solution. Whatever
the situation, reaching final agreements is undoubtedly
the responsibility of the direct participants in the
negotiations, who must demonstrate full responsibility
for the future of their peoples. Of course, any eventual
agreement must be developed by the Palestinians and
the Israelis themselves, and not imposed externally.
Otherwise, it would not be viable and would not last.
We deem it very positive that a meeting of the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators was
held here at the ministerial level last month — the
first such meeting in a year and a half. The Quartet is
still the internationally recognized Security Councilauthorized mechanism to faciliate the Middle East
settlement.
We are convinced that fostering cooperation with
the League of Arab States, which is making a significant
contribution to the negotiation process, will help step
up efforts to find a fair resolution to chronic problems.
We support the efforts of the League to promote the
Arab Peace Initiative. Its role is very important, among
other things for restoring the intra-Palestinian unity on
the platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Clearly, implementing any eventual agreement, which
the parties intend to achieve no later than April 2014,
would not be possible if there were to be a split.
The Quartet’s adoption of a statement on the
resumed negotiation process (see SG/2202) is of
particular importance. However, we cannot dwell on
that. We need to move further by encouraging parties
and sending clear signals to show that the international
community does not wish to see the Palestinian
issue being pushed into the background, given all of
the upheavals in the Arab world over recent years.
Achieving a comprehensive, fair and lasting ArabIsraeli settlement would be a key contribution to
normalizing the situation in the region.
It is a source of serious concern that illegal Israeli
settlement activities continue in the occupied territories.
Unilateral and provocative acts are unacceptable.
Measures by both sides to improve the atmosphere
surrounding the renewed negotiations should be a sine
qua non. The measures should be sustainable, gradual
and regular in nature.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
consistently deteriorating, despite the basic climate
of calm and certain concessions introduced by Israel

13-5252515/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on the importation of fuel and building materials. It is
clear that giving the citizens of Gaza a normal life is
only possible by fully lifting the blockade of the Strip
and restoring the unity of the Palestinian territories.
Russia is fully assisting the current negotiation
efforts, both as part of the Quartet and through
ongoing dialogue that we have been carrying out with
the Palestinians, Israelis and Governments of the
region. Apart from the meetings that took place on
the sidelines of the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, the Special Representative of the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation for reaching
a settlement in the Middle East recently visited the
region. We will continue to assist Palestine with our
traditional assistance as well as by strengthening the
institutional basis for statehood and the economy.
Resolution 2118 (2013) opened a window of
opportunity for convening an international conference
on Syria. We must not drag our feet. The Syrian
conflict is increasingly taking on an obvious and very
dangerous interfaith aspect. Christians find themselves
under the threat of being chased off their lands and
are experiencing terrible suffering at the hands of the
Islamists. We are hearing of new cases of the desecration
and destruction of religious facilities and murders
and violence. Bandits, cloaked in Islam, are instilling
religious hatred in people and casting a shadow over
the community on behalf of whom they act. We need to
really urge all the Syrian parties to meet in Geneva and
make their choice, using political methods to resolve
the various problems.
The Syrian Government has frequently said that
it was ready to participate in the Geneva meeting. We
welcome the fully fledged accession by Syria to the
Chemical Weapons Convention. The authorities of the
country are demonstrating openness and preparedness
to work closely with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
and to ensure the international inspectors access to
their declared facilities. The destruction of equipment
linked with the chemical weapon programme is fully
underway. In that regard, there is a need for the
armed opposition also to comply unswervingly with
the requirements in resolution 2118 (2013) in terms
of providing full assistance to the OPCW and United
Nations support during the joint mission. It is clear that
at least part of the opposition is trying to undermine the
efforts to implement the resolution.

16/68

22/10/2013

In conclusion, I would like once again to underscore
that in terms of finding a political and diplomatic
settlement and in working on chemical disarmament,
there is no option to pooling the collective mutually
complementary efforts of the international community.
Russia is prepared to work jointly on that.
Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive briefing.
Today’s debate is the first open debate of the Security
Council on the Middle East since the resumption of talks
between the Israelis and the Palestinians on 14 August.
Those talks carry the heavy burden of hope — hope
for the region as well as hope for the international
community. They represent a remarkable and historic
chance of a solution, based on the establishment of two
States, living side by side in peace and security.
We have noted that a number of negotiation rounds
have taken place in Jericho and Jerusalem. Reports
coming out of those talks are less than encouraging, yet
we remain cautiously optimistic. It is our hope, as well
as our wish, that things behind the scenes are moving in
the right direction. The nine-month deadline is critical.
The longer it takes, the dimmer the possibility of a
negotiated settlement would become. In his report on
the peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine, the
Secretary-General says that:
“For the negotiations to have a chance at success,
they need to be meaningful with a clear political
horizon and yield early dividends” (S/2013/524,
para. 16).
Pakistan agrees with that assessment.
We also welcome the fact that the Quartet
principals met on the sidelines of the General
Assembly on 27 September and that they reaffirmed
their determination to lend effective support to the
parties and recommitted themselves to a permanent
status agreement within the agreed timeline of
nine months. The commitment of the international
community to that shared objective is critical. It is a
fragile and complicated process, and all the more, it
merits the support and continued encouragement of the
international community. As we have consistently said,
the credibility of the Council is linked to the peaceful
solution of the long-standing Palestinian issue.
For the process to move forward, specific actions
are required on the ground. How can we expect the

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

building of trust in an atmosphere where settlement
construction continues? Palestinian prisoners remain in
prolonged detention. Gaza remains blocked and attacks
in and around the Al-Aqsa compound continue to sour
the atmosphere.
That delicate process requires trust, and trust is
earned by action and not by mere words. There have to
be consequences for actions, and therefore, we welcome,
in that regard, the European Union guidelines on
settlements. Pakistan’s support to the Palestinian cause
is unrelenting. We have recently contributed $1 million
to the Palestinian Authority for the construction of the
Palestinian Embassy in Islamabad. That is just one of
the sincere gestures of the Government of Pakistan to
show our solidarity with the people of Palestine and
their just cause. We continue to believe that peace in
the Middle East is dependent on the establishment of an
independent, viable and contiguous State of Palestine,
based on the pre-1967 borders with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital. Vacating occupied Lebanese lands and
the Syrian Golan is also imperative.
Allow me to turn now to the precarious situation
in Syria. Pakistan welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013) and continued cooperation
of the Syrian Government with the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), aimed at dismantling its chemical
weapons programme. The Secretary-General says, in
his proposal on the elimination of chemical weapons in
Syria (S/2013/591), that it is uncharted territory. Pakistan
hopes that the cooperation of the Syrian Government
with the joint team will continue and that the opposition
groups would also extend similar support.
It may be recalled that the improved atmosphere
in the Council was instrumental in the adoption
of the presidential statement on the humanitarian
situation in Syria (S/PRST/2013/15). We hope that the
Council’s pronouncement will have the desired effect
in alleviating the sufferings of our Syrian brothers and
sisters, both inside the country and outside.
Lastly, neither the destruction of chemical weapons
nor the improvement of the humanitarian situation
is a panacea for the ills afflicting Syria. The real
solution lies in dialogue and engagement. We welcome
the renewed momentum towards the convening of
Geneva II and hope that it will be convened as soon
as November. Work towards a plan that fulfils the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and that is

S/PV.7047

Syrian-led and Syrian-owned remains crucial. We hope
that all sides will work towards such an outcome.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his informative briefing. I would also
like to thank the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements. Luxembourg fully endorses the
statement that will be made by the observer of the
European Union at this debate.
I would like to speak first about the Middle East
peace process. The direct negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians begun on 14 August are
continuing on a regular basis, and we welcome that.
Nonetheless, we have no illusions. In order to achieve
a negotiated two-State solution in the agreed time
frame of nine months, numerous obstacles must still
be overcome. We hope that with the decisive support
of the United States, and in particular the personal
involvement of Secretary of State John Kerry, as well as
the active involvement of Special Envoy Martin Indyk,
Israel and Palestine will continue to negotiate with the
requisite earnest and discretion. We hope that both
parties will demonstrate good faith and be prepared
to make the necessary sacrifices to build an enduring
peace in the Middle East.
The time has come to take the necessary historical
decisions, to implement a two-State solution based
on the 1967 borders, and to make peace through a
sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security
side by side with the State of Israel, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both States. To that end, unilateral acts
that fuel the logic of defiance must cease. No one in
Palestine will believe in the successful outcome of the
peace process if illegal settlement activities continue
at their current pace, if tensions and provocative acts
on the esplanades of mosques intensify, and if the
separation wall continues to deprive Palestinians of
their land. For their part, the Palestinians must end the
violence in the West Bank and stop firing rockets from
the Gaza Strip. They must fulfil their commitments and
continue their efforts to combat terrorism.
Luxembourg will continue to work with its European
Union partners to contribute to the efforts under way in
close cooperation with the key stakeholders, including
the countries of the region and the Quartet. We welcome

13-5252517/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Quartet’s meeting on the sidelines of the General
Assembly and its statement issued on 27 September.
I turn now to Syria.
Since the open debate that was held in July, the
Security Council has been able to take two important
decisions with respect to disarmament and humanitarian
access. On 27 September, we adopted resolution 2118
(2013) which follows up on the terrible chemical
weapons attack of 21 August and seeks the dismantling
of Syria’s chemical weapons. The destruction in the
established time frame of one of the largest chemical
weapons arsenal in the world is an enormous job.
No effort must be spared in order to support the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations in
its work. Syria, for its part, must unswervingly respect
all the requirements and commitments stipulated by the
Council. On 27 September, Luxembourg made available
to the OPCW a satellite communication facility, and last
week we decided to contribute €500,000 to the special
trust fund established by the United Nations and the
OPCW to cover part of the cost of the Joint Mission.
Of course, the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme will not in and of itself end the
immense suffering of the Syrian people, which has now
lasted for more than two and a half years. The violence,
unfortunately, has seen no end. Children living in
besieged communities are now dying of famine. In
January, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights estimated that there were roughly
60,000 dead. Today, just nine months later, the number
of victims has doubled. The list of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes that appal the conscience
of humankind is only increasing. Given the level of
horror, the situation in Syria must be referred to the
International Criminal Court. The Council must
shoulder its responsibilities in that regard.
The humanitarian and security challenges can be
resolved only through a politically negotiated solution
to the crisis. Now that a provisional date for the
“Geneva II” conference has been announced, we would
encourage all parties concerned to participate in order
to finally set in motion a dynamic that will lead to an
end to the hostilities and move towards the necessary
political transition in Syria based on the 30 June 2012
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
In the meantime, it is urgent for the parties in
Syria, in particular the Syrian authorities, to follow up
18/68

22/10/2013

the provisions of our second important decision, the
presidential statement on the humanitarian situation
adopted by the Council on 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15).
The parties must facilitate without delay free and
unhindered humanitarian access to the affected
populations. The evacuation of civilians trapped
in Moadamiya, on the outskirts of Damascus, and
of thousands of families who are prisoners in other
besieged towns, is urgently needed. There is an urgent
need to lift bureaucratic obstacles, ensure the provision
of medical supplies, provide humanitarian pauses,
open humanitarian corridors and provide cross-border
access and passage across the front lines to affected
populations.
We count on the Secretary-General and his team
to continue their regular updates to the Council on
the humanitarian situation in Syria and its impact on
neighbouring countries, as well as to inform us of
the implementation of the provisions of the 2 October
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/15). The decisions
we take will be of no value unless we remain focused
on their implementation on the ground and if we
collectively and firmly assure that they are applied.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing. I also listened attentively to the statements
made by the observer of Palestine and the representative
of Israel.
The Palestinian issue lies at the core of the Middle
East question. The only way out lies in resolving the
dispute through dialogue and negotiation. China has
always maintained that on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map for
peace, as well as through peace talks between Palestine
and Israel, an independent State of Palestine must be
established with complete sovereignty based on the pre1967 border, with East Jerusalem as its capital, whereby
the two States, Palestine and Israel, can live side by side
in peace and security.
At present, the resumption of direct talks between
Palestine and Israel represents a rare opportunity for
the Middle East peace process. It is our hope that
Palestine and Israel will seize that opportunity, seek
common ground, avoid any action or polemics that
might undermine the prospect of peace talks, and try
to achieve substantive progress as soon as possible.
The immediate priority is to take effective measures to
halt all settlement activities and to stop acts of violence
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

targeting innocent civilians in an effort to preserve the
climate for peace talks. The international community
needs to scale up its support for Palestine in order to
facilitate its economic development and to enhance
the confidence of the Palestinian people in the peace
process.
At present, the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Gaza,
remains grave. The relevant United Nations resolutions
need to be effectively implemented, and it is our hope
that Israel will fully lift the Gaza blockade so as to
alleviate the humanitarian difficulties in Gaza.
We welcomed the ministerial meeting of the Quartet
in September on the margins of the General Assembly.
China supports the Security Council’s strengthened
role in facilitating the international community’s
unanimous support of the peace process in the Middle
East.
China firmly supports the Palestinian people in
their just cause to restore their legitimate sovereignty
and has continued its unique, active support of the
peace process. China stands ready to continue to work
with the international community in contributing
positively towards a comprehensive and just settlement
of the Palestinian issue and the achievement of lasting
peace in the Middle East.
A political solution is the only way out of the
Syrian conflict and such a solution must be promoted in
parallel with the elimination of chemical weapons. At
present, inspection and elimination of Syria’s chemical
arsenal is progressing positively and appropriately.
China welcomes the Secretary-General’s appointment
of Ms. Sigrid Kaag as Special Coordinator of the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations and
notes that Ms. Kaag is already working in Syria. It
is China’s hope that the Joint Mission will strengthen
communications with the interested parties, including
the Syrian Government, to ensure continued progress
in the inspection and elimination of chemical weapons
according to schedule. China considers highly
important the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria
and is ready to take part in relevant efforts by providing
expertise and financial assistance.
The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2118 (2013) explicitly calling for
implementation of the Geneva Communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex) and the convening of the

S/PV.7047

proposed “Geneva II” conference aimed at providing
an opportunity for a political solution of the Syrian
conflict. The international community must seize the
opportunity with a view to forging a consensus in
order to vigorously advance the political process and
facilitate an early convening of Geneva II aimed at a
positive outcome. China calls on the Syrian parties
to achieve, for the greater good of their country and
people, a ceasefire and an end to the violence, without
delay, as well as an end to the crisis through dialogue
and the rebuilding of their homeland as soon as possible.
China supports the good offices of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Joint Special Representative
Brahimi and stands ready to participate in Geneva II
and work with the parties to seek a comprehensive, just
and appropriate solution to the question of Syria.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.
With respect to the main issue of the peace process
in the Middle East, negotiations between the Israelis
and the Palestinians have resumed after three years.
The viability of a two-State solution, which is the only
lasting and durable solution to the conflict, is at stake.
In that context, we welcome the initiative and
commitment of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry. At the ministerial meeting of the Quartet on
27 September, representatives agreed to support the
designated goal of the negotiations, namely, to conclude
an agreement on all final status issues and to establish a
methodology based on regular meetings scheduled over
a nine-month period. Twenty years after Oslo, a new
interim agreement would serve no purpose, nor would
continued negotiations with no end in sight.
We also welcome the sense of responsibility
manifested by the leaders of the two sides, Mr. Netanyahu
and Mr. Abbas, in deciding to return to the negotiating
table and urge them to maintain that same approach
in conducting the negotiations. In order to overcome
scepticism and the temptation to withdraw, both parties
should adopt confidence measures aimed at changing
the situation on the ground and outlining a path to a just
and durable peace. They must refrain from any decision
that could hinder the progress of negotiations.

13-5252519/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that context, our position has been constant.
First, the continuing settlement activity contravenes
international law and calls into question the viability
of the two-State solution; in that connection,
the European Union has drawn the appropriate
consequences. Secondly, violence, in all its aspects,
must cease. Israel’s security and similarly, respect
for the human rights of the Palestinians, cannot be
compromised. In that context, France regrets the loss
of life on both sides resulting from the too frequent
clashes between Israelis and Palestinians. Thirdly,
the situation of Palestinian prisoners and the issue of
administrative detention — despite recent progress on
the latter — remains of concern. We call for the release
of the second group of Palestinian prisoners, which is
a cornerstone for the resumption of the peace talks and
has been again postponed to 29 October. Fourthly, it
is equally important to ensure sustainable economic
development in Palestine in order to strengthen, on the
Palestinian side, the peace camp of President Abbas.
The Gaza blockade — which benefits
Hamas — does not help the situation, nor do the
financial difficulties of the Palestinian Authority and
the economic slowdown evident in the Palestinian
territories. We must help President Abbas with those
issues. The measures taken by Israel in recent months
to ease restrictions — especially those concerning
work permits and water access — are steps in the right
direction. They should be continued and strengthened,
including in Area C and in Gaza.
In terms of Syria, beyond the process of dismantling
its chemical weapons, the Council must stand ready to
respond to the ongoing tragedy. Faced with evidence of
the horrifying massacre of 21 August, which resulted
from the use of chemical weapons, the Security Council
demanded an end to Syria’s chemical weapons arsenal.
As France had requested, the decision allows for
monitoring by the Council and measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations in the case of
non-compliance by the Damascus regime in assuming
its international obligations.
The Council must ensure the strict implementation
of the decision. I commend the cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which have been given
the responsibilty for dealing with the weapons, and their
courageous staff, who are already deployed in Syria. I
also express my delegation’s support and confidence to
Ms. Sigrid Kaag, who was appointed by the Secretary-

20/68

22/10/2013

General as Special Coordinator of the Joint Mission of
the OPCW and the United Nations. Nevertheless, such
progress must continue. A crucial issue is the fact that
every day, innocent civilians are being killed in attacks
carried out by the Syrian regime.
For its part, France calls for a political solution. In
that context, it supports the convening of a conference
in Geneva, “Geneva II”, leading to a political solution
in Syria based on the full implementation of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) of 30 June 2012.
States participating in Geneva II must fully embrace
that goal. It is important that the process be credible
and lead quickly to the establishment of a transitional
Government with full executive powers, including
presidential powers in the security, intelligence and
armed forces sectors.
The Secretary-General and the Joint Special
Representative, Mr. Brahimi, are committed to
organizing the Geneva II conference. France is fully
cooperating in those efforts, together with its partners.
The successful ministerial meeting convened by
France on the margins of the General Assembly with
Mr. Al-Jerba showed the international community’s
support of the Syrian national coalition that represents
the moderate opposition to the regime of Bashar
Al-Assad and should guide the opposition’s delegation
in Geneva.
Pending the Geneva II conference, the Security
Council must ensure that the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/15) of 2 October, on humanitarian
access in Syria, enables real change on the ground. It
is clear that, three weeks after its adoption, there is no
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Syria.
The regime continues to refuse to grant United Nations
agencies and other humanitarian actors free, immediate
and unimpeded access to populations in need. France
supports the initiative to invite the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos, to present to the
Council a first evaluation of the implementation of the
presidential statement.
Lastly, I would like to say a word on Lebanon, which
is suffering the consequences of the conflict in Syria.
Lebanon is dealing with the challenges and threats it
faces because of the war in Syria. Refugees from Syria
are arriving in increasing numbers and today represent
approximately 30 per cent of the Lebanese population.
The deterioration of the security situation due to the
fallout from the Syrian crisis and the resultant worsening
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of community tensions, including the two attacks of
15 and 23 August in Ruways and Tripoli respectively,
are tragic illustrations of this. There is a political and
institutional crisis, with institutions paralysed, waiting
for a new Government to be formed. There is also an
economic crisis, which weighs heavily on the country’s
internal balance. Given these threats, the dissociation
policy adopted by President Sleiman must at all costs
be maintained and respected by all the Lebanese actors
who collectively adhered to it by signing the Baabda
Declaration on 11 June 2012.
Lebanon must be supported. We welcome the
launching, on the margins of the General Assembly, of
the International Support Group for Lebanon, which
enabled an unanimous expression of support for the
stability and independence of Lebanon and respect for
its sovereignty. We believe that it is now crucial that
we pursue this mobilization with the United Nations.
The Group’s work is ongoing, in particular in Beirut,
with a view to demonstrating our solidarity with that
friendly country and to helping it face this sweeping
crisis, which is not only humanitarian in nature but also
affects the political and security environment.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our support for
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. Its work has been
affected by the difficult situation facing the country,
but its role is crucial in supporting Lebanon in its
efforts to fight against impunity.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
convening this open debate. I would like to express
my appreciation for the briefing we just received
from Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman on the
current situation in the Middle East.
As regards the Middle East peace process, Rwanda
firmly believes that now is the time to take bold and
concrete steps towards sustainable peace. The ongoing
direct negotiations must achieve a lasting solution to
the Israeli/Palestinian conflict and hence give way
to the vision of a two-State solution, where a secure
State of Israel lives side by side with a viable State of
Palestine. We applaud the renewed commitment by
both Israelis and the Palestinian leadership to advance
these talks, and Rwanda pledges its continued support
to both parties. We are encouraged by the holding
of the Quartet meeting of 27 September in New
York, attended by both Israelis and Palestinian chief
negotiators, and we hope that both parties will keep the
current momentum aimed at achieving a comprehensive

S/PV.7047

agreement. Furthermore, we emphasize the need for all
concerned parties to strongly support the peace process
and avoid engaging in subversive activities that would
undermine the progress achieved.
On the issue of Syria, Rwanda remains concerned
with the current situation in the country, where a human
tragedy is unfolding with spillover effects on the entire
region. We reiterate our indisputable condemnation of
all forms of violence by whomever commits it.
Rwanda welcomes the progress made following the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination
and destruction of chemical weapons in Syria. We
are encouraged by the close cooperation between the
Syrian Government and the joint mission by the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons to eliminate and destroy the
chemical weapons in Syria. On this note, we urge the
Syrian rebels to permit the joint mission access to
chemical weapon sites in areas under their control, and
we call for all parties to sign a ceasefire agreement in
order to ease the process of dismantling Syria’s deadly
weapons.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our call to all
stakeholders to stop the supply of weapons to either
side of the conflict, and we urge all parties to desist
from violations and abuses of international human
rights and humanitarian law, bearing in mind that the
perpetrators will be held accountable before a court of
law. Rwanda further calls upon all parties to facilitate
safe, immediate and unimpeded humanitarian access to
those in need.
As we have said before, it is evident that there is no
military solution to the Syrian crisis. Rwanda remains
committed to the initiative to convene the “Geneva II”
conference next month in order to promote an inclusive,
Syrian-led political process leading to a transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. We welcome the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States for Syria, Mr. Brahimi, who is on a Middle
East tour to garner support for a Geneva II conference.
Rwanda calls upon all parties concerned to set a date
for the conference to avoid further speculation.
Allow me to comment briefly on Lebanon. The
situation in that country is particularly worrisome,
as violence is becoming more and more sectarian,
creating further political and security challenges. The
international community must condemn these acts and

13-5252521/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

effectively support President Michel Sleiman and the
Lebanese Government for their commitment to the
Baabda Declaration and their dissociation policy. Peace
and stability in Lebanon is paramount and should be
firmly maintained with the support of the international
community. We call on all parties in Syria to fully
respect the sovereignty, political independence and
territorial unity of Lebanon, and we also call on all
Lebanese actors to avoid further escalation and to
embrace the path of political understanding.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing this morning.
The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the return
to direct negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian
leaders since our most recent open debate here in
July (S/PV.7007). We extend our appreciation to the
United States, particularly to Secretary Kerry and
Special Envoy for the Israeli-Palestinian Negotiations
Martin Indyk for their steadfast commitment. That
determination has enabled the parties to return to the
table. We welcome the parties’ commitment to intensify
negotiations in the coming weeks, and we applaud the
bold leadership demonstrated on both sides.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Palestinian
Economic Initiative. We are taking a leading role in
fostering private-sector-led sustainable economic
growth in support of Palestinian State-building efforts.
We look to Israel to take the necessary steps to further
ease restrictions on both the West Bank and Gaza, to
enable the step change in the Palestinian economy that
Secretary Kerry is rightly advocating.
It is important to build confidence among the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples that their common goal
of peace is within reach. Over the past few weeks,
there have been a number of concerning events, such
as the murder of three Israelis, including two serving
Israeli Defense Forces soldiers in the West Bank, and
we condemn that unreservedly. There has been a rise
in price tag attacks across East Jerusalem and the West
Bank, including acts of setting fire and vandalizing
Palestinian property. Those responsible for these crimes
must be brought to justice. We are also troubled by
the rising tensions around the holy sites of Jerusalem,
sites that hold religious significance and are politically
sensitive. We call on all parties to maintain the status
quo and engage in dialogue to ensure calm.
Going forward, the international community must
do all it can to support both parties in working towards

22/68

22/10/2013

our common goal of reaching a negotiated two-State
solution that ends the conflict once and for all.
Concerning Syria, for the first time, with the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the Security Council
imposes binding and enforceable obligations on the
Syrian regime, with the threat of action under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations in the event
of non-compliance. Resolution 2118 (2013), the first on
Syria in 17 months, requires the full implementation of
the Executive Council decision of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, whereby Syria’s
chemical weapons must be verifiably eliminated within
the first half of next year. The voluntary destruction
of those chemical weapons, which until recently the
Al-Assad regime denied that it possessed, is a huge
step forward on the issue. Resolution 2118 (2013) also
formally endorses the Geneva communiqué of last year
(S/2012/523, annex), calling for a transitional governing
body with full executive powers.
Today, my Foreign Minister hosted a meeting
in London of 11 Foreign Ministers and a senior
delegation from the Syrian National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, led by President
Al-Jarba. The communiqué issued after that meeting
welcomed progress on preparations for a “Geneva
II” conference, which could take place in November.
Participants underscored that Geneva II should lead
to a transitional governing body with full executive
powers, agreed on by mutual consent. They agreed that
once such a body is established, Al-Assad and his close
associates with blood on their hands will have no future
role to play in Syria. The United Kingdom will continue
to work closely with the Syrian National Coalition,
which is committed to the Geneva communiqué and
an inclusive and democratic Syria, and which rejects
extremism.
Well over 100,000 people have been killed, and
hundreds of thousands of Syrian civilians continue to
suffer from the regime’s brutal use of conventional
weapons and gross human rights violations committed
on a daily basis. The United Kingdom calls on all Member
States to support the Third Committee resolution on the
human rights situation in Syria. We must send a clear
message to the Al-Assad regime that the international
community is united in its condemnation of such human
rights violations.
We have seen the Security Council come together
on humanitarian access with the adoption of a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/15). That should
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

now be translated into visible change on the ground.
The humanitarian situation remains dire. More than
6.8 million people are displaced, and every 15 seconds
a Syrian becomes a refugee. That is almost 5,000
people every day. The United Nations estimates
that up to 2.5 million people in areas under siege
cannot be reached by humanitarian agencies. The
use of siege by regime forces in Moadamiya, Homs,
Aleppo and Al-Hasakah is unacceptable, and I echo
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos’s call for an
immediate pause in hostilities in Moadamiya to allow
humanitarian agencies unhindered access in order to
evacuate the remaining civilians and deliver life-saving
treatment and supplies.
The United Kingdom recognizes the scale and
despair of the humanitarian crisis. During the general
debate of the General Assembly, we announced a
further $160 million in humanitarian assistance, which
now brings the United Kingdom’s total Syria-related
humanitarian funding to $800 million. That is the
largest sum that we have ever committed to a single
humanitarian crisis. The international community as
a whole pledged more than $1 billion in new funding
during September. That is a welcome step, but more
must be done.
Finally, concerning Lebanon, as July’s Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/9) and
the recent meetings of the International Support Group
have demonstrated, there is genuine international unity
in support of Lebanon’s stability. The United Kingdom
has tripled its own humanitarian and security assistance
to Lebanon this year, and we call on the Lebanese
parties to take urgent steps to form a new consensus
Government to tackle the significant challenges they
face.
We are at a critical juncture in both the Middle
East peace process and the Syria conflict. Both crises
require bold, responsible leadership on the part of the
parties to conflict and active engagement on the part
of the international community in order to secure an
end to conflict and a better future for the people of the
region.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing and the Permanent Observer of Palestine
and the Permanent Representative of the State of Israel
for their statements.

S/PV.7047

We are holding this open debate at a time when the
situation in the Middle East continues to be of serious
concern to the international community. Regarding
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, while we welcomed
the resumption of direct negotiations between the
Israelis and the Palestinians with the aim of arriving
at a definitive settlement of the conflict, today we
remain somewhat disappointed with the slowness of the
negotiations. What is worse, the violence continues on
both sides, rendering the achievement of any progress
in the negotiations hypothetical.
That is why Togo urges the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to maintain the course of the direct
negotiations and to stop resorting to acts that damage
any possibility of settling the conflict. It is why we urge
the Israeli authorities to continue to act in ways that
promote confidence, such as releasing 26 Palestinian
common-law criminals from prison on 13 August,
issuing new permits enabling Palestinian to travel in
Israel and authorizing the importation of construction
materials into Gaza, as well as easing measures
announced on 25 September by the Minister of Strategic
Affairs, regarding the lifting of some restrictions in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We also hope that
construction of new colonies will end and the embargo
on the Gaza Strip will be lifted.
By the same token, we ask Hamas, which continues
to administer the Gaza Strip, to cease all acts of
provocation and to control the armed groups that shoot
rockets into southern Israel. Hamas’s engagement
alongside the Palestinian Authority in the peace process
would be an added guarantee of success in the talks on
a general settlement of the Palestinian question.
Given that the international community bases its
hopes on pursuing direct negotiations between the two
parties with the goal of achieving two viable States
living in peace and security and within internationally
recognized borders, Togo urges the friends of Israel
and Palestine, as well as all the sponsors of the peace
process, to spare no effort in supporting the current
negotiations so as to arrive at a lasting peace between
Israelis and Palestinians. In that regard, we hope that
the return of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry to the region, said to be in the next few days,
will help the two parties to make meaningful progress,
despite the obstacles that litter the road to peace.
Concerning Syria, we would like once more to
commend the newfound unity of the Security Council,

13-5252523/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which succeeded in creating a mechanism that has
enabled a successful start to the process of dismantling
Syria’s chemical arsenal. Verifying the initial
information received from the Syrian Government, and
bringing Syria’s chemical weapons under international
control and destroying them, are major achievements,
and we welcome them. In that regard, Togo commends
the commitment and efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Director General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for
establishing a Joint Mission tasked with definitively
relieving Syria of its chemical weapons, in accordance
with resolution 2118 (2013). Togo is also pleased that on
11 October the Norwegian Nobel Committee decided
to award the Nobel Peace Prize to the OPCW in
recognition of its commitment to eliminating chemical
weapons in Syria and everywhere else in the world.
The destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons should
not, however, overshadow the ravages that the war
continues to inflict on the country through massacres,
arbitrary arrests and detentions and horrendous human
rights violations such as rape and sexual violence, as
well as the recruitment of children.
Togo again condemns all those acts and the
bombings in recent days, as well as the kidnappings of
humanitarian workers. It remains very concerned about
the religious nature of the conflict, which unfortunately
destroys social cohesion and renders the future of
religious minorities in Syria uncertain.
My country believes it is important that the
international community work further to put an end
to that war. The Security Council should — after
unanimously acknowledging in its resolution 2118 (2013)
that the only solution to the current crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic is through an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process based on the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) — encourage
the adoption of appropriate measures to facilitate the
effective organization of the conference, announced for
November.
In that regard, we urge the Secretary-General and
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, to continue their efforts to achieve that goal.
We also believe it is urgent that countries that have
any influence with the opposition coalition to use all
that influence to convince it of the need for a political
solution to the Syrian crisis, which requires a dialogue
between the opposition and the power in Damascus.
24/68

22/10/2013

While calling on all parties to move towards
negotiations for the settlement of the crisis, we would
also urge the friends of both parties to put pressure on
them to sign a ceasefire that would allow humanitarian
agencies to help people in difficulty throughout
the territory. It is essential that the provisions of the
presidential statement of 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15)
be implemented, in particular with regard to the
call for countries and donor agencies to increase
their contributions to Syrian refugees and internally
displaced persons.
With regard to Lebanon, the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate in that country because of the
flows of Syrian and Palestinian refugees it continues
to receive. The number of refugees, which is estimated
at over 1.3 million people and is growing by the day,
affects the country’s political, social and economic
life, as well as its security. Living with refugees is
becoming increasingly difficult because the country
has exceeded its ability to receive any more people,
as President Michel Sleiman recently announced from
rostrum of the General Assembly when he was calling
for international assistance (see A/68/PV.6). While
reiterating his appeal, Togo believes that the solution
to that issue lies fundamentally in a political solution to
the conflict in Syria. And it is towards that end that the
international community, the Security Council and all
States in the region should work.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing. I also extend my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
statements.
At the end of July, some days after our last
open debate on the situation in the Middle East (see
S/PV.7007), Palestinians and Israelis returned to the
negotiating table, giving new life to the peace process
and overcoming the inertia of a dangerous stalemate
that had been ongoing for almost three years. That was
an auspicious moment in a regional context, which,
as we have all noted, is marked by uncertainty and
upheaval.
However, three of the nine months that the parties
established as the time period for reaching an agreement
have gone by, and despite the fact that the negotiations
have been carried out with a great deal of reservations,
the information that we have indicates that the progress
so far has been complex, which is understandable, but
also extremely slow. That is partly because, instead
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of beginning with the broad and widely accepted
principles, there is questioning of the parameters of the
two-State solution, which are contained in international
law and supported by the overwhelming majority of the
international community. Among those parameters is
that the pre-June 1967 borders should be the basis of
any negotiation.
In various newspapers around the world, we are
already seeing that lack of respect for the principles
upheld by the international community. Some articles
that I have been reading in the past few days have said
that the question is not whether there will be conflict in
the future between Isreal and Palestine. There will be,
and that cannot be prevented. Preventing catastrophic
changes involves putting an end to the oppressive reign
of an obsolete idea and allowing for both sides to see
the world as it is and adapt to it.
Those remarks, which have been underscored
in different ways, have been published in important
newspapers around the world, including in Latin
America. They undoubtedly strengthen the idea that
Argentina has been putting forth and which we stress
again. We believe that the Security Council should
express itself on the entirety of the situations that we
have been describing as situations that either positively
or negatively affect the Palestinian-Israeli situation
and take concrete steps to complement the negotiations
and support the two-State solution. I think that it is
important for the Council to express itself on behalf
of the overwhelming majority opinion favouring a
two-State solution. In doing so, the Council could help
to counteract those who I do not want to classify, but
perhaps I would call them “free thinkers”, who think
that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
or of international law or the 1967 solution are obsolete
and that instead we need to be realistic and pragmatic.
Enormous atrocities have been committed in
the world with the call for realism and pragmatism.
Therefore, once again we urge the Security Council
to express itself on the principles that it maintains in
order to give a definitive solution, so that there can
be real, lasting peace with secure borders for Israel
and a consolidated Palestinian State. While there
have been brave acts, such as the release of the first
group of Palestinian prisoners detained prior to the
signing of the Oslo Accords, since the beginning of the
negotiations we have seen other developments as well
that are completely incompatible with the peace process

S/PV.7047

and that deepen the mistrust and do not contribute to
creating favourable conditions for dialogue.
We repeat, as others have done, that illegal
settlements campaign has increased on the West Bank,
as have demolitions and displacement in East Jerusalem
and in Area C, ongoing confrontations between
protesters and the Israel Defense Forces and tragic
developments such as the one we saw in August in
Kalandia, rocket launches against Israel and unceasing
confrontational rhetoric.
At the same time, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza continues to deteriorate, suffocated by a blockade
that has been in place for more than six years. We
know and agree that the next several months will be
decisive in putting an end to an occupation that has
lasted for more than half a century and that is a morally
reproachable, politically unacceptable and strategically
unviable.
I turn to the matter of Syria as a second issue. In a
few days, a month will have passed since the adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013), on chemical weapons
programme in Syria. We note with satisfaction that,
with the collaboration of the Syrian Government, the
initial verification activities for the elimination of that
programme began almost immediately.
The
Secretary-General
sent
along
his
recommendations on the role of the United Nations in
that process — including those on putting together the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
and appointing a special coordinator to lead those
efforts — and they were quickly backed by the Security
Council. All of that is a good start for a process that
has involved much suffering and difficulty and should
conclude at the middle of the year ahead.
However, resolution 2118 (2013) has an additional
component that is equally, if not more, important that
the elimination of the chemical weapons programme in
Syria. Through that resolution, the Security Council
echoed the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2013/523,
annex) and explicitly called for the “Geneva II”
conference to be held as soon as possible in order to
implement the communiqué, thus launching a transition
led by the Syrians themselves that would put an end to
the spilling of blood that has lasted more than two and
a half years.

13-5252525/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

To comply with that request, we need the same
political will and the same determination shown by all
of the relevant stakeholders when it comes to looking at
the matter of chemical weapons. We hope that both the
Government and the opposition will soon put together
credible delegations that are able to make compromises
and implement them so that the conference can start as
announced next month.
It is worth reiterating that, in accordance with
paragraph 12 of the 30 June 2012 communiqué, the
global and regional Powers that met in Geneva last year
and are today sitting in today’s open debate reaffirmed
their opposition “to any additional militarization of the
conflict”. That part of the communiqué seems to have
been forgotten but it must be complied with.
Resolution 2118 (2013) was undoubtedly a
meaningful accomplishment. It was a sign of unity in the
Security Council which, except for sporadic moments,
had been paralysed with regard to the Syrian crisis. In
fact, in August we could say that unity in the Council
was perhaps accidental. We no doubt made progress
with resolution 2118 (2013), but we do not know if the
dynamics surrounding the conflict have changed.
We recall that Kofi Annan, when he left his post
as Joint Special Envoy for Syria, said something that,
as far as we can tell, remains valid to this day. He said:
“Only a united international community can
compel both sides to engage in a peaceful political
transition. But a political process is difficult, if not
impossible, while all sides — within and without
Syria — see opportunity to advance their narrow
agendas by military means.”
If Geneva II is to take place, the regional and
international stakeholders that support both sides
should be fully convinced that the political solution is
the only possible solution.
Lastly, I should like to avail myself of this
opportunity to recognize the fact that the Council
has been able to adopt a presidential statement on the
humanitarian aspects of the crisis (S/2013/PRST/15).
For Argentina, it is important though not crucial that
the declaration was issued as a presidential statement
and not as a resolution. It speaks as the expression of
a united Council, not as a menu of options that the
parties can choose from. It speaks of obligations and
requirements that emanate from international law that
must be complied with by all.

26/68

22/10/2013

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate, and Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing, in which he gave us a
detailed explanation of the recent developments in the
Middle East. We are meeting in this Chamber once again
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, and the events whose impact
is a source of concern for the international community
and which requires particular attention.
Two months ago, the world saw an improvement with
the resumption of negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians following an effort by the United States led
by Secretary of State John Kerry. That effort enabled
the resumption on 14 August of negotiations with a
view to reaching a comprehensive agreement in nine
months. Whereas that is a promising sign that brought
an end to the paralysis that plagued the peace process
for some three years, it does indeed represent a real
opportunity — and possibly the last — for achieving a
two-State solution.
However, some positions seek to undermine
confidence in the two parties and prevent from making
progress in promoting peace and coexistence. The
opportunity to restart the peace process must not be
dismissed by any of the parties. They must all commit
to a negotiating process with deadlines and a clear plan
while refraining from doing anything that could hamper
the process or present obstacles to it, in particular,
the ongoing settlement activity and attacks on Haram
Al-Sharif.
The Palestinian parties have shown their good faith
and a great degree of wisdom and sense of responsibility
to ensure the success of the negotiations under way. The
Palestinian people throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories have shown patience and restraint, despite
the disastrous situation caused by the oppressive
embargo. Arab States have also shown their good faith
by proposing the Arab Peace Initiative.
Morocco has for decades contributed effectively
to promoting negotiations and constructive dialogue
between all parties to the conflict in the Middle East
in order to achieve a solution that would respect the
legitimate rights of Palestinians to establish their
independent, viable State in the Palestinian territories
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the return
of Palestinian and Lebanese territories. The Kingdom
of Morocco has always considered the question to
be linked to the issue of Al-Quds, whose symbolic
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

identity must be preserved. That has been the goal of
the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His Majesty the
King, which has sought to preserve the city’s religious
and civilizational heritage as commons shared by the
three monotheistic religions and to promote the city as
a symbol of cooperation and assistance.
We are pleased that the Quartet met in New
York and welcome its contribution to the ongoing
negotiations. We hope that the Council will play a more
active role in reaching a comprehensive solution, which
is what that the international community has sought
to achieve since the Organization was created. The
Security Council proved itself able to speak in a unified
voice in adopting resolution 2118 (2013) and by the way
in which it has dealt with the humanitarian aspects of
the Syrian conflict.
We are aware of the difficulties and complications
regarding the implementation of that resolution and
the convening of a second Geneva conference, which
would be a means for attaining a peaceful solution and
bringing an end to the violence and further provocations.
It should allow for the building of a society based on
peace and reconciliation that encompasses all Syrians
and thereby alleviate the burden on neighbouring
countries which are suffering the repercussions of the
Syrian crisis.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. His presentation was, as ever,
extremely useful in its overview of the general situation
in the region, the accelerated changes occurring there
and the opportunities that they offer.
The situation in the Middle East is characterized
by its volatility and the serious challenges that are
threatening to destabilize the regionty. At the same time,
over recent months we have seen some encouraging
signs, and how one decision may open the door to
greater opportunities for negotiation.
Guatemala believes that diplomacy and dialogue are
the best means for achieving long-term solutions in each
of the conflicts that persist in the Middle East. Seeking
solutions by means other than those established under
the of international law not only creates dangerous
precedents, but runs counter to the very foundations
of the Organization. Each of the situations that has
drawn international attention, whether on the Council’s
agenda or not, such as those in Syria, Palestine, Yemen,

S/PV.7047

Egypt and elsewhere, has its own unique roots. But in
all cases, in our view, it is important to promote open
and inclusive dialogue among all the parties concerned
and to push together to contain the violence and prevent
further clashes.
On this occasion, I will refer to only two matters:
the Middle East peace process and the conflict in Syria.
With regard to the Middle East peace process,
Guatemala views it as a positive sign that the
authorities in Israel and Palestine continue to seek a
negotiated two-State solution through dialogue. We are
aware of the immense challenges that the negotiation
process presents for both parties, at the national and
international levels alike. Paradoxically, the more we
advance in the negotiations, the pending issues seem
ever-more insurmountable. However, a viable option
for peace and security would, at the end of the day, be
of enormous benefit to both parties. In other words, this
is not a zero-sum game, but rather a win-win situation
for all.
We hope that the parties can work positively to meet
the deadlines that have been set. In the same vein, we
believe that the involvement of the Quartet and regional
actors in the process will contribute to the attainment
of a definitive solution to the conflict. We encourage
both parties to continue negotiating in good faith with
a view to achieving a mutually acceptable solution, and
the international community to support this process.
We therefore believe that both sides should refrain
from any act that may jeopardize the negotiations or
the prospects for a peaceful solution to the conflict. We
emphasize once again the need to cease the expansion
of existing settlements and the approval of new ones,
settler violence, the launching of rockets into Israel
and,in general,the use of inflammatory language
by both sides. We hope that the parties demonstrate
their commitment to the principles that unite us and
overcome the differences blocking progress towards a
peaceful solution.
Regarding the situation in Syria, our message is
short and simple — the violence must stop immediately.
All parties must cease the use of military force to achieve
their political objectives. Likewise, the international
community as a whole must stop arms transfers to any
of the warring parties in Syria.
We welcome the creation of the Joint Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations, as well as the recent

13-5252527/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

appointment of its Special Coordinator, Ms. Sigrid
Kaag. We are encouraged that, despite the fact that it
is working in a conflict situation and carrying out a
highly dangerous task, the Mission has been able to
complete inspections of almost half of Syria’s chemical
arsenal. We hope that its work will continue at the same
pace and can lead to the complete destruction of the
chemical weapons programme in Syria by mid-2014.
We also believe that it is important to have
complete and timely information on the establishment,
functioning and operations of the Joint Mission. We
understand that this Mission has no precedent and
therefore must blaze its own trail. However, it could be
argued that transparency and monitoring are therefore
even more important. We also hope that all matters
relating to the protection and safety of the personnel
of the Mission are reported on. In this context, we
also welcome the recent presidential statement issued
by the Council calling for unhindered humanitarian
access to populations in need of assistance in Syria
(S/PRST/2013/15).
At the same time, we are aware the activities of the
Joint Mission will not end the conflict. It is therefore
important for the parties to hold a dialogue and seek
definitive solutions to their differences, including the
establishment of a transitional government. We believe
that the long-delayed convening of a second conference
in Geneva, which is now being announced for late
November, could provide just such an opportunity. We
are therefore concerned at the continuing reports of
deep divisions among the Syrian opposition groups. It
is important that the leadership of the opposition work
to keep the unity of the groups belonging to it so as
to have a strong and representative interlocutor in that
conference.
We also believe that the Geneva conference should
incorporate an obligation on all parties to lay down
their weapons. Doing so will alleviate the humanitarian
catastrophe that has resulted from the conflict. It
should also be clear that the perpetrators of all crimes
committed in Syria should be punished for their
actions. Impunity must not be allowed to prevail in a
post-conflict Syria.
Finally, Guatemala reiterates that the reconciliation
of opposing positions requires holding a constructive
dialogue. That is the only way to avoid greater harm
which, should the trends continue, would eventually
undermine the stability of the entire Middle East.

28/68

22/10/2013

Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his informative
briefing. I also listened carefully to the statements made
by the observer of Palestine and the representative of
Israel.
Three months have passed since Israel and
Palestine began negotiations in July. Although not
much information has been made available about the
details of the talks, the lack of information should
be understandable in the light of the long history
of 20 years of staggered negotiations. However, it
would be naïve to simply assume that no news is
good news. The deteriorating security situation in
the West Bank, sporadic rocket fire from Gaza, and
intermittent violence and clashes, as well as continuing
settlement activities, make up the hard realities that
could potentially spoil the atmosphere at any time. The
Republic of Korea therefore calls for joint efforts to
build mutual confidence in parallel with the talks.
The biggest challenges, however, still lie ahead.
The moment of truth for both sides will come when they
must overcome long-standing hurdles on substantive
and sensitive issues. The role of the international
community will become more instrumental as the
negotiations make progress. We must encourage both
parties to seize this momentum to achieve the two-State
solution. Creative incentives for both parties must be
explored more vigorously to facilitate the negotiating
process. We expect that the Quartet will accelerate
its mediation efforts at an appropriate juncture. My
delegation sincerely hopes that both Israel and Palestine
will remain firmly committed and reach an agreement
within the agreed time frame.
On Syria, we welcome the fact that the initial phase
of the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) is under
way following the timely proposal of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Security Council’s endorsement
of a joint mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations. The
Republic of Korea welcomes the appointment of Special
Coordinator Sigrid Kaag, and trust that she will play
a critical role in keeping the work of the mission on
track. Most importantly, we call on Syria to faithfully
fulfil its obligations under resolution 2118 (2013) and
as a member of the Chemical Weapons Convention. On
that note, we would like to reiterate the need to find out
who is responsible for the chemical weapons attacks in
Syria and hold them accountable.

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7047

Despite the recent progress, continued hostilities
and the use of force in Syria are adding to the death
toll and increasing human suffering. We strongly
condemn continued violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, especially against
women and children, who are the most affected by the
crisis. We support and welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October, and urge all parties
to the Syrian conflict to respond to it immediately.
We especially urge the Syrian authorities to take
immediate steps to facilitate humanitarian assistance
for various humanitarian actors on the ground by
lifting bureaucratic obstacles and granting cross-border
access.

Australia commends the activism and commitment
that the United States continues to show in its leadership
of final-status negotiations. We welome Secretary
Kerry’s speech at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians on 25 September, in which
he stressed how urgently a two-State solution is needed.
Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbass also
continue to display great courage and statesmanship in
persisting with negotiations despite domestic pressures.
We recognize that sustained efforts are necessary
to negotiate the significant challenges and difficult
decisions that lie ahead and in order to conclude
negotiations within the nine-month time frame.

The spillover of the humanitarian crisis to
neighbouring countries also remains a deep concern.
The deteriorating Syrian refugee situation is straining
the host countries not only socioeconomically, but
also politically. Among them, Lebanon and Jordan
are suffering the most as refugees from Syria
comprise approximately one-fourth and one-tenth
of their populations, respectively. The international
community must share the burden by stepping up its
effort to translate its pledges into action. We applaud
the neighbouring countries that continue to open their
borders, as well as those countries that are participating
in the resettlement of refugees from Syria.

We are concerned about recent attacks that have
resulted in the deaths of Israelis in the West Bank.
The condemnation of such acts by Palestinian leaders
is welcome and important. Earlier clashes in the West
Bank, which have led to the deaths of Palestinians, are
also of concern. It is vital that leaders on both sides do
not let such events derail the peace efforts.

Finally, we would like to underscore once again
that we should not be satisfied with the initial stages
of the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria. The
international community, especially the Security
Council, must take further steps to bring the Syrian
crisis to an end through a negotiated political solution
based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
In this respect, we hope that the “Geneva II” conference
will be held as soon as possible.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing.
It is obviously true that the Middle East is
experiencing dramatic turmoil, but a potentially
historic opportunity has opened up in the Middle
East peace process that we simply must not neglect.
The emphasis placed by world leaders on final-status
negotiations and the goal of a lasting two-State solution
during leaders week at the General Assembly reflected
the recognition that we must all engage closely with the
peace process. It is widely recognized that the status
quo cannot continue.

The past month has also seen an historic
breakthrough in the Council’s consideration of the
conflict in Syria with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2118 (2013) on the destruction of Syria’s
chemical weapons and the presidential statement on
humanitarian assistance (S/PRST/2013/15). These
actions demonstrate that the international community
can work together towards peace and security in Syria
and the region, and we simply must continue to build
on this.
Resolution 2118 (2013) demonstrates our agreed
conviction that the use of chemical weapons is a grave
and serious threat to international peace and security.
We are giving our own full support to the SecretaryGeneral and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in their Joint Mission to
inspect and oversee the destruction of Syria’s chemical
weapons.
The onus now lies with the Syrian regime. It must
comply in full with its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013) and cooperate without reservation with
the United Nations-OPCW Joint Mission. The Council
itself must rigorously monitor progress in Syrian
compliance. Our continued engagement will be vital if
the Mission is to succeed.
While progress on chemical weapons is welcome,
only a political solution can resolve the crisis. We

13-5252529/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/10/2013

support efforts to convene a second Geneva conference
in November. We urge both the Syrian regime and the
opposition to participate constructively in these talks.
We call on those with influence on the parties in Syria
to facilitate the process.

the necessary prerequisites for success is the need to
ensure that the process and all efforts are guided by
normative standards set by the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as by the objective of a comprehensive
settlement based on international law.

The Syrian people need a political solution for their
future, but today they also need food, medical care,
shelter and protection. As the presidential statement
on humanitarian access adopted on 2 October made
clear, the magnitude of the humanitarian crisis requires
immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout the country. Sieges must stop; all parties,
and particularly the Syrian authorities, must ensure
that access is provided by the most effective means. We
support calls for ceasefires to allow assistance.

We have repeatedly stated that the lack of agreement
on political issues in situations of armed conflict and
military occupation cannot be used as a pretext for
failing to uphold international law and human rights.
Settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains a matter of serious concern. No doubt, the
increase in new settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem may adversely affect the delicate situation on
the ground. They constitute a serious threat to the peace
process and infringe upon the rights and freedoms of
the Palestinians.

The Council must monitor closely and systematically
the adherence of all parties to the provisions of the
presidential statement of 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15),
and we support an early briefing to the Council by
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos. Already
the conflict is taking a dramatic toll on the security
and stability of the region, and without a resolution
the threat to international peace can only grow.
Neighbouring countries have seen growing sectarian
violence and cross-border violations by parties aligned
to the Syrian conflict. They play host to huge numbers
of displaced Syrians. All neighbouring countries,
particularly Lebanon and Jordan, need the support of
the international community as they struggle to contain
the effects of the Syrian conflict.
We agree with the concerns expressed by others
today about Lebanon. The Council must reaffirm its
support to the sovereignty and stability of that country.
My own country stands ready to work through the
Council to do whatever we can to alleviate this terrible
crisis.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his comprehensive briefing. The past couple of weeks
have been remarkable in terms of the revitalization of
the Middle East peace process, and the continuation
of the direct talks between the parties. We welcome
the recent meeting of the Middle East Quartet, which
was held on the margins of the United Nations General
Assembly in New York on 27 September. We hope that
the parties will demonstrate continued dedication and
good faith to the quest for a lasting solution. Among

30/68

Such practices are illegal under international
law, and they must be stopped immediately and
unconditionally, regardless of the course of negotiations
and their outcome. Pursuant to article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, of 12 August 1949, “[t]he
Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies.”
That both constitutes the basis of and explains the rule
of law prohibiting the establishment of settlements in
the occupied territories consisting of the population of
the occupying Power, or of persons encouraged by that
Power to settle in those territories with the intention,
expressed or otherwise, of changing the demographic
balance.
The Council must take all necessary measures
to ensure that international law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms are observed and respected at
all times and without preconditions.
The economic, financial and humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
requires the constant attention of the international
community. Further easing of restrictions on the
Palestinians’ movement, the providing of access, and
the easing of financial restrictions are necessary. The
continued support of the international community for
a socioeconomic revival of the State of Palestine is
very important. We are convinced that there is no room
for religious or ethnic intolerance in the Middle East.
People must live together, hence they must seek ways
of building peace and good-neighbourly relations in the
region.

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to Syria, we welcome the efforts carried
out so far towards the fulfilment of the objectives laid
down in resolution 2118 (2013) and the relevant decision
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Executive Council. It is imperative that all
parties cease armed violence, engage constructively in
the political process and commit to the implementation
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
The convening of the “Geneva II” conference in the
coming weeks is necessary to bring about the parties’
engagement in dialogue and negotiation. In conclusion,
we would like once again to express our firm conviction
that peace and security in the Middle East is possible
through the dedication and hard work of all involved,
and with the indispensable support of the international
community.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Before I give the floor to the next speaker, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are requested to circulate their texts in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all concerned that this open
debate will continue through the lunch hour as we have
a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council in October. I would also like to commend the
Permanent Representative of Australia and his team for
their excellent work during their presidency last month.
When faced with challenges threatening the core of
their stability and security, countries explore all ways
and means to build partnerships, strengthen them, and
establish safety nets.
In that context, Lebanon reiterates its commitment
to the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006),
unanimously adopted by this organ on 11 August 2006.
Likewise, over the past seven years, everyone present
here has been expressing their unwavering support
for the full implementation of the above-mentioned
resolution. Thus, we believe that this is an opportune
moment for the Council to translate its support into a

S/PV.7047

strong message urging Israel to completely withdraw
from the remaining Lebanese occupied territory, to end
its violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, air and
sea and to refrain from taking unilateral action that
violates its obligations under international law.
Convinced of the importance of a stable Lebanon
for the maintenance of peace and security in the
region, the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/9) on 11 July, renewing its support
for Lebanon’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence, and endorsing Lebanon’s disassociation
policy vis-a-vis the situation in Syria, as well as the
Baabda Declaration of 11 June 2012. Again, let me
reiterate my country’s deep appreciation for that
message of political solidarity.
Capitalizing on the consensus articulated in the
aforementioned presidential statement, on 25 September
the Secretary-General launched the International
Support Group for Lebanon, stressing the need for
“strong, coordinated international support for
Lebanon to help it continue to withstand the
multiple current challenges to its security and
stability” (S/PRST/2013/9, p. 3).
Lebanon looks forward to the enlargement of that group,
and the convening of follow-up meetings to address
its specific needs for coping with the humanitarian
crisis resulting from the influx of refugees from Syria,
to enhance the Lebanese army’s capabilities and to
provide for Lebanon’s economic and financial needs.
With the ongoing Syrian crisis, the number of
refugees from Syria has come to represent the equivalent
of one fourth of the population of my country. Over and
above the obvious humanitarian challenges, a recent
World Bank report has underlined the severe negative
socioeconomic impact of the Syrian crisis on Lebanon.
The report notes that
“the Lebanese growth is estimated to be down by
2.9% this year ... Government expenditures will
increase by an estimated $1.1 billion over the 2012
to 2014 period ... while its revenues will drop by
$1.5 billion. Unemployment could reach 20 per cent
over the same period. More than 170,000 Lebanese
will be pushed into poverty by 2014.”
In his address to the General Assembly last month,
the President of the Republic of Lebanon, General
Michel Sleiman, warned that this grave situation
has begun to have an “existential dimension” for

13-5252531/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

my country. In his meeting in Beirut last week with
representatives of the members of the International
Support Group, he stressed that the financial burdensharing is still insufficient. He said the relocation of
refugees remains symbolic — 17 countries have hosted
only a few thousand refugees, while the international
community faces difficulties in providing them shelter
within Syria, notwithstanding that Syria is 18 times
larger than Lebanon.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), regarding the chemical weapons in Syria, and
the presidential statement of 2 October of this year on
the humanitarian situation there (S/PRST/2013/15).
Lebanon considers that those united actions by the
international community should lead to putting an end
to violence, provide for a safe and dignified gradual
return of Syrian refugees to their country and pave the
way to a political process that will fulfil the aspirations
of the Syrian people.
On 31 July, Palestinian-Israeli negotiations
resumed, owing to the efforts of the United States
Administration and with an initial time frame of nine
months to achieve progress. Like many other countries,
we commended the United States efforts in that regard
and were ready to see signs of hope in them.
However, three months into the set time frame,
and in spite of many rounds of talks, Israeli authorities
continue settlement expansion. The Peace Now
movement, along with other Israeli commentators and
human rights organizations, could see in that only a lack
on the part of their Government to a “genuine intention
to negotiate seriously”. Moreover, empowered with a
sense of impunity, Israeli settlers multiply their assaults
on Palestinian civilians and their properties, attacking
elementary schools and terrorizing children, robbing
farmers of their livelihood by uprooting their olive
trees, and vandalizing churches and mosques. Clearly,
such actions threaten to undermine the prospects for
the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. The Council must
condemn them in the strongest terms.
Finally, need we remind the Council that such
negotiations have to be part of a comprehensive and
inclusive approach if a durable and sustainable peace in
the Middle East is to be attained?
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.

32/68

22/10/2013

Ms. Kaur (India): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of October.
I am honoured to speak in the debate. Let me also
express our appreciation to you for convening the
quarterly open debate, which allows the Council to
take stock of recent developments in the Middle East,
including the State of Palestine. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffery Feltman, for his comprehensive briefing.
The resolution of the Palestinian question remains
an urgent and key issue for the international community.
It is a prerequisite for building a sustainable and lasting
peace in the Middle East region. Given the evolving
situation in the region and its inherent fragility and
unpredictability, it is necessary that there be no more
delay in the resolution of the Palestinian question.
We are encouraged by the ongoing direct talks
between Israel and Palestine, facilitated by the United
States. We hope that the direct talks, which have resumed
after one of the longest periods of stalemate since the
signing of the Oslo Accords, will lead to concrete results
within the time frame of nine months envisaged by the
United States Secretary of State, Mr John Kerry. In this
context, it is necessary to address the issue of Israeli
settlement activities, which are continuing unabated.
Those activities are not only illegal, but also pose a
serious threat to the two-State solution. We join others
in urging Israel to stop settlement activities.
The blockade of Gaza has had serious consequences
for the lives of Palestinians. It has also adversely
affected essential services, economic activities and
infrastructure development. We continue to hold that it
is necessary for Israel to lift the blockade on Gaza and
allow normal and unrestricted movement of persons
and goods within Palestine.
India remains steadfast in its support for a
negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue that
results in a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, living within secure and recognized
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Quartet
road map, various United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Given the financial difficulties that the Palestinian
Authority continues to face, India remains committed
to supporting the Palestinian Authority bilaterally as

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

well as through the India, Brazil and South Africa
(IBSA) fund. Bilaterally, we continue to partner with
the Palestinian Authority by providing development
support and assistance through direct budgetary
support, contributions to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, training and more. Through the IBSA fund,
we will continue to undertake capacity-building and
infrastructure projects that are prioritized by the
Palestinian Authority.
As demonstrated over the past six decades, including
during its memberships in the Security Council,
India also stands ready to support all measures that
the Palestinian leadership may take towards political
resolution of the final status issues.
Before I conclude, I would like to express our
deep concern about the situation in Syria. While we
welcome the adoption of Security Council resolution
2118 (2013), on the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme, and the presidential statement on
the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/PRST/2013/15),
we are concerned at the continuing violence and the
worsening humanitarian situation. We have long held
that there is no military solution to the conflict. We
continue to think that an inclusive political dialogue to
resolve the crisis should remain the focus of the United
Nations, including the Council. We look forward to an
early holding of the “Geneva II” conference, which
should help commence a Syrian-led inclusive political
dialogue that resolves the current crisis and meets the
legitimate aspirations of all sections of Syrian society.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. We are convinced that under your
guidance that our work will be successful. We would
like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing today.
Egypt supports the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the statement to be
made by the representative of Djibouti on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
I would like to emphasize the following six points.

S/PV.7047

First, Egypt backs the negotiations currently under
way between the State of Palestine and Israel to achieve
a peace agreement that is lasting in nature. We wish
to pay tribute to the efforts of the United States of
America, which have allowed for the negotiations to be
relaunched. We hope they will be crowned with success,
success that will lead to a two-State solution. However,
we are concerned over basic differences between the
two parties that will be difficult to overcome. We urge
the occupying Power, Israel, which possesses all the
means to control and the necessary force on the ground,
to take all the necessary steps to achieve a two-State
solution before it is too late to do so.
Secondly, today we heard the Israeli representative
deny the fact that the Palestinian issue lies at the very
heart of the conflict in the Middle East and use the
current situation in the Middle East to renege on Israel’s
responsibilities. We are convinced that a solution in the
Middle East will enable us to build democratic stable
regimes, which we have heard some speakers here deny.
They believe that such developments will contribute
only to instability and bloodshed in the region.
We stress the fact that a failure to find a solution
to the Palestinian issue would threaten the occupying
State above all. We have examined the statistics on
the resumption of settlement construction in the West
Bank, which show a threefold increase since the
signature of the Oslo agreements from 1993 to 2012. We
are also alarmed by the increase in illegal settlement
activity carried out by Israel in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, which has grown 70 per cent this year
compared with the same period last year.
That leads us to question the message of the Israeli
Government at a time when it claims to be engaging
in negotiations. We condemn its illegal activities and
invite the international community resolutely to end
them, including through the imposition of sanctions on
Israeli settlements in line with the measures undertaken
by a number of international stakeholders, including
the European Union, whose guidelines will enter into
force at the beginning of next year. We warn against
any attempts to circumvent those sanctions.
Thirdly, Egypt condemns ongoing Israeli actions
against the Palestinian people, including the blockade
of Gaza and the terrorism carried out by Israeli settlers
against unarmed Palestinians. As the occupying Power,
Israel bears full responsibility for the situation. It must
therefore lift its unfair blockade of the Gaza Strip. We

13-5252533/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

also condemn systematic Israeli violations against the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the provocations of extremist
Israeli settlers there under the cover of the heightened
Israeli security presence. We ask for an end to be put to
Jewish sloganeering in the mosque.
Fourthly, Egypt expresses its concerns regarding
the decrease in funds made available to United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) and the deterioration of its
financial situation. The demonstration by hundreds of
Palestinian refugees in Gaza against a reduction in the
basic services and systems provided by UNRWA will
have an impact on the credibility of the United Nations
and its role in the nation.
Fifthly, Egypt rejects the use of the terrible situation
in Syria as an excuse for disregarding the ongoing Israeli
occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan. We demand
that Israel withdraw from the Golan and implement
United Nations resolutions, especially resolution 497
(1981). We stress the need for the Council to be briefed
on that issue in order to achieve a necessary settlement
of that issue.
Sixthly, we welcome the agreement for the
destruction and elimination of Syrian chemical weapons
pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013). We believe that this
new measure will enable us to destroy weapons of mass
destruction in the region and that it complements others
that have been adopted but not fully implemented,
such as resolution 687 (1991), whose implementation
was limited to the destruction of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq, despite the fact that the resolution
was supposedly designed to eliminate weapons of mass
destruction throughout the region.
Egypt takes this opportunity to remind members
of the proposal made by my Minister of Foreign
Affairs within the framework of the general debate at
the General Assembly this year (see A/68/PV.18) on
the need to turn the Middle East into a zone free of
weapons of mass destruction, and to convene in 2014
the conference that was planned for 2012. We invite
the permanent members of the Council to assume their
responsibilities and to invite all States of the region to
provide the necessary guarantees before the end of the
year.
The Palestinian issue is and remains the main reason
for instability in the Middle East; an instability that
threatens peace and stability, especially international
peace and stability. Egypt will continue to demand

34/68

22/10/2013

that the Security Council assume its responsibilities
and address the Palestinian issue in the appropriate
manner. We also insist on the need to put an end to
illegal Israeli settlement activities in order to achieve
a definitive solution, and to implement past resolutions
on creating in the Middle East a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction, which are the real threat to peace
and stability throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
and the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine
for their statements.
Since the most recent open debate on this item in July
(see S/PV.7007), encouraging political developments
have taken place in the Middle East. After years of
procrastination and virtual paralysis, a new dynamic
may be emerging as a prospect for progress on the
Syrian and on the Israeli-Palestinian tracks appears.
On the Syrian crisis, a military intervention has
been avoided by diplomacy. It is hard to reconcile the
need to protect civilians in Syria with the option of a
military solution, which would in all likelihood only
trigger more suffering and instability. Brazil welcomes
the convergence of views between the United States
and Russia that generated momentum for the adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013) and led to the endorsement of
the final communiqué of the Geneva Action Group of
June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex).
Brazil unequivocally condemns the use of chemical
weapons in Syria and the ensuing loss of lives. We
welcome the Syrian Government’s decision to accede
to the Chemical Weapons Convention and to apply
it immediately. As one of the original signatories
of the Convention, we will continue to press for the
universalization of that instrument and urge those
countries that have not yet adhered to do so at the
earliest possible date.
The Syrian Government must continue to cooperate
fully with the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in the
implementation of its obligations. The opposition must
also cooperate. In case of non-compliance, it is clear
from the text of resolution 2118 (2013) that authorization

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for measures under Chapter VII can be contemplated
only through a new Security Council resolution.
We reiterate our belief that there is no military
solution to the conflict, and call for the cessation of
all arms supply to all parties to the Syrian conflict.
While welcoming the effort towards the elimination of
chemical weapons, we must not forget that the brunt
of civilian deaths in Syria is caused by conventional
weapons, which continue to flow.
All parties should seize the new impetus and
follow the path of a negotiated political solution that
takes into consideration the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people. The Geneva communiqué should
be implemented as a matter of urgency. Brazil renews
its support for Joint Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi, as well as for the prompt convening of the
“Geneva II” conference. In that regard, we consider
that, in addition to regional stakeholders, other players
who could contribute to the success of the conference
should be invited to participate.
We renew our condemnation of all violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law by all
parties and call for immediate humanitarian access to
those in need. The Government in Damascus bears the
largest share of responsibility for the cycle of violence
that has victimized a large number of civilians,
especially women, children and youth. It is the duty
of the Government to protect its citizens. We are also
aware of the responsibilities of the armed opposition.
In the same vein, in line with the findings
contained in the report of the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
(A/HRC/21/50), we reiterate our grave concern at the
negative impact of unilateral sanctions on the living
conditions of the Syrian people. We praise the efforts
of neighbouring countries to host Syrian refugees
and underscore the principle of burden-sharing. Let
me also express Brazil’s strong support for the policy
of Lebanon, under President Michel Sleiman, of
dissociation from the Syrian conflict.
Brazil welcomes the resumption of direct
final-status negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, and commends the efforts of United States
Secretary of State Kerry to that effect. We hope that
the current talks will lead to the realization of the twoState solution based on the 1967 borders, and call on the
parties to adhere to the agreed upon time frame of nine
months to reach a comprehensive peace agreement.

S/PV.7047

We underscore that the process must lead to a final
peace agreement, not an interim one. To that end, it is
Brazil’s expectation that negotiations deal with all main
subjects.
The continuing settlement activities and settler
violence against civilians in Palestine constitute
violations of international law. They are contrary
to the required improvement of the atmosphere for
negotiations to reach a successful outcome and harmful
to the two-State solution itself. Brazil condemned the
recent launches of rockets and mortar shells from Gaza
and Syria into Israel. We welcome Israel’s decision to
release Palestinian prisoners and encourage Israel to set
free a new group, as soon as possible.
In that context, there is even more reason to call
on the Security Council to fully exercise its functions
with regard to the Palestinian question and provide
support for the peace process. Brazil also expects that
the Quartet, whose statement of 27 September was a
welcome development after a long period of silence,
report regularly to the Security Council.
In order to provide broader support for the first
serious effort at a comprehensive resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict in such a long time, serious
consideration should be given to the establishment of a
support group to the Quartet, with wider geographical
representation.
The current negotiation process presents an
opportunity that must not be missed. Brazil has been
emphasizing the importance of listening to Israeli and
Palestinian civil societies. A number of organizations
from both sides can contribute significantly to
galvanizing the political will for peace. Brazil will
be, as usual, ready to provide its support to initiatives,
including those that involve representatives from civil
societies, in order to work towards reconciliation and
sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I congratulate you,
Sir, on the occasion of your assumption of the Security
Council presidency for this month, and in particular
assure you of the full support of the Bureau of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his detailed and objective briefing.

13-5252535/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The last time I addressed the Council, in July (see
S/PV.7007), shortly after the announcement of the
resumption of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, I called
for the long-term commitment of the international
community to ensuring that the parties honour promises
negotiated in good faith and refrain from any action
that could jeopardize the negotiations. We welcome
the parties’ commitment to achieving an overall
agreement within nine months, and we await evidence
of real progress. We are encouraged by the recent
announcement that United States mediation efforts will
focus on accelerating the negotiations. We welcome the
long-awaited resumption of the Quartet’s activities and
its willingness to convene monthly meetings to monitor
progress. We believe, however, that the Council has not
yet taken full measure of its peacebuilding capacities
with regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Alarming signs on both sides indicate that groups
with a stake in continued conflict are continuing to
mobilize. It is therefore imperative that the international
community — especially the Security Council,
pursuant to its role in the maintenance of international
peace and security — remain vigilant and act urgently
and decisively to counter provocative acts during this
sensitive time and ensure respect for international law
and protect civilians.
The ongoing announcements of Israeli settlement
activity — such as those just constructed in East
Jerusalem — remain of concern and poison the climate
of negotiations. We urge the Council to take action
towards implementation of resolution 446 (1979).
The European Union order concerning the financing
of projects in the Israeli settlements is commendable
and should be fully implemented. We encourage other
States to act in tandem.
The international community must exert real
pressure in order to force the Israeli Government
to halt its settlement activity and to compromise at
the negotiating table. We are also concerned about
provocative acts carried in the area of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem and the increasing number of
attacks during the olive harvest carried out by settlers
against Palestinians. The raids conducted in the
Palestinian territories further fuel tensions. Similarly,
the explosive issue of the thousands of Palestinians
detained in Israeli prisons remains a main concern of
the Committee.
We ought to have since improvements on the
ground since the policy initiatives that I have mentioned
36/68

22/10/2013

were undertaken, which would have leant greater
credibility to the negotiating process. Paradoxically,
the Palestinians are facing an economic contraction,
increased budget deficits and mass unemployment. In
Gaza, the humanitarian situation is deteriorating.
Nevertheless, the Committee believes that
measures to stimulate the economy, including donor
support, can contribute to economic improvements.
However, they must be accompanied by an overall
lifting of the restrictions imposed by the occupying
Power. According to the World Bank, those restrictions
cost the Palestinian economy $3.4 billion a year, in the
West Bank alone. It should be noted that all estimates
of the economic damage caused by the occupation lead
to the same conclusion, namely, that the Palestinian
economy would have prospered if it was not the object
of such coercive measures.
Our Committee places high expectations on the
current round of negotiations. It will therefore remain
fully committed to tirelessly supporting the peace
initiative currently under way. We urge the Council to
make use of its political and moral authority in seeking a
definitive and durable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).At the outset, I would like to convey
the Movement’s appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
I also avail myself of this opportunity to express my
appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing to the
Council today.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains seriously
concerned about the situation in Palestine as a result of
the illegal policies that continue to be pursued by Israel,
the occupying Power, against the Palestinian people and
their land. Over the past months, while the international
community has been awaiting tangible progress in the
resumed negotiations between the two sides and has
articulated its full support for that process on the basis
of the long-standing parameters rooted in the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map,
the occupying Power has, regrettably, continued to

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

behave in a manner contradictory to those parameters,
to the good faith required for the negotiations and
to the overarching objectives of the peace process.
Tensions have thus continued to rise, widening the
gap between the hopes and expectations for the
political process and the reality on the ground. Israeli
settlement activities, the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
military raids and constant provocations, including
incitement to religious conflict by extremist Israeli
settlers, are exacerbating the conditions on the ground
and reinforcing doubts regarding Israel’s desire for, or
commitment to, the peace that the State of Palestine,
with the strong support of the international community,
including NAM countries, has been earnestly seeking
and remains committed to achieving.
NAM is extremely alarmed in particular by the
escalation of acts of aggression in occupied East
Jerusalem, especially in and around Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which continue
to be the result of provocations by Israeli extremists,
including settlers and Government officials. The
blatant disrespect for that holy site and its worshippers
and the continued threats of further incursions are
tantamount to grave acts of incitement that are stoking
religious sensitivities and aggravating already elevated
tensions. Israeli officials continue to recklessly fuel
religious tensions by encouraging extremists to acts of
provocation that threaten to ignite a religious conflict,
with far-reaching and dangerous consequences for the
region and beyond. NAM therefore once again draws
the Security Council’s attention to that serious matter,
which constitutes a threat to international peace and
security, and calls for actions to halt all such Israeli
incitement and for respect for the sanctity of religious
sites.
NAM also reiterates its serious concern regarding
the continued and systematic Israeli violence and
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including the killing and injury of civilians in violent
military raids, the excessive use of force against civilian
protesters, the forced displacement of civilians and
the arrest and detention of more Palestinians. Israel’s
settlement activities and construction of the wall
have also continued in the recent period throughout
the Palestinian land through myriad illegal means
and measures, in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and numerous United Nations resolutions.
The illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip also remains
of serious concern, as it continues to inflict grave

S/PV.7047

socioeconomic losses and humanitarian hardship on
the Palestinian people besieged there. NAM condemns
those violations and urges the international community
to persist with its calls on Israel, the occupying Power,
to respect its obligations under international law and to
cease all such illegal actions and violence against the
Palestinian people under its occupation.
The ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement
Committee on Palestine met on 26 September in New
York, reviewed the recent developments on the political
track and on the ground in Palestine and reaffirmed their
solidarity with the Palestinian people and their support
for their just cause to realize their inalienable right to
self-determination and freedom in their independent
State of Palestine and to achieve a just solution to the
question of Palestine in all its aspects. They expressed
hope that the current negotiations would succeed within
the specified time frame and result in the achievement
of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that would
bring an end to the Israeli military occupation of the
Palestinian and other occupied Arab lands.
The Non-Aligned Movement therefore renews
its calls, at this most critical juncture, for continued
support and assistance to the Palestinian people in their
legitimate historic struggle for justice, dignity, peace
and the exercise of their right to self-determination.
NAM calls further for a redoubling of international
efforts, including by the Security Council and in line
with our political, legal and moral obligations, towards
the realization of these noble objectives, so are to usher
in a new era of peace and stability in the Middle East.
Lebanon has suffered from consecutive Israeli
attacks against its territory, with a heavy human and
material toll, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues
to violate Lebanese airspace, while intensifying its
incursions over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant
violation of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant
international resolutions, in particular resolution
1701 (2006). The provisions of that resolution should
be implemented in a manner that guarantees the
consolidation of the foundations of stability and security
in Lebanon and prevents Israel from undertaking its
daily violations of Lebanese sovereignty.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of Syrian crisis. The

13-5252537/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
In my national capacity, with regard to the statement
made today by the representative of the Israeli regime
against my country, it will be enough to quote a Persian
saying: “The rage and anger of your criminal and
aggressor enemy is a good indication that you are on
the right track.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): As I take the floor in
the Security Council for the first time as the new
Permanent Representative of Japan, I would like to say
how pleased I am to participate in the deliberations of
the Council and express my readiness to work with you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council in the
coming years.
Today, I wish to touch upon two issues — first on
the Middle East peace process, and secondly on the
situation in Syria. First, let me start with the Middle
East peace process.
Japan welcomes the resumption of direct
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians
realized through the mediation efforts of the United
States. We remain committed to assisting Palestinian
State-building efforts in order to create a proper
environment for achieving peace through a twoState solution. Sustainable economic development is
indispensable to establishing a viable Palestinian State.
Allow me to introduce two concrete initiatives of Japan
in this regard.
The first is a project called the Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity. In our view, agriculture and
agro-industry are a driving force for the Palestinian
economy. The Corridor project is thus designed to
transform an area of the Jordan Valley into productive
and fertile land, thereby allowing Palestinians to export
agricultural products. The project is also expected
to create employment in the West Bank. Regional
cooperation is key to that end, as the project involves
not only Palestine but also Israel and Jordan.
Prime Minister Koizumi of Japan launched this
initiative in July 2006 when he visited Israel, Palestine
and Jordan. I was given the task to design the project

38/68

22/10/2013

in my capacity as Director-General for the Middle East
and Africa at our Foreign Ministry. Although there was
some skepticism in the beginning, steady progress has
been made since 2006. One Palestinian company has
already decided to participate in its flagship project, the
Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, and several companies
have expressed interest in joining. The park’s beneficial
economic effects are estimated at more than $40 million
per year. About 7,000 jobs can also be created.
A ministerial-level meeting was held in Jericho
in July this year under the chairmanship of Foreign
Minister Kishida of Japan. Ministers from Israel,
Palestine and Jordan participated. The meeting served
as an important opportunity of confidence-building
among the participants and reaffirmed the importance
of moving forward the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity
project. We look forward to welcoming private
companies from the Middle East and other regions of
the world joining the project. The plan for business
expansion in the West Bank and Gaza announced by
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Kerry, in May
also aims at promoting local entrepreneurs, which we
strongly support.
The second Japanese initiative is the Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development. The Conference, launched
in February this year in Tokyo, is a process aimed at
mobilizing and sharing East Asian experiences and
resources deriving from their economic development for
the sake of Palestinian development. A second meeting
of Conference will take place under the Indonesian
chairmanship early next year.
I very much hope that the Security Council will
take into account not only the political aspects, but also
the economic incentives to the peace process, when it
discusses this very important subject.
Turning to the situation in Syria, Japan, like
others, welcomes the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), as well as the establishment of the Joint Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations. I also join
others in extending wholehearted congratulations to
the OPCW on being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
Since the inception of the OPCW in 1997, Japan has
made significant contributions to the activities of
the organization in its capacity as the second-largest
financial contributor and as a member of the Executive
Council. The first Director of the Inspectorate at OPCW
was Major General Ichiro Akiyama of Japan.
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As my Prime Minister, Mr. Abe, expressed at
the general debate in September (see A/68/PV.12),
Japan will provide the greatest possible cooperation
towards the disposal of Syria’s chemical weapons. My
Government will consider concrete cooperation based
on relevant information with respect to global needs
and the implementation scheme for destroying Syrian
chemical weapons.
Despite progress in the field of chemical weapons,
we must not turn our eyes away from the appalling
humanitarian situation in Syria and the lack of progress
in the peace process. Faced with this deplorable situation,
Japan will continue to proactively provide humanitarian
assistance — now totaling $155 million — to refugees
and neighbouring countries. With the $60 million
pledged by Prime Minister Abe last month, Japan
will support various international organizations in
caring for internally displaced persons and refugees
in and around Syria. Japan will also provide bilateral
assistance to Jordan and Lebanon. Furthermore, we
will extend a helping hand to areas under the control
of opposition groups where it is difficult for assistance
from international organizations to reach.
Let me recall, however, that humanitarian
assistance cannot be an end in itself. Now is the time
for the international community to seize the window
of opportunity with a view to stopping the violence
and bringing about a political solution. The successful
convening of the “Geneva II” conference is of utmost
importance in this regard. Japan is always ready to
participate in the Geneva II conference and to make
further contributions to resolving the Syrian crisis.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Allow me first to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate. I would also like
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing.
Amid the ongoing turmoil in the Middle East, the
Palestinian question continues to lie at the heart of the
challenges that we face in the region. Turkey has always
supported a two-State solution based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Palestine, sitting side by side with us on an equal
footing under this roof and living side by side in peace
and security with Israel. The revival of the Middle
East peace process and the successful completion of
comprehensive peace negotiations between the parties

S/PV.7047

for a just and lasting solution have become increasingly
critical against the backdrop of the recent developments
in the region.
The denial of the right of the Palestinians to have
a State of their own has no justification on any moral,
political or legal grounds. In the absence of an immediate
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question,
the prospects for regional peace, cooperation and wellbeing will be only an elusive dream.
In this respect, we welcome and support the ongoing
peace talks that were relaunched last July by the
Palestinian and Israeli leadership. We also appreciate
the commitment and efforts of the United States
Secretary of State. We view as a positive development
the statement issued by the Quartet in September on its
determination to lend effective support to the efforts of
the parties and commitment to reaching a permanent
status agreement within nine months. However, it is
also apparent that the window of opportunity for a
comprehensive solution narrows as time goes by. We
cannot afford to miss another opportunity for peace and
stability in the region.
We therefore encourage the parties to continue
negotiations in a sincere, decisive and dedicated manner
and to vigilantly avoid actions that might jeopardize
the process. The parties must act in good faith, build
confidence through a settlement freeze, prisoner
release and security arrangements for both sides. We
also believe that any provocative step against holy
sites, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque, must be avoided.
I would like to reiterate once again that, as always,
Turkey, is ready to contribute to all international efforts
towards a just and lasting settlement.
We are concerned, however, by Israel’s continuing
illegal settlement activities in occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. Israel’s
expansionist policy remains a major obstacle to
meaningful negotiations and undermines the prospects
for a negotiated two-State solution. We are dismayed by
the approval of more than 3,000 settlement units since
the announcement of the resumption of the negotiations.
We continue to be worried by Israeli settler violence,
as reflected in land usurpation, the destruction of olive
trees and provocative actions against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, together with the harsh measures taken by
Israeli security forces. Those actions may trigger a
widespread reaction and be detrimental to the ongoing
talks.

13-5252539/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation of Palestinian prisoners, including
children and women, under Israeli custody remains
another source of concern. The Palestinian Ministry
of Detainees recently announced that currently
5,200 Palestinians were being kept in Israeli prisons,
detention camps and interrogation facilities. UNICEF’s
latest report reveals ongoing violations against children
in Israeli military detention.
The international community must be firm
in its condemnation and rejection of those and
other unacceptable Israeli actions — inter alia,
restrictions on the freedom of movement of people
and goods — which constitute attempts to artificially
change the demographic and multicultural identity of
Jerusalem.
The illegal blockade of Gaza is another issue
of major concern. All restrictions on Gaza are
unsustainable and counterproductive. As the ceasefire
persists, a further easing of restrictions must follow.
The deteriorating economic, social and humanitarian
conditions in Gaza as a result of the restrictions
adversely affect the already fragile situation in the
region. We have noted with concern the recent reports
by various international organizations, including the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
United Nations agencies, that restrictions on Palestine
are the primary source of the continued deterioration of
the Palestinian economy.
Turkey has taken urgent action to alleviate some
emerging vital shortages, including providing fuel for
generators for critical services such health, water and
sanitation in Gaza. We have decided to send another
urgent dispatch of flour supplies to Gaza, amounting to
10,000 tons this year, via the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
the transfer of which will start on 28 October.
As part of the peace efforts, we welcome the
economic initiative of the Quartet, which aims at
bringing economic growth to the Palestinian economy.
However, any economic initiative alone cannot
be regarded as a substitute for a genuine political
settlement. Unless there is substantial progress towards
a just and lasting peace based on a two-State solution,
economic initiatives will hardly be a substitute for
freedom, independence and full sovereignty. Only
a political solution can pave the way to a sustainable
economic life and prosperity in Palestine.

40/68

22/10/2013

In the meantime, Turkey will continue to fully
support Palestinian reconciliation, which we believe
constitutes one of the pillars for lasting peace in
the Middle East. We strongly support the goal of
establishing a unity Government that embraces the
Palestinian people as a whole.
The situation in Syria continues to be the greatest
humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first century. The
crisis continues to threaten regional peace and security,
while inflicting a grave burden on Syria’s neighbours.
The number of Syrians in neighbouring countries has
reached more than 2 million, 600,000 of whom are
currently in Turkey.
The report of the investigation mission that was
made public on 17 September serves to confirm our
general evaluation of the 21 August incident with regard
to the use of chemical weapons by the regime in Syria.
We welcome the fact that, following that report, the
Security Council was finally able to act in unity on the
issue of Syria, with a view to the elimination of Syria’s
stockpiles of chemical weapons. We also welcome the
establishment of the United Nations-Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Joint Mission,
tasked with guiding that process. However, we firmly
believe that the rapid and unconditional implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013) is crucial and that there should
be consequences for noncompliance.
Having said that, the conflict in Syria neither began
with the use of chemical weapons, nor will it end with a
resolution to eliminate them. The agreement to destroy
Syria’s chemical arsenal must not allow the regime to
avoid responsibility for its other crimes. We should not
lose sight of the fact that more than 100,000 people have
been killed by regime’s use of conventional weapons.
There is therefore an immediate need for a political
solution that paves the way for a democratic transition
in accordance with the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people. We therefore repeat our support for the
establishment of a transitional governing body with full
executive authorities, in line with the provisions of the
Geneva final communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Let me conclude by reiterating that 2013 is a vital
year for peace in the Middle East. It is now time for
sincere and concrete action. We need to seize any
momentum that would help to revitalize the talks
between the parties and take concerted action towards
a two-State solution in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the road map

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7047

and the Arab Peace Initiative. The success of future
efforts mainly depends upon the Israeli Government’s
acceptance of the establishment of a viable, contiguous
Palestinian State. There is also a need for the presence
of a reconciled and unified Palestinian front under the
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas. Turkey is
ready to contribute to all international efforts to that
end.

governing body with full executive powers and control
of all governmental and all security institutions. The
European Union also considers that, in full conformity
with the Geneva communiqué, the parties will have to
agree during the conference on clear and irreversible
steps and a short time frame for the political transition.
International participants in “Geneva II” should adhere
to the principles included in the communiqué.

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.

The European Union calls on the opposition to
come together and participate actively at the conference
and encourages the National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces to take a leading
role during negotiations. We stand ready to continue
engaging with and to support the Coalition in those
endeavours and in its relations with the international
community at large.

Mr. Hallergard: I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.
The European Union continues to be extremely
concerned about the deteriorating situation in Syria,
which makes it all the more urgent to put an end to
all violence and to the suffering of the Syrian people,
and find a political solution that meets their legitimate
aspirations. We condemn the unprecedented use of
force by the regime. We also condemn the continuing
widespread and systematic violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights in Syria, including
increasing attacks on religious and ethnic communities.
Only a political solution that results in a united,
inclusive and democratic Syria can end the terrible
bloodshed and grave violations of human rights.
The European Union supports a vision of Syria that
will live up to the legitimate demands of the Syrian
people for a free, open and inclusive political system
in which all Syrians are involved and enjoy equal
rights regardless of their origin, affiliation, religion or
beliefs, while recognizing an important role for women
in society.
The European Union welcomes the call by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon for a peace conference to be held
in Geneva before the end of November. We urge all
sides to the conflict to respond positively to that call
and to adhere publicly to a credible political transition
based on the full implementation of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). The EU reiterates
that the objective of the conference must be the swift
establishment, by mutual consent, of a transitional

The European Union stood united in condemning
in the strongest terms the horrific chemical attack
perpetrated on 21 August. That attack constituted a
blatant violation of international law, which amounts
to a crime against humanity and a war crime under the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Those crimes, as well as other atrocities and human
rights violations and abuses, must be investigated and
perpetrators and those ordering the crimes must be
held accountable. The European Union reaffirms that
there should be no impunity for any such violations,
including those committed with either chemical and
conventional weapons or other means, and recalls that
the Security Council can refer the situation in Syria to
the ICC , as requested in the Swiss letter to the Council
of 14 January 2013 (S/2013/19, annex), at any time.
We are seriously concerned about the growing
involvement of extremist and non-State foreign actors
in the fighting in Syria, which is further fuelling the
conflict and posing a threat to regional stability. We call
on all the relevant parties to refrain from supporting
such groups.
The European Union welcomed the decision
of the Executive Council of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
resolution 2118 (2013), which mandated that the
Syrian Arab Republic eliminate all chemical-weapons
material and equipment by the first half of 2014. The
Syrian Arab Republic must now meet all its obligations
in the most complete, diligent and transparent manner.
The European Union calls on all sides to ensure that the
inspectors have free and unfettered access to all sites.
The European Union and its individual member States

13-5252541/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are giving concrete support to the Joint Mission of the
United Nations-OPCW in carrying out its important
and urgent tasks and stand ready to consider further
support.
As the largest donor, the European Union
reaffirms its commitment to continuing to provide
assistance, including humanitarian aid, to the Syrian
people — assistance that now amounts to close to
€2 billion. Yesterday the Foreign Affairs Council agreed
on common EU messages on humanitarian aspects of
the Syrian crisis, to which I would like to refer.
All efforts must be made to ensure that humanitarian
aid reaches all people in need in Syria and that full
access is granted to humanitarian aid agencies. We
welcomed the Security Council presidential statement
of 2 October on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(S/PRST/2013/15). It should be fully implemented,
and we welcome the efforts being made by the
United Nations, and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in particular, in that regard.
All parties, especially the Syrian authorities, must
take all appropriate measures to facilitate safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to populations in
need of assistance throughout the entirety of Syrian
territory, including across conflict lines and borders
with neighbouring countries. We call on all sides of
the conflict to allow for local ceasefires to facilitate
humanitarian work and to respect all obligations under
international humanitarian law.
The EU expresses deep concern for the fate of the
millions of internally displaced persons and refugees,
and commends those countries that are keeping their
borders open in order to provide safe havens for
refugees. The EU renews its commitment to respond
to humanitarian needs in Syria and its neighbours.
We recognize that the dramatic situation of refugees
affecting neighbouring countries is also of growing
concern to countries beyond the immediate vicinity of
Syria, and is having an impact on them as well.
To facilitate an effective settlement of the crisis,
the EU will continue its engagement with, and support
to, the Syrian National Coalition, including in areas
under the Coalition’s control. The EU welcomes the
creation by the Group of Friends of the Syrian People
of a Syria recovery trust fund as an important step
towards ensuring that the assistance the people of Syria
need is properly delivered.

42/68

22/10/2013

With regard to the Middle East peace process and
the ongoing direct negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians aimed at a comprehensive peace between
the two sides, the European Union remains fully
supportive of the process and is committed to helping
to ensure its success. The European Union commends
the courageous leadership shown by Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas in that context, as well
as the crucial role played by the United States and the
support expressed by the League of Arab States. We
trust that such leadership will be the basis needed for
substantial decisions to be taken on the key issues with
regard to a viable two-State solution.
The European Union recalls its commitment
to support the parties’ quest for a comprehensive
agreement on all final status issues, within the agreed
nine-month timeframe. We urge all parties to refrain
from actions that could undermine the negotiation
process and the prospects for peace. We will not lose
sight of developments on the ground, and we will
continue to act in accordance with our well-known
principles and positions and with international law
and international humanitarian law. As negotiations
progress, the EU intends to give further concrete form
to its support, in line with what will be agreed on by the
parties, and keeping in mind the EU’s determination to
contribute to a new era of peace and prosperity in the
Middle East. The EU is concerned with the dramatic
shortfall in fiscal revenue due to slowing economic
development in the Palestinian territory. The EU is
the largest donor to the Palestinian Authority, and we
call on other donors, especially those in the region, to
increase their financial support to it.
Before concluding my statement, I would like to turn
briefly to the situation in Lebanon. The EU welcomes
the establishment in New York on 25 September of
an international support group for Lebanon. We will
continue to uphold our commitment as the largest donor
in Lebanon, supporting the country in addressing
humanitarian, economic and security challenges. Given
the magnitude of those challenges, it is of the utmost
urgency that a Government be formed in Lebanon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): More than two
and a half years ago, the unrest in Syria began,
with unforeseen, horrific consequences. A country
is in ruins. Iceland condemns the use of chemical

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

weapons in Syria in the strongest possible terms. We
also condemn all other violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in the country,
regardless of the perpetrators. The latest report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/24/46) states that
the perpetrators of those violations and crimes, on all
sides, do not fear accountability and that referral to
justice is imperative. Iceland agrees, and reiterates its
request to the Security Council to refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.
We welcome resolution 2118 (2013), which requires
the verification and destruction of chemical-weapon
stockpiles in Syria. We also welcome efforts to
convene a second Geneva conference in November.
In the light of the open debate on women and peace
and security in the Security Council last Friday (see
S/PV.7044), Iceland would like to stress the importance
of women as mediators and their role at the negotiating
table. Women’s participation in peace negotiations is
fundamental to ensuring results, and now is the time
to put our words into action and have women actively
involved in a Geneva conference, to ensure that their
rights will be protected and promoted in any future
political solution in Syria.
Journalists are our eyes and ears in conflict zones.
It is therefore vital that journalists be granted free
access, so that they can report without obstruction. They
have a right to the same protection as civilians, as the
Council recognized in resolution 1738 (2006). In Syria,
however, they are operating under extremely dangerous
circumstances, with 28 journalists killed in the country
last year. That has to change, and journalists’ freedom
of movement throughout the country, as well as a
non-discriminatory visa policy for them, as called for
in the six-point plan, must be respected.
The situation in the Middle East cannot be separated
from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which remains
a key issue. We welcome the renewed peace talks
between the State of Israel and the State of Palestine,
and commend Secretary Kerry for his commitment. It
is extremely important that the peace process provide
tangible results, while respecting the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination as well
as Israel’s right to exist within safe and secure borders.
But time is short. The continuing settlement activities
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are an
obstacle to peace and may well make a two-State solution
impossible. The international community, including the

S/PV.7047

Security Council, must address the situation and do its
utmost to prevent ongoing violations of human rights
and humanitarian law on the ground. That includes
addressing the continuing settlement activities, which
are not confined to the construction of new homes for
settlers but also include new roads and infrastructure as
well as demolitions and eviction orders.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that this
time the negotiations must result in two States, living
side by side in peace and security. That is the only way
forward for both parties.
The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My delegation
wishes to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
Azerbaijan’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for convening this
timely open debate on the Middle East.
On repeated occasions, the Holy See has clearly
voiced urgent concern for the peace and welfare of all
the peoples of the Middle East. On this occasion, my
delegation once more joins its voice to those of all people
of goodwill who stand ready to welcome with great
hope the re-engagement of Israelis and Palestinians in
direct, serious and concrete negotiations. Our hopes
are renewed that we are witnessing at present a newly
rejuvenated peace process.
This is a critical time for the region, and there
are many issues to be considered. A solution for each
and for all of the peoples of the Middle East must be
characterized, first and foremost, by respecting the
centrality and dignity of the human person, regardless
of race or creed, by a concern for every human life
and for human dignity and by the tireless pursuit of
the common good for the whole of society, while also
keeping in mind the regional and international context.
The recognition and respect of the inalienable dignity
of every human being is the road map to the unity and
stability of every nation.
Peacebuilding between the people of Israel and
the people of Palestine constitutes a lingering remnant
of the twentieth century, which proved to be the
bloodiest of centuries. Each side in the drama suffered
grave humanitarian crises, whether in declared
wars, extremist violence or the military responses
thereto. In many of the confrontations, sadly, it has
been the civilian population that has fallen victim to
declared and undeclared violence. The impact of the

13-5252543/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian suffering of both parties as a result of this
ongoing conflict requires the international community
every year to donate more funds to sustain refugee
populations. The global economic picture, however,
warns us that the situation cannot be sustained
indefinitely. A political solution is also the best solution
to those economic pressures, because peace between
the parties generates stable economies and, in turn,
attracts development funds.
My delegation wishes to note that other unresolved
political issues have introduced yet further instability
into the region. Accordingly, we join our voice to those
expressing grave concern regarding the situation in
Syria, and encourage everyone involved to continue
moving forward in a sincere quest for justice and peace.
As an imperative first step, the Holy See earnestly and
urgently calls upon all parties to put an immediate end
to violence and to begin a real process of dialogue with
the “Geneva II” conference, planned for next month.
One of the consequences of the current violence in
Syria is the flight of non-combatants from their homes.
Added to the plight of over 4 million internally displaced
persons within the borders of Syria itself, more than
2 million refugees, three quarters of them women and
children, have already sought refuge in neighbouring
countries and are now seeking peace, security and
safety in countries outside the Middle East.
The challenges faced, especially by neighbouring
countries, in assisting and protecting those refugees
could have a destabilizing impact on the entire region.
The situation is extremely grave and is worsening by
the day; many people are dying of hunger or from a
lack of access to basic and necessary medical care.
The Catholic Church remains committed and active at
the forefront in providing humanitarian assistance to
people regardless of their religious or ethnic affiliation,
with all the means at our disposal. In that regard, I
would like to recall that, on 1 September, Pope Francis
called for a day of prayer and fasting for world peace,
and particularly for peace in Syria.
From the beginning, the Middle East has been the
cradle of the ancestral faith of Christians, and Christians
have lived peaceably in those countries for centuries,
indeed millennia. As citizens of their respective
countries in the Middle East, they desire to contribute
to their societies in the Middle East and to continue to
be part of the social, political, cultural and religious
landscape of the region and work for the common good
of societies to which they fully belong, striving for
44/68

22/10/2013

peace and reconciliation and guided by those values
that can help society progress towards greater respect
for justice, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
For that reason, my delegation wishes in this
Chamber to raise the issue of the worrying exodus of
Christians from the region of their birth. Extremist
and reactionary forces introduced into the region as a
result of political instability and conflicts are targeting
Christians and other groups that are suffering from
the consequences of their blind violence. Christians
see themselves forced to flee for the sake of life and
limb, leaving behind a 2,000 year-old tradition bound
up in the culture of the region. It is an unacceptable
recurrence of what happened in Iraq when sectarian
violence reduced the Christian population by 70 per
cent.
For those of us here at the United Nations, the
challenges of the Middle East to which I have referred
are a clarion call to the task of peacemaking, which is
the very reason for the existence of the Organization.
By mustering the needed political will, the international
community can make a difference in the life of the
peoples of the Middle East and help them fulfil their
long-deferred dream of peace in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I will be making a shorter
statement while the full text is circulated.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important open debate of the Security Council on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement to be made by the representative of Djibouti
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Malaysia welcomes the resumption of direct talks
between both sides and wishes to underline our support
for the State of Palestine in its negotiations towards a
just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine
and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We also
welcome the efforts of the other stakeholders involved
in that important process, including United States
Secretary of State John Kerry, the Middle East Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative. Malaysia has always
believed in a two-State solution, based on the borders

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of
Palestine. We urge all parties to demonstrate honesty
and sincerity towards achieving those objectives.
Words must be followed up with actions to reflect the
genuine desire for peace.
The commitment of the Palestinian side is clearly
seen in the way the Palestinians have continued to foster
an atmosphere conducive to the continuation of the talks.
However, that commitment is not matched by those on
the other side of the negotiating table. Our Palestinian
brothers and sisters have shown tremendous courage
and sacrifice as they proceed down the path of direct
negotiations. They do so while knowing full well that
they are backed by the overwhelming encouragement
and support of Member States for their efforts to fully
advance their interests within the United Nations and
its organs, following the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 67/19.
Yet, despite that, Israel continues to announce the
construction of new illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Malaysia condemns Israel’s
building of illegal settlements in Palestinian lands,
including in Jerusalem. Justice is long overdue for that
violation, one that threatens to completely undermine
the possibility of a just and lasting solution.
Malaysia furthermore reiterates its grave concern at
the desecration by Israeli settlers of holy sites, including
the recent attacks on the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Settler
violence has also risen due to the olive season, with
more Palestinian-owned groves and farms deliberately
burned or robbed. Palestinian prisoners remain
under long detention, in violation of international
humanitarian law.
My delegation also demands an immediate end to
Israel’s blockade of Gaza, in particular in the light of the
serious humanitarian situation and food security needs
of the population. The people of Gaza are being denied
their livelihood through collective punishment by the
occupying Power that is both inhumane and illegal.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
occupying Power continues to act with impunity
and to change the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure and legal status
of the territory. My delegation reiterates our strong
objections to Israel’s pillaging and profiteering from
the illegal exploitation of occupied territories, including
the geological surveys recently concluded by a United
States-Israeli company on oil deposits in the southern

S/PV.7047

half of the occupied Syrian Golan. Malaysia calls for
the immediate and full withdrawal of Israel from the
occupied Syrian Golan, in line with resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).
Malaysia takes note of the recent discussions on the
date and modalities of the conference to follow up on
the 30 June 2012 meeting of the Action Group on Syria.
My delegation expresses our continued support for the
tireless efforts of Joint Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi. In that regard, we call on all parties to come
together and work towards a political solution that is
Syrian-led and inclusive.
With regard to Lebanon, Malaysia reiterates that
Israel must desist from its continued and almost daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty, whether by air,
water or land. Israel must fully implement resolution
1701 (2006), which calls for the full cessation of
hostilities and the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Lebanon, with full respect for the Blue Line.
In conclusion, while there are significant
developments in the Middle East peace process, the
Security Council is also currently witnessing other
openings for peace in other areas of conflict. At the
same time, voices of hate and ignorance continue to
incite violence and oppression in the region. Malaysia
continues to believe in a moderate approach to conflict
resolution in order to bridge the differences and restore
stability to the lives of Palestinians, Syrians and other
peoples in the Middle East. We must collectively
summon the political will to bring an end to the
immediate suffering in those areas and commit to a
moderate cause which could secure greater gains than
if we were divided by conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): In their statements today, a number of
delegations deliberately referred to the situation in my
country in a misleading, provocative and distorting
manner. They adduced a number of false allegations to
serve their aim of supporting radicalism and terrorism
in Syria and across the broader region and to detract
attention from the core matter under discussion today:
the situation in the Middle East. We remain firm in
our conviction, reiterated time and again before the
Council, that the objective for our discussion of this
item should be to bring to an end the Israeli occupation

13-5252545/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Arab lands, not to discuss the internal situation of a
certain State.
I will not respond to the statements made by enemy
States that shelter, arm and train terrorists and facilitate
their infiltration of Syrian territory across our borders
with neighbouring States. They spread devastation,
radical terrorism and Wahhabi extremism in Syria and
seek, in particular, to bring about the failure of any
peaceful solution under Syrian leadership. I mention in
particular the regimes of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey
as well as some well-known Western Governments
whose conduct is in blatant violation of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
of international law, in particular the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
Israel occupies territories in Palestine, Syria and
Lebanon. The beginning of that occupation coincided
with the birth of this international Organization.
For more than half a century, successive Israeli
Governments have perpetrated systematic and
documented violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law that amount
to war crimes and crimes against humanity. There has
been more than half a century of settlement campaigns
that undermine — as recognized by everyone,
including Israel’s supporters — the prospects for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the 1967 borders and of peace and security in
the region. There has been more than half a century
of complete disregard by Israel for the relevant United
Nations resolutions seeking to bring to an end its
occupation of Arab territories. There has been more
than half a century by Israel of State terrorism, racist
laws, desecration of Islamic and Christian holy sites,
and the eviction of Palestinian citizens from their
homes, including women and children. There has been
more than half a century of blind support by influential
States, both within and outside of the Security Council,
for the continued Israeli policy of occupying Arab
territories.
For more than half a century, part of our land has
been occupied and Syrian citizens have been chafing
under the yoke of Israeli occupation. In the occupied
Syrian Golan, Syrian citizens continue to suffer.
Their suffering has been overlooked once again by the
Secretariat in its briefing today.
Israeli settlement campaigns continue in the
occupied Syrian Golan, where Syrians are subjected to
the most horrendous policies of racial discrimination,
46/68

22/10/2013

detention and torture. They are deprived of their
natural resources and of education meeting the Syrian
national curriculum. They are also prevented from
carrying their Syrian identity cards. If a Syrian citizen
in the occupied Syrian Golan refuses to carry an Israeli
identity card, he or she is prevented from entering an
Israeli hospital if he or she falls sick. Syrian citizens
in the Golan Heights are prevented from following the
Syrian curriculum in their studies.
Those facts are well-documented, well-established
and well-known to all present. Since all present claim
to be against occupation and to seek its termination,
why has the United Nations failed, in humanitarian,
political, economic and moral terms, to fulfil its
responsibility to bring Israel’s occupation to an end?
While it is true that the United Nations, including the
Security Council, has succeeded in adopting hundreds
of resolutions calling for the cessation of the Israeli
occupation, what is frustrating is that none of those
resolution has been implemented, including resolution
497 (1981), on terminating the occupation of the Syrian
Golan. It is useful to recall here that all resolutions,
as well as international law, have been elaborated to
be applied. The Charter of the United Nations, as well
as other international instruments, have been adopted
to be respected. United Nations resolutions have been
adopted to be implemented. Accordingly, we have
learned, and in turn we teach young diplomats, to come
to the Organization to perfect the art of diplomacy.
We try to convince them that the resolutions of this
international Organization must be respected and
carried out. That is supposed to take place seriously and
applied to everybody without exception. I do not believe
that any of the States Members that have acceded to the
Organization for noble goals have come just to adopt
resolutions that remain dead letters, or merely to cite
those resolutions and laws in their statements or have
them apply to some and not to others in accordance
with so-called double standard policies.
I should like to ask, given that, after so many years,
the United Nations has been unable to end the Israeli
occupation of our occupied territory and return the
rights of its people, what, in the Council’s view, is the
alternative? How can we regain our occupied territory
in Palestine, the Syrian Golan and South Lebanon?
We believe that what is needed today to preserve the
credibility of the international Organization is for some
very well-known States to end their policies of double
standards. Member States should match words with
deeds by taking concrete measures that force Israel to
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

abide by United Nations resolutions in a manner that
will help to end the occupation and the unprecedented
bloody tragedy being experienced by Arab citizens
and Palestinians living under occupation for so many
decades.
It is paradoxical that Israel was established by
a resolution of the Organization (General Assembly
resolution 181 (II)). Regardless of our views on that
resolution, Israel, which is indebted to the Organization
for that resolution, currently, does not carry out any of
the resolutions adopted by the United Nations when it
comes to ending its occupation of Lebanese, Palestinian
and Syrian land. Israeli occupation forces provide
assistance to terrorist groups in the buffer zone in the
occupied Syrian Golan by transferring injured terrorists
through the separation wall to Israeli hospitals to be
treated. It then returns them to Syrian territory, again
through the separation wall, to continue their terrorist
activities in that critical region.
We should pay due attention to ensuring
that such Israeli assistance to terrorists does not
constitute a flagrant violation of the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement, the mandate of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
or international law — or that it endanger the lives
of UNDOF personnel and undermine the work of the
forces. That is precisely what has happened many times:
terrorist groups have abducted UNDOF peacekeepers,
targeted their positions and fired on them. We have
informed the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
of all the full details of such events, including the
very serious matter concerning a Qatari intelligence
conspiracy and the abduction to Jordan of a Filipino
peacekeeping battalion. We requested an independent
official investigation in a statement I made at the
General Assembly on behalf of my Government,
which I have reiterated in a number of statements at
the Security Council. Strangely, months later, we
continue to await a response from DPKO. To date, we
have received no reply, either from the Secretariat or
from DPKO. However, as the saying goes, every cloud
has a silver lining. That Qatari-Israeli collusion with
Wahabi/Takfiri radical terrorists, who wreak havoc
along the separation line in the Golan, is indicative of
the policy of double standards and its collusion against
the safety and stability of Syria and its people, as well
as that of United Nations personnel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.

S/PV.7047

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan):
The Palestinian-Israeli negotiations currently under
way sharpen our collective hope that in a few months’
time a comprehensive peace will finally settle on a land
most holy to the three monotheistic faiths — a peace
founded on the basis of two States, Palestine and Israel,
existing side-by-side in peace and security. As the two
sides work their way towards that noble objective, with
the extraordinary support provided by the United States
Secretary of State, traditional spoilers will attempt,
with increasing fever and intensity, to bring ruin upon
us, in other words, to spoil that.
We urge the Israeli Government in particular to do
everything in its power to prevent the extreme parts
of the right-wing settler movement from provoking
a crisis on Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We know the Israeli
Government has the power to do so — it cannot say
it does not — and the stakes are so high. Should it
fail to take preventive measures, not only could those
groups torpedo the talks, but they could also unleash a
colossal, overwhelming global crisis on a scale hitherto
not witnessed this century.
Similarly, we demand that the Israeli Government
desist from demarcating, expropriating, confiscating,
approving, announcing and undertaking any sort of
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in East Jerusalem. Not only could those
actions ultimately undermine the talks but, obviously,
they remain illegal under international law.
As we have noted previously in the Council, the
position of the International Court of Justice on that
last point is unambiguous, as explained in paragraph
78 of its 2004 advisory opinion (see A/ES-10/273).
Indeed, in earlier paragraphs of the opinion, in relation
to East Jerusalem the Court also recalled specifically
the position of the Security Council. The Court noted
that resolution 298 (1971) states in paragraph 75 that
“all legislative and administrative actions taken by
Israel to change the status of the City of Jerusalem,
including expropriation of land and properties,
transfer of populations and legislation aimed at the
incorporation of the occupied section, are totally
invalid and cannot change that status”.
(spoke in Arabic)
Having just referred to the fundamental question
in the region, I must now turn to the bloodier and more
grave tragedy in the world, that is, the Syrian crisis. I
would like to reiterate what was stated by His Majesty

13-5252547/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

King Abdullah II in his statement before the General
Assembly recently (see A/68/PV.5), that the escalation
of violence in Syria and the use of religious and ethnic
divisions may undermine a regional renaissance and
endanger international security. In order to confront
such issues, we have to move quickly to initiate the
process of political transition in Syria, to put a stop to
violence and bloodshed, to end the refugee crisis and its
disastrous effects on the neighbouring or host States, to
eliminate chemical weapons, to try the perpetrators of
war crimes and crimes against humanity and to preserve
the territorial integrity of Syria. There is no need to
re-emphasize the grave economic crisis experienced by
Jordan, which has worsened as a result of acting as host
to huge numbers of Syrian refugees.
My delegation gave a detailed account of the
Jordanian crisis, providing statistics and numbers, in a
closed meeting of the Council to discuss the situation
on 30 April (see S/PV.6957). We submitted a request
to the Council to visit Jordan in order for members to
have first-hand experience of the real situation and
its disastrous impact on our national security and
economy. We were most hopeful that the international
positive consequences of such a visit might have helped
to alleviate the suffering andeconomic misery caused
by the crisis. Unfortunately, after the passage of 176
days, Jordan has still not received any response to that
official request, nor has it received any compensation
for the grave material losses it has sustained.
I would like to emphasize that the Jordanian people
are not in a position to bear this grave burden without
sufficient international assistance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moreno Zapata (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. We also appreciate the briefing and report
by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman.
The situation of conflict on the ground in the Middle
East has not changed. The reiteration of statements that
most States have made during the debate convened
by the Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, cannot be viewed
merely as words. It is about a renewal of momentum
and the maintaining of pressure by the international

48/68

22/10/2013

community in order to achieve a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the region. The Security Council
has adopted many resolutions on the issue of Palestine
since 1947, and Israel has fulfilled none of them.
The impunity with which the occupying Power
acts, flouting the resolutions adopted by this body,
strip from it any credible authority or morality to judge
anyone. Its criminal record of assassinations, torture,
disappearances, apartheid, arbitrary detentions, among
other crimes against the Palestinian people, continues
to horrify the world.
Notwithstanding any negotiations that may be
taking place, we have to realize the need for a positive
atmosphere, and for such an atmosphere it is vital to
stop the settlements policy of the occupying Power,
Israel. That is an indispensable prerequisite for holding
any kind of conversation. Moreover, the situation
clearly shows a waning in the power of mediation that is
exacerbated, not only by the use of the veto to block the
application of sanctions against the occupying Power,
Israel, but also by the fact that the mediation is being
conducted by a partner of the Government of Israel.
Acts of aggression by settlers against the Palestinian
population and segregationist controls and roadblocks
and illegal settlements are ongoing. They sabotage the
peace process, negotiations and violate the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Venezuela reiterates to the Council that
there is a need to address the situation using the purview
granted to this body by the Charter of the United
Nations. And we fervently endorse a Palestinian State
that is independent, viable and territorially contiguous,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The State of Palestine has shown that it is
committed to participating in negotiations in good
faith, but the ongoing Israeli aggression against its
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the ongoing
threat to the viability of the two-State solution
make peace impossible in the region. The constant
provocations and attacks, such as those that occurred at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and against Palestinian cemeteries,
churches and mosques, are all elements that lead to the
deterioration of the negotiations. The announcement
by the Government of Israel to move forward with a
settlement plan on Palestinian territory that includes
3,000 illegal settlements constitutes an act of aggression
that places them on the margins of international law
before the international community. Such war crimes,
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

acts of State terrorism and systematic violations of
human rights committed against Palestinians must be
tried in international tribunals.
Israel’s frequent violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty
and its occupation of the Golan are also a source of great
concern. It is deplorable that, rather than encouraging
peace and supporting efforts to achieve a space of
dialogue, as is claimed for the “Geneva II” conference,
some countries — acting from outside — are instigating
the more extremist and terrorist factions in Syria to
continue the violence. Only political dialogue and
diplomatic negotiations can contribute to solving the
conflict that is affecting the Syrian people.
The warmongers do not want peace in Syria. They
seek to bolster their geopolitical interests through
regime change. They aim to destroy Syria and create
a new political map in the Middle East. That is
empowering terrorist groups like Jubhat Al-Nusra and
Al-Qaida, which represent opposition forces linked to
atrocities, including the destruction of the Twin Towers
in this very city, an event that shook the entire world.
Financing or encouraging such groups, which deny the
existence of anyone who thinks differently from them,
be they Christian, Muslim or Jew, and which promote
hatred and the suppression of women, is a crime against
humanity and compromises world peace.
In that regard, the Venezuelan Government regrets
and deplores the terrorist acts recently committed in
the suburbs of Damascus in which 30 people died at the
hands of the groups I have just mentioned.
Venezuela encourages a negotiated solution to
the conflict in Syria and commends the Government
of Syria for its initiative in joining the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. We welcome this opportunity to continue to
engage the Council on matters of international peace
and security.
Our appreciation also goes to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

S/PV.7047

It has become a tradition for the Security Council
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. This is in an effort to engage
the international community and to share ideas on
how we can work together to contribute to peace and
prosperity in the Middle East. My delegation continues
to follow with great interest the socioeconomic and
political events in the Middle East, especially events in
Syria and the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
On the situation in Syria, my delegation would
like to express its continued support for the people of
Syria and to call for an end to the horrible humanitarian
catastrophe besetting the heroic people of that country.
We are particularly concerned about the plight of
millions of women and children who have been
displaced and are without food, shelter and medical
care. As we speak, some 6.8 million Syrians require
urgent medical assistance, and 4.2 million remain
internally displaced. We are told that of the 1.7 million
Syrian refugees scattered and stranded in neighbouring
countries, 50 per cent are children. It is disheartening
for a people who have lived in their ancestral land from
time immemorial to be forced into refugee camps on
foreign soil. We call on the international community
as well as humanitarian organizations the world over
to respond with kindness and care to the refugees of
Syria.
While we welcome the recently adopted resolution
2118 (2013), which calls on Syria to eliminate and hand
over its chemical weapons to the United Nations, we
would have preferred to have seen stronger language
clearly stipulating the measures to be taken in the case
of failure by the Al-Assad regime. However, we remind
the international community not to be blinded by the
resolution, but to remain vigilant and resolute to ensure
that those responsible for the many atrocities in Syria,
including the 21 August massacre, account for their
deeds.
My delegation wishes to reiterate its position, which
is in line with that of more than 60 other countries, to
refer the Syrian question to the International Criminal
Court. It is our firm belief that atrocities such as those
of 21 August defy humankind and human nature. Those
who played a part in the planning, organization and
execution of those crimes should be investigated and
tried by an international court of last resort.
On the question of the Palestine, Botswana continues
to believe that there is no alternative to the two-State
solution. The coexistence of Israel and Palestine,

13-5252549/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/10/2013

living side by side as two sovereign States, cannot be
overemphasized. That will not only be of value to the
Israeli and Palestinian people, but will contribute to
regional stability and offer new opportunities for the
region as a whole.

well as on those of all its bodies. The issue requires
the continuing effective attention by all Member States
until a final, just settlement is achieved. Undoubtedly,
that will be one of the fundamental keys to stability and
comprehensive peace in the region.

My delegation is therefore encouraged by the
resumption, in July, of the long-overdue talks between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. We believe that
the talks present an opportunity that should not be
squandered. The Israelis and the Palestinians should, at
the same time, prove their will and desire to shape their
destiny and future.

In that context, it is our belief that there is no
alternative but peace in order to achieve stability and to
open new horizons for the peoples of the entire region.
My country expresses its support and encouragement
for the resumption of direct talks between the Israeli
and Palestinian sides, under the aegis of the United
States of America. We thank the United States for its
efforts. We look forward to the talks culminating in
a comprehensive final settlement of the question of
Palestine in all its aspects. Such an outcome should
include a clear and well-defined timetable that enables
the Palestinian people to regain the right to establish
their independent sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, thereby
allowing peaceful coexistence among all parties in the
region on the basis of durable peace and security.

We also commend all those who continue to be
committed to the peace process, the representatives of
the Quartet and the Security Council for their relentless
efforts towards seeing a peaceful end to the IsraelPalestinian conflict. It is my delegation’s belief that
these efforts should be augmented by both regional and
international support. We further call on the parties to
create an environment of mutual trust throughout the
negotiations in an effort to safeguard the integrity of
the negotiations, lest they be undermined.
In conclusion, Botswana believes that a stable and
peaceful Middle East will not only usher in prosperity
for the people of the region as a whole but will allow
them to play a pivotal role in the development of their
region and the world at large.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ben Sliman (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Mr. President, allow me to express our
warmest congratulations on Azerbaijan’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. Let me also express my gratitude for the
convening of today’s open debate on the agenda item
entitled “The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question” — a new opportunity to consider
the latest developments in the region, particularly those
pertaining to the question of Palestine. Allow me also
to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the subject this
morning.
In my country’s opinion, the question of Palestine
is one of the core issues in the Middle East, particularly
in the light of the latest developments in the region,
the grave challenges entailed and the need to find
urgent solutions. We therefore believe that this issue
must remain central on the United Nations agenda as
50/68

The Council has before it today a historic opportunity
to provide conditions for a just, balanced and durable
solution that allows all parties an opportunity that
cannot be squandered, particularly in the light of the
current situation in the Middle East, which cannot afford
further setbacks. However, most regrettably, what we
see on the ground are the practices and policies by the
occupying forces. We see unconstructive statements
by its officials that do not reflect awareness or the
necessary seriousness to achieve the desired peace.
We believe that to be a serious threat to the current
negotiations and a settlement between the two sides.
In that context, Tunisia condemns the continuing
illegal Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory — including the West Bank,
East Jerusalem and surrounding areas — which, as
indicated in the latest report by Peace Now, the Israeli
peace organization, increased by 70 per cent in the first
half of 2013, as compared with the same period last
year. My country calls on the international community
to act urgently to put an end to such practices, which
the international community agrees are a flagrant
breach of the norms of international law, resolutions
of international legitimacy and the fundamental
framework for a peace process.
Tunisia also condemns the attacks by the occupying
forces and Israeli settlers against Palestinians and their
properties, the confiscation of their lands and farms, and
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the harassment, humiliation and violation of their most
fundamental rights, including the rights of detainees
and prisoners. Those, in the opinion of the international
community, are a clear challenge to the principles of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
My country strongly condemns the attempts to
Judaize the city of Jerusalem, to eradicate its Islamic
sites and to change its demographic and geographic
character, in addition to the daily campaigns of attacks
against Muslim and Christian shrines, particularly the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Palestinian faithful therein.
We call for the stifling embargo imposed on the Gaza
Strip since 2007 to be fully lifted in order to put an
end to its serious and tragic economic repercussions,
under which Palestinian citizens, including women and
children, are deprived of the simplest and most basic
elements of decent living. We also call for an end to
Israel’s occupation of Lebanese and Syrian territories.
My delegation would like to express its deep
concern concerning the situation in Syria and the
continuing acts of killing, destruction and terror in all
parts of the country. That has the potential for grave
consequences for Syria and its future, and indeed the
entire region, particularly on the humanitarian level.
Tunisia reiterates its support for the aspirations of
the Syrian people for freedom, dignity and democracy.
We also stress the need to step up efforts to achieve
a political settlement to the crisis, which has become
unbearable. We also emphasize the importance of
Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and the
cohesiveness of its society. In that regard, my country
supports the current efforts towards the holding of the
“Geneva II” conference to achieve a political settlement
that is agreed upon and supported by all Syrian parties
that desire peace. Such a settlement should put an end
to the more than two years of strife that has had tragic
consequences for Syria and the countries of the region.
We also reiterate our strong condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict. We
believe that to be a criminal act against the Syrian
people — indeed, against humanity. In that regard,
we very much appreciate both the United StatesRussian agreement and resolution 2118 (2013), on the
destruction of Syria’s stockpile of chemical weapons.
Those weapons are indeed a threat to the peace,
security and stability of the region and to international
peace and security. We hope that development will be a
positive step towards a political settlement of the Syrian
crisis and the holding, at the earliest possible date, of

S/PV.7047

an international conference on a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruciton in the
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan.): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this quarterly debate.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive briefing.
Let me begin by congratulating the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
on recently having been awarded the 2013 Nobel
Peace Prize. That timely and important recognition is
testimony to the significant work being carried out by
that organization around the world, especially in the
Syrian Arab Republic during the past several weeks.
In that context, we would like to express our full
support for the decision taken by the Security Council
on 11 October whereby a first-of-its-kind OPCWUnited Nations Joint Mission in Syria was endorsed
and entrusted with a multiphase mission to carry out
resolution 2118 (2013).
The ongoing armed conflict in Syria is of the
utmost concern to each and every one of us. The
attempts by the international community to resolve
the conflict and restore stability in that country
remain insufficient. Kyrgyzstan once again expresses
its serious concern over the numerous victims of the
armed conflict, the humanitarian catastrophe and the
further escalation of the crisis. We call on both sides to
immediately implement a ceasefire and to resolve the
crisis peacefully by conducting a dialogue among all
the political forces of the country under the mediation
of the United Nations.
We support the recent agreement on Syria’s chemical
weapons reached between United States and Russia,
and subsequently endorsed by the Security Council.
We welcome Syria’s adherence to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their
Destruction. Kyrgyzstan is strongly convinced that
more efforts should be undertaken by all the parties
concerned to resolve the crisis while preserving Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, without military
interference from the outside.
The need to avoid external interference, especially
by force, unauthorized by the Security Council and to
engage in political dialogue on the basis of the Geneva

13-5252551/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), has
been expressed in the declarations of the Heads of States
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
adopted, respectively, during recent high-level summits
in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, and Sochi, Russian Federation.
The member States of the SCO and CSTO voiced their
support for the convening of the second international
Geneva conference to lay a foundation for Syria’s
reconciliation and normalization.
The situation in and around Syria should not distract
our attention from the Israeli-Palestinian question. We
wholeheartedly welcome the resumption, in late July,
of direct talks between Israel and Palestine. Those
United States-brokered peace talks are of significant
importance for both parties. As United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process Robert
Serry rightly told the Council on 17 September (see
S/PV.7032), momentous and sustained efforts will
be necessary to successfully conclude negotiations
within the nine-month deadline set for achieving a
comprehensive settlement.
We consider it important to continue that process in
order to find ways to achieve a long-term settlement and
to reach an agreement that provides for the coexistence
of two States living in peace and security in accordance
with previously defined and accepted parameters. We
support the efforts being made by the United States
in that regard, including the series of high-level
negotiations carried out by the United States President
and the Secretary of State with their Palestinian and
Israeli counterparts in September. At the same time, we
express serious concern about continued illegal actions
by Israel, such as the killing of innocent Palestinians,
its settlement activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, the hampering of aid deliveries to those in
need, the ill-treatment of prisoners, forced evictions
and the excessive use of force.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our strong conviction
that the Middle East Quartet, which has a strong mandate
of trust from the whole international community, should
play a more active role in the peace process to help both
parties reach a final and comprehensive settlement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
other representatives in thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate. Our appreciation also

52/68

22/10/2013

goes to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation also associates itself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
This meeting is being held at a time of continuing
uncertainty, but also of hope. As long as conflicts in
the Middle East remain unresolved, we must be hopeful
and determined to achieve a resolution.
For Indonesia, the question of Palestine has always
been one of tremendous importance. We remain deeply
committed to supporting the cause of sovereignty that
Palestinians have pursued for over 60 years, and to
achieving peace.
We believe that last July’s resumption of direct
negotiations between Palestine and Israel is an
encouraging development. It is our fervent hope that
the negotiation will lead both parties to the common
goal of an independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
In that regard, we recall the meeting of the Quartet
held in New York on 27 September, during which it was
briefed on the progress in the negotiations. The Quartet
appreciated the efforts of Palestine and Israel and was
determined to lend effective support to both parties to
reach a permanent status agreement within the agreed
goal of nine months. The Quartet also called on all
parties to promote conditions conducive to the success
of the negotiations and to refrain from actions that
undermine trust. Indonesia fully supports the position
of the Quartet and calls on Israel in particular to
maintain conditions conducive to fruitful negotiations.
History shows that that is the fate that has befallen some
previous attempts at successful engagement.
We would like to draw particular attention to
the continuing construction of settlements and the
separation wall, which present formidable obstacles
to progress. Similarly, we condemn the continuing
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian
people, including the prolonged detention of thousands
of Palestinians, the eviction of families from their
residences and the blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
has worsened the deplorable humanitarian conditions
of the population.
We furthermore note Israel’s recent cancellation
of the visit of a UNESCO team to the Old City of

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7047

Jerusalem — the purpose of which was to examine
the condition of several religious heritage sites in the
city — in utter disregard of the principle of good faith
in international relations.

occupation of Palestinian territory, which is perpetrated
through violations of international law, the commission
of crimes against humanity and violations of United
Nations resolutions.

Indonesia has continuously expressed its
unwavering support of the two-State solution, based
on the conviction that it is the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to have their own State. Furthermore,
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with rights and responsibilities equal to those of other
States, will contribute to the attainment of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Indonesia
therefore takes this opportunity to renew its call on the
Security Council to take steps to compel Israel to stop
its illegal actions in the occupied Palestinian territory,
and to treat Palestine as an equal and respectable partner
in the negotiations. We remain convinced that peace
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Palestine, constitutes an
important element of any deal that may be achieved as
the outcome of negotiations.

The Government of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia believes that, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the Palestinian people has
an absolute right to free self-determination. In that
context, we urge the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, in accordance with the mandates
set out in the Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, to endeavour to achieve a just, lasting
and peaceful solution in order to ensure a future of
prosperity and progress, as called for by the General
Assembly.

I would like now to turn to the issue of Syria.
Indonesia remains deeply concerned about the ongoing
conflict in Syria, and its impact on the Syrian people.
The deaths of thousands of people and the widespread
destruction of property necessitates that all parties
immediately cease acts of violence and hostilities. It is
also paramount that all parties to the conflict uphold
international human rights and humanitarian law and
ensure unfettered and safe humanitarian access for
those in need.
Indonesia is of the view that Syria’s favourable
response to the safeguarding and eventual destruction
of its chemical weapons, as called for in resolution 2118
(2013), while constituting an important step forward,
also presents an opportunity for renewed efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the conflict. Accordingly,
Indonesia again urges the international community
to deepen its commitment to promoting an inclusive
political process that reflects the wishes of all Syrians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, Mr. President, I would
like to commend you on presiding over the Security
Council.
Bolivia is once again addressing the Council
to vigorously condemn Israel’s continued military

We reiterate our position that a permanent
solution to the Palestinian question will be achieved
only through ending the occupation begun in 1967,
achieving and independent State of Palestine based
on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and achieving a just and agreed solution to
the Palestinian refugee problem based on the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. We also call on Israel
to comply with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations and respect the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people and the right of all States in the
region to live in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
We cannot ignore the direct and indirect alarming
consequences of Israel’s closure policy in the West
Bank and its abuses in the Gaza Strip. According
to the report of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People of
7 October, (A/68/35), the restrictions imposed by Israel
in the form of a blockade, on the movement of people
and goods since 2007, have continued to undermine the
living conditions of 1.7 million Palestinians.
The international community has the responsibility
to ensure the relevant investigations regarding the
thousands of Palestinians held in Israeli prisons and
detention centres due to more than 2,951 arrest and
detention operations carried out from 7 October 2012 to
6 October 2013. At least 3,583 Palestinians, including
women and children, were arrested during that period
alone. A UNICEF report published in March indicates
that ill-treatment of Palestinian children held in
the Israeli military detention system appears to be
widespread, systematic and institutionalized.

13-5252553/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We cannot fail to also mention that in August, the
Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics reported that
in the year 2012 Israel intensified its illegal settlement
activity in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
in view of the fact that in 2012 the number of settlers
in the 144 settlements in the West Bank was 563,546,
representing an increase of 24,765 settlers as compared
to 2011.
On 18 October, the President of the Council
distributed a letter in which the Ambassador of the
Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
expressed alarm about illegal Israeli activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, which territory constitutes the State of
Palestine. In that regard, my Government calls for
the solidarity of the entire international community
in view of the persistent provocations and acts of
aggression carried out by the Israeli occupation forces
against the Palestinian people. We especially condemn
the attacks and abuses directed against the sanctity of
Palestinian cemeteries, churches and mosques located
in the occupied Palestinian territory, as such abuses can
lead to serious consequences affecting the entire region
and the broader international community.
I remember that, a few months ago, a Palestinian
representative informed other representatives that there
was no problem in adopting resolutions against Israel,
because they would surely only collect dust in a file
cabinet of the United Nations. We believe that it is
crucial that the United Nations and the Council clearly
signal that Israel’s crimes cannot and should not go
unpunished.
Bolivia is of course hopeful about the possibility of
peace talks that may finally achieve the goals so longed
for by the Palestinian people and the international
community. However, we must not allow such
discussions to become a delaying tactic to consolidate
the crimes that have been committed against the
Palestinian people.
Finally, with regard to the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, Bolivia naturally supports the problem
being resolved in the context of negotiations, in full
respect for international law and avoiding any unilateral
action that violates it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

54/68

22/10/2013

Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for having opened the door for an exchange of views on
the situation in the Middle East, including, of course,
the Palestinian question.
The question of Palestine continues to be a
concern for nearly everyone. In spite of the recent
resumption of dialogue and negotiations based on the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, the occupying Power has continued its
abusive behaviour — a situation that serves to sow
mistrust and instability with respect to the ongoing
negotiation process.
The Israeli behaviour to which I refer leads to
systematic practices prohibited by international law,
including human rights law, international humanitarian
law and the Charter of the United Nations itself. More
specifically, I refer here to the illegal occupation of
territories, the unstoppable settlement activities, the
blockade on the Gaza Strip, the construction of the
separation wall, constant provocations, incitement to
religious conflicts and clashes, the excessive use of
force against Palestinian civilians through military
raids and the arrest of more Palestinians.
My country, Ecuador, considers it unfortunate to
see how Israel carries out such practices of military
control over another people. It is like so many other
blemishes of the past, which we cannot, and should
not, erase, for it is from our historical mistakes that we
learn, and we have an ethical duty to not repeat them.
Based on that premise, it is worth asking: what is
Israel seeking? We assume it is searching for a definitive
solution to promote the peaceful coexistence of its State
side by side with a Palestinian one, to restore justice,
dignity and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and to contribute to the long-awaited peace and
security of the entire region. Or perhaps it is seeking to
continue its unilateral and arbitrary policy that brings
about unjust suffering and denies the rights of the
Palestinian people, in flagrant violation of international
law, in complete contradiction with common sense and
to the detriment of the hope that the human species has
for itself and for a future of peace and reconciliation.
I wish to reiterate the solidarity extended by Ecuador
to the Palestinian State and people on 26 September
during the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, with a view to

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

their just cause being realized through the exercise
of their inalienable right to self-determination and
freedom in an independent Palestinian State with its
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. At
the same time, I wish to express our solidarity with the
other countries of the region that are also suffering from
Israeli military occupation, in complete disrespect for
the rights of their peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Sheikha Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate and giving us an
opportunity to speak. I also thank Mr. Feltman for his
briefing this morning.
The Palestinian question is the central question in
the Middle East and will remain a source of concern
for the region and the international community until
the just solution that is desired by all is found. To that
end, the State of Qatar has expressed support for and
welcomed the international initiatives to relaunch the
peace process on the basis of the well-known terms of
reference, which were confirmed by the Arab Peace
Initiative and expressed at the recent summit in Doha.
Arab countries have taken practical steps to achieve
those goals.
We reaffirm today, as we have in the past, that the
success of any initiative will be based on the sincere
willingness of both parties to achieve the goals. We
would refer to the unilateral settlement activities of the
State of Israel, its efforts to change the demographic
nature of the Palestinian territories, the Judaization
of East Jerusalem and the blockade imposed on the
Gaza Strip. Those actions do not create the conditions
necessary for the desired development and progress.
We urge the international community to find
a solution that establishes an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the
basis of the 1967 borders and a full withdrawal from
all occupied territories, including the occupied Syrian
Golan and the remaining occupied territories in
Lebanon. The status quo jeopardizes any prospects for
peace. Any decisions taken by the State of Israel are null
and void under international law. Israel is responsible
for the escalation of the crisis in the entire region.
We call upon the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities to preserve the city of Jerusalem and

S/PV.7047

the sacred Islamic and Christian monuments and sites
there, to stop the aggression that religious people are
subjected to in that sacred city and to take action to
deter Israel in accordance with international law and
the relevant Geneva Conventions.
The situation in Syria has reached catastrophic levels
because of the violations by the Syrian regime, which
even include the use of weapons of mass destruction
against its own people. We recall the resolution issued
by the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. The Security Council reached
an agreement on adopting a resolution on the use of
chemical weapons. But the Council is also called on
to take rapid and immediate action to protect civilians
on the basis of its own mandate and the Charter of the
United Nations.
On the humanitarian front, the Security Council, in
its presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/15), has taken
the step of calling on the international community to
take actions urgently, in a decisive manner, and to use
all relevant mechanisms available to it. The human
crisis faced by millions of Syrians and their children
who are starving every day cannot be tolerated. The
Council must adopt a resolution to put an end to their
suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and would like to thank you,
Sir, and the presidency of Azerbaijan for convening this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
We all know the essential requirements for creating
the necessary conditions for negotiations that lead to
successful outcomes: political will, good faith and
transparency. However, in the present case — the situation
between Palestine and Israel — while negotiations
have resumed between the parties and eight rounds
of negotiations have been held, Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to demonstrate its lack of political
will, bad faith and lack of transparency. Indeed, it
has intensified its policy of building settlements, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, its systematic violations
of the most basic rights of the Palestinian people and
the escalation of attacks in occupied East Jerusalem

13-5252555/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

against mosques and against the Palestinian people’s
right to freedom of religion and culture.
Nicaragua regrets the lack of progress since the
most recent resumption of the peace negotiations, which
demonstrates yet again that Israel’s true intentions are
directed not at achieving peace, but rather to imposing
conditions for negotiations and buying time in order
to permanently alter the demographic and religious
composition of those territories, in a serious violation
of international law.
We also take the opportunity this debate provides
to reiterate our solidarity with the Palestinian political
prisoners who are being held in Israeli jails and are
mistreated by the authorities, leading to hunger strikes
and fatalities. We demand that the more than 5,000
Palestinians in prison be released immediately. We urge
all those who defend human rights to join us in a global
campaign of solidarity with Palestinian prisoners.
Year after year and month after month, we must
continue to denounce and condemn Israel’s illegal
occupation and its expansionist policies, which, despite
all the efforts to achieve peace, continue to hinder
the process of negotiating for a political, peaceful
and lasting solution. The anti-settlement organization
Peace Now has issued a report that states that there has
been a 70 per cent increase in the construction of Israeli
settlements in the West Bank, including in occupied
East Jerusalem. We ask the Council, is that consistent
with the peace process and the ongoing negotiations?
Now more than ever, and after the approval by
the vast majority of the international community of
resolution 67/19, we are unavoidably committed to
rectifying the historic injustice committed against this
sister nation. Despite the fact that we have been unable to
achieve such recognition — owing to a lack of political
will on the part of one of the permanent members of
the Security Council, which has blocked the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian cause with its veto and
its threats — we, the international community, must
continue to support all the initiatives of the Palestinian
State, to persuade that permanent member to reconsider
and rectify that injustice once and for all and finally
achieve international peace and security in the Middle
East.
Peace in the Middle East entails not only solving
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict but nust also necessarily
include the situation in all the Arab territories occupied
by Israel, particularly Syria and Lebanon. In addition,

56/68

22/10/2013

Israel must immediately cease its attacks, practices and
policies against the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and self-determination of the Arab peoples and States
of the Middle East. Peace should be achieved through
dialogue and a political settlement. The negotiations
between Palestine and Israel should continue in
good faith and transparency. At the same time, the
“Geneva II” conference is the only way to settle the
Syrian conflict, with the participation of all the parties
concerned.
In conclusion, we would like to call on the
international community to declare 2014 an
international year of solidarity with Palestine, which
should culminate, finally, in the State of Palestine’s
admission as a full Member of the United Nations.
Nicaragua reaffirms its absolute and total solidarity
with the Palestinian people in their struggle for
freedom and in the exercise of their inalienable right
to self-determination, including the right of Palestinian
refugees to return to live in peace and freedom in their
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on
the pre-1967 borders, and with two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Every now and then,
we participate in open debates in the Security Council
in order to revisit the story of the long suffering and
denial of the Palestinian people. The Palestinians
have been subjected to a regime of oppression without
precedent anywhere on Earth. They have no security
in their homes; their houses have been bulldozed, land
confiscated, trees and crops destroyed, residents evicted,
roads and neighbourhoods blocked and fragmented and
borders walled. As a result of that systematic policy
of oppression, the quality of life of the Palestinians
throughout the occupied territories has diminished to
subsistence level. Unfortunately, all of that is happening
before the eyes of an international community that is
committed to upholding human dignity and human
rights as well as rights to self-determination and
freedom from oppression and torture. It is happening
because of the lack of any resolute action.
Despite a global outcry and an advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice against it (see
A/ES-10/273), Israel continues to build separation
walls in the West Bank, dividing and isolating
communities, destroying livelihoods and preventing
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

access to their jobs, families, markets, schools and
hospitals for thousands. Appeals from the international
community for improving the Palestinian people’s everdeteriorating living conditions go unheeded. We share
the international community’s concerns about Israel’s
continued pursuit of illegal, unethical and unfair
policies and practices that impede the peace process
and confidence-building.
When the stalled negotiations resumed this year,
on 14 August, under United States mediation, we saw a
ray of hope. As time progresses, that sense of optimism
has started to fade as Israel continues to press ahead
with its illegal settlement policies, which present the
main stumbling block to progress. Twenty years after
the breakthrough Oslo Accords, there is no sign of a
final agreement that would ensure the creation of an
independent State of Palestine, on pre-1967-ceasefire
lines in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East
Jerusalem, living peacefully alongside the State of
Israel.
Although the international community routinely
restates its commitment to the concept of a two-State
solution, Israel’s construction of a barrier in and around
the West Bank and the expansion of settlements on
occupied land make that solution less feasible. Even
the resumption of talks in August was preceded by the
Israeli Government’s announcement of the construction
of some 2,000 new settler homes in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. Israeli settlement activities, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, Israeli military raids into
Palestinian territories and extremist Israeli settlers’
constant provocations to violence all exacerbate tension
and reinforce doubts about Israel’s commitment to a
two-State solution.
It is undeniable that the root cause of the conflict
is the occupation; it must end, and the sooner the
better. The settlements are an existential threat to the
viability of a future Palestinian State. It is contrary to
international law and the road map, and therefore must
cease. If peace in the Middle East is to be achieved,
we must prevail on Israel to cease further illegal
settlements, dismantle the existing ones in line with
its obligations under article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and tear down the walls — the sooner the
better. In that context, we consider the recent action by
the European Union to be a move in the right direction.
Although United States Secretary of State John
Kerry has invested much political capital and time in
convincing the two sides to resume talks, sustained

S/PV.7047

international pressure will be necessary to make Israel
agree to a solution on the basis of the parameters
rooted in the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. We also urge the United Nations
to play its due role to resolve this protracted crisis. In
particular, the Security Council cannot evade its own
role, particularly since its resolutions adopted over time
on the matter remain unimplemented.
Israelis have suffered in the past and they know
more than anyone else that the aspirations of a nation
cannot be denied forever. Even the mighty pharaohs
could not stop those aspirations, and the creation of
the State of Israel is proof that such aspirations can be
fulfilled. Therefore, should we expect that the Israeli
leadership will reflect on its own history and facilitate
a two-State solution? I am hopeful, as we have seen
positive outcomes in recent times — such as those in
South Sudan and Timor-Leste. They achieved their
sovereignty and independence and now live in peace and
harmony as equal members of the global community.
Let Israel and Palestine follow the same path.
The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has long been a
major catalyst of instability and turmoil in the Middle
East, fanning and fuelling violence and extremism in the
region as well as the wider world. The Security Council
has a responsibility, set forth in the United Nations
Charter, to secure peace and stability by addressing the
root causes of the prolonged conflict and negotiating a
just solution to it. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bangladesh in the latest meeting of the Non-Aligned
Movement’s Committee on Palestine, on 26 September,
reaffirmed our commitment to the realization of the
inalienable and legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for an independent, viable, contiguous State of
Palestine, based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital and living side by side with Israel in peace
and harmony. The realization of that goal would emend
the historical injustice visited upon the Palestinians and
greatly contribute to lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Norway welcomes
resolution 2118 (2013) as an important milestone in
the efforts to address the issue of chemical weapons in
Syria. Removing the chemical stockpiles in Syria and
eliminating the risk of anybody using those horrendous
weapons in Syria ever again is timely and necessary.

13-5252557/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

However, we know that that turn of events will not end
the war in Syria. Resolution 2118 (2013) should therefore
be a stepping stone towards stopping the bloodshed
in the country and finding a political solution to the
conflict, for which there is no military solution.
Norway urges the parties to participate in the
planned “Geneva II” conference. The conference
should build on the framework already established
under the first Geneva Conference. The goal must be to
reach agreement on a transitional body that can prepare
for free elections and a democratic constitution.
Such a body could pave the way for a truly inclusive
and democratic Syria and ensure respect for Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
At the same time, we must not forget the suffering of
millions of victims and the urgency of full, immediate,
unfettered and unimpeded humanitarian access. Today,
more than 2 million people are without access to
humanitarian assistance. That is unacceptable. We call
on the Security Council to see to it that the presidential
statement of 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15) is fully
implemented.
Norway remains resolute in its support for
the ongoing negotiations towards a final status
agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization. The courage shown by the top leadership
on both sides is truly commendable. It is encouraging
that the talks are continuing, as time is of the essence.
We urge both parties to make use of the opportunity
presented and to agree on a solution within the
parameters of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Oslo Accords and agreements signed later.
We of course understand that reaching an
agreement involves painful concessions and tough
decisions for both sides. But reaching agreement now is
in the interests of the Palestinian people. This may be
the last opportunity for a long time for the Palestinian
people to realize their national aspirations. Reaching
agreement now is also in the interests of Israel. Broader
recognition of Israel’s right to exist can only be achieved
by ending the occupation. Only the establishment of
a sovereign Palestinian State, in accordance with the
principles of the two-State vision of peace, can provide
the State of Israel with internationally recognized and
secure borders.
Norway is concerned about any external events
that threaten to undermine the talks. We condemn all
use of violence. We call for restraint from unilateral

58/68

22/10/2013

acts on the ground. Settlement activities must stop and
all parties must refrain from provocations and stay the
course.
Norway, in its capacity as Chair of the donor
coordination group — the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians — calls on donors to follow up on the positive
spirit in the meeting held in New York on 25 September.
Additional contributions to the Palestinian Authority’s
budget are urgently needed. The meeting concluded
that $350 million was required this year. It also called
for additional support from generous Arab States to
reduce the Palestinian domestic debt. The Palestinian
Government is expected to further align its expenses
to its resources. The Israeli Government is expected
to lift restrictions to private sector development of the
Palestinian economy. Both are expected to cooperate
to further improve the business environment, trade,
development, and the collection and transfer of taxes
and duties.
With renewed hope for a political solution to the
conflict, the donors agree to stay committed to the
State-building programme while negotiations are
ongoing. We, as donors, should now deliver on our
promises. At the same time, the donors call on the
parties to do their part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s very important
debate, which affords the wider United Nations
membership an opportunity to contribute to the very
important deliberations on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. Likewise, we
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in the
Middle East.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The situation in the Middle East remains of
great concern to Namibia, as the occupation of the
Palestinian territories continues unabated and the
people of Palestine continue to live under subjugation.
Today’s debate is taking place at a time when Namibia
is awaiting, with great anticipation, a positive outcome
of the recently resumed direct negotiations between

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Palestinians and the Israelis, following intensive
international efforts.
Over the years, Namibia has expressed its steadfast
support for and solidarity with the Palestinian people
in the pursuit of their inalienable right to selfdetermination, independence and freedom. It is a matter
for which my delegation has persistently advocated ever
since we obtained our independence from the South
African apartheid regime, some 23 years ago; before
that, we had been in the same boat as the Palestinians.
We therefore cannot remain complacent while the
people of Palestine continue to suffer under the Israeli
occupation.
The people of Palestine have suffered and have
lived under occupation for too long. The denial of their
fundamental right to self-determination by the sustained
Israeli occupation continues to seriously affect their
socioeconomic wellbeing. They are not allowed to fully
exercise their fundamental human rights as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, to which we all
attach great value. Namibia is also opposed to the
blockade of the Gaza Strip that has caused so much
suffering to the Palestinian people.
Namibia wishes to reaffirm its call for Israel’s
complete and unconditional withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and calls on the international community to
facilitate the creation of the Palestinian State, on the
basis of the 1967 borders. The international community
has an obligation to ensure that the people of Palestine
realize their inalienable right to self-determination and
the creation of an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In this context, Namibia welcomes the reactivation
of the Working Group of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, with
the mandate to foster and reinforce the Committee’s
cooperation with civil society organizations, and pledges
to support the efforts of the Committee in mobilizing
the international community to facilitate the realization
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Real
and lasting progress towards the freedom of Palestine
can be realized only through the implementation of all
relevant resolutions of the United Nations regarding the
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.
While we welcome the direct negotiations between
the Palestinians and the Israelis following intensive
international efforts, Namibia believes that peace in

S/PV.7047

the Middle East can only be achieved by addressing the
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory by Israel.
A great deal of work therefore lies ahead in clearing the
path for the creation of the Palestinian State, ending
the conflict, and bringing lasting peace and security to
both Palestinians and Israelis.
Let me reiterate Namibia’s strong support for the
ongoing peace process. We appeal to both parties to
commit themselves, to embrace this opportunity and
to abide by their previous agreements and obligations
to establish lasting peace between Israel and Palestine,
with their peoples living side by side, within secure
borders. Namibia is convinced that our deliberations
here today will contribute to the search for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution — a solution
that will bring an end to the Israeli occupation, which
dates back to 1967, and enable the Palestinian people
to exercise their inalienable rights in an independent
State.
Let me conclude by reiterating once more Namibia’s
unwavering support for and solidarity with the people
of Palestine in their cause for freedom, independence
and social justice, and our support for full membership
for Palestine in the United Nations and its specialized
agencies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): I join other
speakers who have commended you for convening
today’s important debate. The delegation of Sri Lanka
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Finding a just and durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East has been a priority for the
international community since 1948. The Middle East
conflict attracts a considerable amount of international
attention and resources. We look forward to proactive
leadership to end this unsatisfactory situation.
The conditions of the Palestinians must be improved
urgently. This can only contribute to improving
the situation of the region as a whole. Successive
generations of Palestinians have suffered owing to a
number of factors, in particular by being dispossessed
from much of their land.
In recent years, the continuing blockade of Gaza
has added to the pain and frustrations of Palestinians

13-5252559/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

living in the area. The blockade in Gaza has created an
aid-dependent economy and given rise to a deep sense
of helplessness. In 2012, its economy grew by 5.9 per
cent, albeit from a low base, which was less than half
the rate achieved in 2011. This has translated into
very high unemployment rates and low wages, which,
coupled with the increasing cost of living, have directly
impacted on the Gazans’ access to food. In 2012, 34 per
cent of households, approximately 1.6 million people,
were assessed to be food insecure. In addition, the
continuing blockade continues to place a heavy burden
on the already-stressed education system in the Gaza
Strip. The recent closure of the illegal tunnels has put
further pressures on the people of Gaza. There is an
urgent humanitarian need to lift the restrictions on
most imports, including essential supplies, and exports,
through the legitimate crossings between Israel and the
Gaza Strip.
We note with concern that the United Nations is
hard-pressed to keep the vast majority of the people
of Gaza supplied with their minimum necessities. In
the Gaza Strip, the funding difficulties of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have reached
a critical point. Despite significantly scaling back
humanitarian interventions since 2012, the Agency’s
emergency appeal remains severely underfunded. We
underline our strong support for the work of United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including UNRWA and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.
The situation in the West Bank is also of serious
concern. Although the number of search and arrest
operations in recent months has remained stable,
disturbingly the intensity of confrontations during
these operations and the number of resulting civilian
casualties has increased.
Israel has an obligation to protect the Palestinian
civilian population in the occupied territories and
desist from actions that are contrary to the established
rules of international law and practice. The settlement
activity is a violation of the law as reflected in article
49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949. The
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council, the Economic and Social Council and
the International Court of Justice have all condemned
the settlement activities as being contrary to the law.
Ending such practices, which contribute to much human
suffering and the continuing friction in the occupied

60/68

22/10/2013

territories, is an essential step to improve the situation
on the ground and to build confidence.
We are very much mindful of the security needs
of Israel. The indiscriminate attacks against Israeli
civilians will only widen the gap between the parties.
We encourage both parties to exercise the utmost
restraint for the sake of the peace process and the
safety of civilians. In addition, a climate conducive to
peace would be encouraged by a mutual adoption of an
approach sensitive to each other’s concerns.
Considering the unsatisfactory circumstances in
the occupied Palestinian territories, we hope that every
effort will be made to achieve success in the resumed
negotiations so that both the Israeli and the Palestinian
peoples will be able to enjoy peace and prosperity
in their own lands. The objective of the negotiations
should be to secure a lasting peace accord which leads
to the establishment of a fully sovereign and secure
State of Palestine.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly regarding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and the attainment of a two-State solution on the basis
of the 1967 borders. The political unity and economic
advancement of the Palestinian people will contribute
to the viability of that solution. We therefore sincerely
encourage political rapprochement between Gaza and
the West Bank.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Let me at the outset, Sir, congratulate you sincerely
on your accession this month to the presidency of the
Security Council for the second time. I thank you for
the crucial role you are playing in the Security Council
and for having convened this debate on the situation in
the Middle East.
My country fully endorses the statement to be made
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
as well as those already made on behalf of the League
of Arab States and the Non-Aligned Movement.
For more than six decades now, the Council has been
seized of the tragedy of the Palestinian people. Israel
continues its violations of international law by denying
Palestinians their rights, and the Palestinians continue
to suffer. There can be no solution to the conflict so
long as the resolutions of the United Nations affirming

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the rights of the Palestinian people to establish their
own State remain unimplemented. That has a negative
impact on the Middle East region as well as on peace
and security around the world.
It also allows Israel to pursue its policy of
colonization, to hold thousands of prisoners and to
violate the sacred nature of the holy sites. It also
continues to displace Palestinian citizens, particularly
in Jerusalem, and to implement its policy of apartheid
and ethnic cleansing. All this is taking place before the
very eyes of the Security Council, which has failed to
shoulder its responsibilities and putting an end to Israeli
occupation, which may well be the only one to outlive
the era of racial segregation.
The Israeli occupation continues, as do the
daily violations of Palestinian rights, including
displacements, expulsions, arbitary arrests, abuse of
prisoners and ongoing settlement activities seeking
to change the demographic situation on the ground by
confiscating and destroying the houses of Palestinians,
expanding the settlements, detaining and mistreating
Palestinian demonstrators. Moreover, the blockade of
Gaza continues.
The United Nations and the international community
have repeatedly denounced those arbitrary practices,
including last month (see S/PV.7032) when the Council
was briefed by Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, who reported on
the aggression that cost the lives of Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including an officer
at the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in the course of
an act of aggression perpetrated by Israel. There have
been 282 Israeli infiltration operations, according to
the United Nations, and Israel has displaced some 176
Palestinians, including 87 children without any explicit
condemnation from the Council. Israel is accelerating
the pace of its aggression against holy sites through
almost daily violations perpetrated by Israeli settlers.
Nor should we forget the serious decision taken by
the commanding general of the occupying authorities
to give the Jews access to the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the attempt to build a synagogue in front of the
Al-Marwani Mosque in order to Judaize that holy site.
It is time for the Council to renounce its policy of
laissez-faire. It needs to be more effective in addressing
the Palestinian question. It is high time for the
Council to realize that the ongoing Israeli occupation
constitutes and has constituted through the decades

S/PV.7047

an ongoing threat to international peace and security.
My country, which was the first sponsor of the Arab
Peace Initiative, calls on the Council to honour its
commitments and to shoulder its historic humanitarian
and other responsibilities so that the world may not
lose hope for peace and its confidence in our common
international institutions.
In Syria, the Syrian regime continues its campaign
of extermination against the Syrian people, using every
kind of conventional and non-conventional weapon and
killing more than 120,000 people and displacing more
than a quarter of the population of Syria. It has even
used chemical weapons against defenseless civilians
and continues to calmly proceed in such a manner that
the Council will be unable to counter its violations
or protect its citizens, which is a responsibility of the
Syrian regime itself, due to the repeated use of the veto.
The Council responded tardily and minimally to
the massacre at Ghouta, when the Syrian regime killed
more than 1,000 people using chemical weapons. The
response focused exclusively on chemical weapons
and minimized the cause of a people fighting for its
liberty to the sole issue of chemical weapons. Even
when the Security Council has discussed how to
deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need, it
has limited itself to adopting a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/15).
The Council must be firm. It must adopt the
necessary resolutions that open the possibility of
imposing sanctions against anyone who would attempt
to carry out unprecedented moral blackmail by denying
critical humanitarian assistance to certain provinces
and cities. It is high time for the Security Council to
put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people by not
allowing the Syrian regime to exploit the Council’s
resolutions on the convening of conferences or the
elimination of chemical weapons as a delaying tactic.
If the Council does not take the requisite measures, it
could risk making the situation in Syria a perennial
issue on which the Council will have to meet month
after month, year after year, while Syrians continue to
die.
My delegation affirms the need to resolve the
situation in Syria immediately and definitively, without
limiting itself to considering the repercussions of
the Ghouta massacre and the elimination of Syrian
chemical weapons, as was affirmed at the ministerial
meeting of the League of Arab States in September.
Necessary measures also need to be taken to achieve

13-5252561/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a ceasefire throughout Syrian territory by prohibiting
the use of military air assets, including missiles and
heavy weapons, and to adopt a ceasefire monitoring
mechanism under United Nations supervision.
Neither the Syrians nor the world will be able to
forget the indifference shown by the international
community in its failure to settle the Syrian crisis in a
radical and effective way. We reaffirm that the Syrian
regime and the forces that have plotted with it against
the Syrian people by poisoning them with chemical
weapons should not have a place in determining their
future. They need to be brought to justice. A special
tribunal needs to hold them accountable for the crimes
they have perpetrated, and all those who have soiled
their hands with the blood of innocents should be
brought to trial.
To conclude, we remind the Council of the
responsibilities incumbent upon its members for
ensuring the implementation of United Nations
resolutions on the establishment of zone free of nuclear
weapons and weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. I recall that the Council failed in its duty
to convene a special international conference to that end
in 2012. This year is drawing to a close without there
a glimmer of hope that it will be convened. This will
lead peace-loving people of the region to question the
validity of international resolutions if the international
community is incapable of implementing through
its institutions the most straightforward decisionto
convene a conference on which everyone is agreed.
We urge the members of the Council to renew and
to restore the confidence of people around the world in
institutions associated with international joint actions
headed by the Council. Members need to remain
committed to safeguarding international peace and
security in a resolute and timely manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): South Africa joins
others in congratulating you, Mr President, and your
country on assuming the presidency of the Council for
this month. We thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing to
the Council earlier today. We welcome the opportunity
to participate and share our views in this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

62/68

22/10/2013

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Recent events, in particular the resumption of
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, have been
encouraging. We welcome the efforts of United States
Secretary of State John Kerry in meeting with the
leadership of both countries, and the current diplomatic
efforts in Europe and the Middle East aimed at promoting
peace in the region in general and a lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conundrum in particular. We
hope that all those involved in the negotiations will find
wisdom in the Arab proverb: “Be not so soft as to be
squeezed dry, nor so stiff as to be broken”.
We believe that the only way a solution to
that protracted conflict can be found is through a
peaceful and fair negotiation process carried out in an
environment conducive to fruitful deliberations — that
is, an environment free of intimidation, fear, violence
and other obstructionist activities.
We all know that the construction of settlements
by Israel remains the biggest obstacle to progress in
the peace talks. But Israel continues its settlement
activities with impunity. We all know that the continued
settlement construction changes the geographical
make-up of Palestine and could make impossible the
creation of two States, in line with the overwhelming
call for the creation of a sovereign, independent,
democratic, viable and contiguous Palestinian State,
coexisting peacefully alongside Israel, on the basis of
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We condemn the settlement construction activities
and call on those with the wherewithal to make them
stop, including the Council, to do the necessary without
delay. We know too well if it were not Israel that was
engaging in those illegal activities, quick condemnation
and threats of the use of force would have ensued.
Recent positive developments have yet to translate
into progress on the ground, especially in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The reality is that the Palestinians
continue to live under an occupation that they have
endured for decades. They face daily hardships
compounded by many checkpoints that restrict their
movement and access. The violence meted out by Israeli
settlers against the Palestinians continues unabated,
and the separation wall continues to be extended in
spite of international condemnation. While we welcome
Israel’s decision to free some Palestinian prisoners

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

as a confidence-building measure and a gesture of its
commitment to the peace talks, at the same time we
condemn the capture and imprisonment of Palestinian
citizens, especially children.
South Africa is also deeply concerned about the
plight of the Palestinians illegally imprisoned in Israeli
jails and continue to live in horrendous conditions. We
once again call on Israel to respect the human rights
of all Palestinian prisoners and to abide by relevant
international human rights and humanitarian law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (1949).
We reiterate our deep concern about the abuse
of human rights of Palestinian children and their
detention. We are all very aware of the long-lasting
adverse effects that this will have on that vulnerable
group and its negative effect on their potential to
becoming responsible and productive adults. Again,we
call on Israel to fulfil its obligation under international
human rights and international law and protect the
rights of children.
South Africa welcomes the reconciliation efforts
among the Palestinians, including agreements reached
between Fatah, Hamas and other parties in Cairo in
2011, as well as the agreement reached in February
2012 in Qatar. Those are most welcome developments.
South Africa congratulated and encouraged all the
parties involved in both these agreements to seek
reconciliation and unity as an important ingredient for
long-lasting and sustainable peace. South Africa will
continue to support all efforts towards democracy,
peace, stability and the advancement of human rights
and human dignity in Palestine.
The development of the Palestinian Economic
Initiative by the United States and the Quartet is
commendable. We hope that it will be able to revive
the economic potential of Palestine and help alleviate
the current financial pressures the country is facing.
We call on the international community, including
the private sector, to lend a hand to this critical
socioeconomic programme. The measures enacted by
the Israeli Government to ease the implementation of
the Initiative, including “approval for the importation
of greater quantities of construction material and
water into Gaza”, are welcome. Those measures would
contribute to the revival of the enclave that has suffered
a great deal under the blockade, which continues to
frustrate the lives of the inhabitants of Gaza, and has

S/PV.7047

contributed directly to the increase in unemployment
and poverty.
Despite those positive developments, we still call
on Israel to end the illegal blockade of Gaza in respect
of international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention and resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 465 (1980), 681 (1990), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003)
and 1860 (2009).
The need to deliberately link development and
peace with security has never been as clear as it is
today. The former Secretary-General Kofi Annan was
right when he stated that
“we will not enjoy development without security,
we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for
human rights. Unless all those causes are advanced,
none will succeed.” (A/59/2005, para. 17)
Finally, we look forward to the International Day
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People to be held on
29 November with the Palestinian Arab Idol winner,
Mohammed Assaf, as the key feature of the celebrations.
We wish the Palestinians all the best in their quest for
self-determination and pledge our support for the noble
cause.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In our national capacity, we would like to
make a few comments about the important topic that we
are considering today.
The Middle East has occupied the attention of
the international community, in particular due to the
events that have taken place in that region recently.
Nonetheless, we cannot forget that the region has been
marked by instability and insecurity, driven primarily
by what we consider to be the main political problem
in the Middle East — the systematic aggression of
Israel, the occupying Power, against Palestine. The
illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories remains the main obstacle to peace and
the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution in the region of the Middle East.
The Security Council must play its due role in
maintaing international peace and security and adopt
practical, specific measures to compel Israel to end to
its abuse against the Palestinian people. Israel’s conduct
deliberately violates United Nations resolutions,

13-5252563/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

threatens regional and international peace and security,
and violates the human rights of an entire people. There
will be no peace in the Middle East as long as that
aggression continues and the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people are no taken into account.
The General Assembly took an historic decision
when its member States, in a majority decision
(resolution 67/19), granted Palestine observer status in
the United Nations. Cuba supported that decision in
line with its historic position of support for the cause
of the Palestinian people in defence of their rights. The
Cuban delegation reiterates its support for the admission
of Palestine as a full-fledged State Member of the
United Nations. The Security Council must consider
and approve without further delay the request for its
recognition as a State Member of the United Nations,
presented by Palestine in 2011.
We are encouraged by the news of the resumption
of negotiations between Israel and Palestine, but we
must continue to support the Palestinian people in
their legitimate and just struggle for self-determination
and the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Cuba demands
that Israel comply with international law and end its
occupation of all Arab territories, and reiterates its
position in favour of a just and lasting peace for all of
the peoples in the Middle East.
The Palestinian people’s suffering has worsened
under the growing number of Israeli settlements, the
difficult and agonizing reality of Palestinian prisoners,
and the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
the besieged Gaza Strip. The living conditions of its
inhabitants have further declined under the ongoing
unjust blockade of that area. Only the end of the
settlement policy, the release of Palestinian prisoners
and the lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip will
make it possible to implement a significant political
process that would bring peace to the region. Cuba will
continue to support the Palestinian people in their just
struggle for self-determination.
Cuba pays particular attention to the situation
in Syria and its international repercussions. Cuba
condemns any use of chemical weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, and is firmly committed to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, and to strict compliance
with its provisions. Cuba supports the establishment
of a a zone free of nuclear and other weapons of mass
64/68

22/10/2013

destruction, including chemical weapons, in the Middle
East.
In that context, we welcome the decision of the
Syrian Arab Republic to join the Chemical Weapons
Convention and its willingness to implement it
immediately on a provisional basis, including before
the entry into force of the Convention for that country.
Likewise, we welcome the agreements achieved on the
destruction of Syria’s arsenal of chemical weapons. We
also support efforts to achieve a political solution to
the conflict that respects the sovereignty, independence
and integrity of Syria and the self-determination of its
people.
We flatly reject military intervention as a solution
to the very serious conflict, and we are opposed to the
use of force against Syria. We share the concern over
the loss of innocent lives in Syria and in any part of
the world. We also condemn all acts of violence in that
country against civilians and innocents. We reject the
resort to the supposed protection of human lives as a
pretext for foreign intervention, be it direct or through
the support of illegal armed groups, including the use
of mercenaries that only sow destruction and escalate
the number of deaths.
The Security Council’s obligation is to foster
peace, not violence. It is to avoid destabilization
and not to contribute to the financing, arming and
training of those who aim to destabilize. It is to protect
innocent people and not to use or manipulate them for
geopolitical purposes. That is also the responsibility of
the Organization as a whole. Cuba is opposed to the
calls of those who promote regime change in Syria
and opt for the use of force and violence, instead of
contributing to dialogue and to negotiation between all
the parties. We also reject the complicity of the mass
media, which are accustomed to distorting reality
and are not accountable for the consequences of their
actions.
We reiterate our call to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria and the
right to the self-determination of its people, without
foreign intervention or interference of any kind, and we
urge the promotion of a political solution to the conflict
through diplomatic means without any more bloodshed.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Djibouti.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I take the floor on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

While a period of extraordinary challenges is still
evolving in the Middle East, a credible peace process
towards a two-State solution remains a core priority of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We reaffirm
the permanent responsibility of the United Nations
towards the question of Palestine until all of its aspects
are justly and fully resolved, and we further reiterate
our call for the international community’s sustained
engagement and full support, at this critical period,
in seizing the current diplomatic opportunity to bring
about tangible results that enforce United Nations
resolutions and put an end to the Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian and Arab lands occupied since 1967.
The latest United States initiative to reignite the
peace process, spearheaded by Secretary of State John
Kerry, deserves our commendation, and we hope that
this time around it will produce realistic progress.
The agony, hardship and hopelessness of the Syrian
people continue unabated. The brutality experienced
by the civilian population is unparalleled, with millions
in makeshift refugee camps in the neighbouring
countries. There is no end in sight to that humanitarian
catastrophe. All hopes are pinned on the renewed push
for the long-delayed “Geneva II” conference and a
negotiated settlement to end the mayhem and bloodshed.
The OIC expresses grave concern over the continued
Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people and
their land. Israel, the occupying Power, persists with
its construction of illegal settlements and the apartheid
annexation wall, which constitute grave breaches of
international law, undermine the contiguity, unity
and viability of the State of Palestine, and jeopardize
the prospects for achieving the two-State solution on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders. In that regard, the
OIC urgently calls upon the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to uphold its
responsibilities and further consider practical measures
to bring an end to Israel’s settlement policy.
The fragile situation on the ground due to the
repeated provocative acts of violence and terror
perpetrated by fanatical Israeli settlers is alarming.
Such daily aggressions against Palestinian life,
property and rights, which include blocking roads,
vandalizing cars and houses, burning mosques and
fields, and uprooting trees, along with other damage
to property, have regrettably become commonplace.
Such acts threaten to further destabilize the extremely
fragile situation on the ground, and to sabotage resumed
bilateral negotiations. The continued failure to enforce

S/PV.7047

international law has emboldened the occupying Power
and the fanatical Israeli settlers to continue committing
violations and crimes against the Palestinian people
with impunity.
By the same token, illegal, unilateral Israeli actions
in occupied East Jerusalem continue to endanger the
precious significance of the holy city of Jerusalem for the
entire Islamic world. All acts aimed at altering the Arab
character and demographic composition of occupied
East Jerusalem — including building settlements,
excavating underneath Al-Aqsa Mosque, desecrating
Islamic and Christian sites, distorting the authentic
history of the city, changing its landmarks, demolishing
Palestinian homes and closing Palestinian institutions
with a view to isolating occupied East Jerusalem from
its Palestinian surroundings — are illegal, null and
void and must be brought to an immediate halt. The
continuation of such illegal acts threatens to further
destabilize the entire region.
The continued, intensified provocations of Israel, the
occupying Power, and its extremist settlers, particularly
at Al-Haram al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have
the potential to inflame already simmering religious
tensions and violence and must receive immediate
attention from the international community, with due
regard for measures to de-escalate tensions, to preserve
the sanctity of Muslim and Christian holy sites in the
city and to protect them from any acts of aggression and
provocation.
In that regard, we recall that such illegal Israeli
acts have always contravened international law and
resolutions of international legitimacy, including those
that affirm that East Jerusalem remains an integral part
of the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since
1967, and that its illegal annexation by Israel continues
to be rejected and unrecognized by the international
community.
United Nations statistics show that the rate
of demolition of residential and other structures
rose last year and this in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. The number of small communities being
continuously leveled amounts to the forcible transfer
of their population, which can no longer live there
without shelter. That is a clear violation of the Geneva
Convention and a war crime.
The OIC stresses that the Israeli blockade of the
Gaza Strip constitutes a collective punishment of the
Palestinian population, with serious and catastrophic

13-5252565/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

social, economic and humanitarian consequences on
the lives of that entire population. The OIC reiterates
its firm demand for an immediate end to that illegal and
inhumane Israeli blockade.
Furthermore, the OIC is very concerned over human
rights violations against Palestinian political prisoners
in Israeli prisons and detention centres. The inhumane
policies and systematic violations perpetrated by
Israel against Palestinian prisoners require the urgent
intervention of the international community in order to
defend the human rights of Palestinian prisoners, save
their lives and pressure Israel to respect its obligations
towards them, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions.
Israel has administratively detained thousands of
Palestinians for prolonged periods without informing
them of the charges against them and without the right
to due process.
The OIC believes that international consensus
to bring about a just and comprehensive solution in
the Middle East conflict requires the enforcement
of international law and the implementation of
international resolutions. The Security Council cannot
remain silent while a volatile and dangerous situation
continues to escalate on the ground due to Israeli
persistence in defying the will of the international
community through its forced occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories and by denying the restoration of
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The
OIC calls upon the Council to play its role vis-à-vis
the Middle East peace process by implementing the
resolutions in has adopted, in an effort to move the
process forward towards the realization of peace.
To conclude, I wish to reaffirm the full support and
solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people in their
endeavour to regain their legitimate and inalienable
national rights, including their rights to return, selfdetermination, sovereignty and independence in the
State of Palestine on the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel, who has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Today, representatives from
a variety of Arab and other countries have used this
forum to launch a range of baseless accusations against
my country, referring to our eternal capital Jerusalem.
It is truly absurd to hear some of the world’s most

66/68

22/10/2013

oppressive tyrannies lecture the Middle East’s only true
democracy about human rights and religious rights. One
has to wonder what rights those representatives might
be referring to. Perhaps they mean religious rights like
the Saudi policy of executing individuals who import
Christian literature, or perhaps they are referring to the
Saudi policy of banning non-Muslims from entering
entire cities.
In his remarks earlier, the Lebanese representative
accused Israel of violating resolution 1701 (2006). In
fact, in the past two months, violation of the Blue Line
and resolution 1701 (2006) from the Lebanese side have
increased daily. Instead of standing guard, the Lebanese
Armed Forces are standing by and permitting violations
of resolution 1701 (2006) and the Blue Line by armed
Hizbullah activists and armed Lebanese citizens.
Both sides — and that includes Lebanon — must
respect resolution 1701 (2006). Lebanon’s words are not
enough. Perhaps Lebanon should consider toning down
its rhetoric and turning up the heat on Hizbullah. As we
speak, Hizbullah has built an arsenal of 60,000 rockets
in populated areas south of the Litani River in Lebanon.
By operating within civilian populations and directing
a tax against the civilian population in Israel, Hizbullah
and Lebanon are committing a double war crime.
In light of those and other human rights abuses, it
takes a great deal of audacity on the part of the Lebanese
representative to sit in the Chamber and demonize
the only democracy that respects human rights in the
Middle East. But I must say I was touched to hear
the representative of Lebanon show such an interest
in Palestinian rights, although I would suggest that,
instead of issuing empty words, his Government should
take a look at the Palestinian refugee camps throughout
Lebanon where Palestinians are kept in some of the
worst conditions in the region. They are subjected to
violence, discrimination, economic oppression and
marginalization from every sector of society.
I would like to also respond to certain other States
in our vicinity that spoke against Israel earlier today. To
begin with, there is no blockade in Gaza. All goods and
humanitarian aid — let me repeat that, all humanitarian
aid — enters Gaza from Israel. It does not take an expert
in geography to know that Gaza has an additional entry
point.
Furthermore, I wish I could be shocked by the
accusations hurled by the Syrian representative earlier.
But nothing can be more shocking than the crimes that

13-52525

22/10/2013

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syria has perpetrated, first and foremost the murder of
120,000 men, women and children; secondly, the use
of chemical weapons against innocent civilians; and
thirdly, the displacement of millions of people. The
Syrian representative is using the oldest trick in the
book. By attacking Israel, he is creating a smokescreen
to distract from the atrocities being perpetrated in
Syria by his Government. That trick has not worked in
the past, and it is not working now.
Lastly, we have heard many representatives from
the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) group who have
criticized Israel today. I would like to point out to
those same representatives that they choose to ignore
the crimes of the State that holds the chairmanship of
NAM today, Iran, at their own peril. Iran is actively
supporting a murderous regime in Damascus and
responsible, at the same time, for killing thousands of
Syrians, including Palestinian refugees. And it is that
country that is leading all the attacks against Israel in
this Chamber. The rhetorical hypocrisy of NAM must
now cease.
The President: The representative of Syria has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for taking the floor a second time. Once again,
let me say that my delegation has repeatedly warned of
the danger of being diverted from the substance of the
item under consideration, the fundamental objective of
which is the self-determination of Palestine and not the
situation in neighbouring countries. I shall not fall into
that trap.
However, let me point out the lies and half-truths that
the representative of Israel has cited. The representative
of Israel is speaking in the Security Council, which
has adopted hundreds of resolutions calling for an end
to Israeli occupation of Arab land. Is he trying to tell
us about the steps Israel has taken to implement those
resolutions, to end the plight of Arab peoples under
Israeli occupation, and to end settlements?
Some delegations have indeed fallen into that trap
and have spoken of the plight of the Syrian people,
while forgetting the plight of Syrians under occupation
in the Syrian Arab Golan. The Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic believes in the pivotal role of
the United Nations. It believes in the role being played
by the Council in maintaining international peace and
security. Therefore we continue to call on the Council

S/PV.7047

to enforce all its resolutions relating to the occupation
and to the fight against terrorism and those inciting
terrorism.
The President: The Permanent Observer of
Palestine asked for the floor to make a second statement.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I apologize for taking the
floor again, but I find it extremely necessary to respond
the representative of Israel’s barrage of lies presented to
the Council regarding the Palestinian people and their
leadership. I will not debase myself by responding to
that barrage of lies. Suffice it to say that it is difficult to
see those who have their forces and their settlers, some
of whose leaders have their hands tainted with the blood
of thousands of Palestinian victims, come and lecture
us about morality and assuming the high ground.
In that regard, I also challenge the representative
of Israel, who, in a sweeping manner, just said that the
documentation that we send to members of the Security
Council is nothing but lies. I challenge him to offer a
single piece of evidence that the documentation that
we regularly send to the Council in order to document
the crimes of Israel, the occupying Power, against our
people in the occupied territory, is not true. Let him
offer a single piece of evidence. He just said that the
contents of our letters are lies, but he does not cite a
single piece of evidence to that effect.
With regard to Jerusalem, I think that Israeli
action speaks for itself. He cannot assume that the
people in this Chamber and the entire international
community are just a bunch of fools. It is a known fact
that millions of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza
are not allowed to come and practice their religious
activities in holy Jerusalem, whether they are Muslims
or Christians. Those are facts. Any Palestinian, for
example from Ramallah, who tries to go to Jerusalem to
pray on Friday at these holy places will not be allowed
to practice his or her religion at those sites if he or she
does not have a permit.
The speech that the Israeli representative gave is
most surprising. It is not a speech that is congruent with
the atmosphere of peace or that advances the contours
of peace. It is the statement of someone who is really
looking for excuses to create problems and to run
away from the prerequisites of peace in terms of good
behaviour congruent with international law.
The universal position of the entire international
community and the statements that have been given

13-5252567/68

S/PV.7047

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

22/10/2013

by everyone here today — and we are thankful to
them — and of many others who have come from
outside the Council send a loud message to the Israeli
leadership that it must wake up from the dream in
which it is indulging itself and refusing to acknowledge
what is really happening. It must heed the international
community and act according to the requirement of
peace, and not try to blame others. It is a message from
all participants here, which we appreciate, that the
leaders of Israel need to wake up and to act according
to the prerequisites of peace.

international community, and the Security Council in
particular, act decisively, they will not allow someone
to come and lecture all of us as the Israeli representative
just has. We are confident that the Council’s patience is
running out, and we are very close to the point where
either they act in good faith, negotiate with us in good
faith, act in accordance with international law and stop
all the crimes and violations of international law being
committed against our people, or — I am sure — the
Council will take action against them in a decisive
manner in order to allow peace to take root.

I believe that it is time for all of us to put an end to the
unlimited impunity enjoyed by Israel and to apply the
law to that country as it was applied to those who acted
as they did until the Council acted decisively. When the

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

68/68

13-52525
