S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9106th meeting

Tuesday, 9 August 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dai Bing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Figueiredo Sobral Torres
Mr. Hubin
Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Ms. Tenkorang
Mr. Vinito
Ms. O’Boyle
Mr. Abbas
Mrs. Jiménez Alegría
Mr. Heines
Mr. Chibisov
Ms. Harqoos
Mr. Rogers
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Capacity-building for sustaining peace
Letter dated 1 August 2022 from the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/592)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-45514 (E)
*2245514*

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. on 8 August
and resumed at 3 p.m. on 9 August.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like
to commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely debate. Let me also thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Despite its huge potential for progress, Africa
continues to face a multifaceted set of challenges. The
impact of the pandemic and global food insecurity are
further exacerbating an already dire situation in many
parts of the region. In addressing those challenges, it is
essential to build effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions and better governance systems through
capacity-building. Against that backdrop, I would like
to highlight the following points.
First, more emphasis should be given to an
integrated approach to national institutions and
capacity-building. All of the complex challenges in the
region are closely interlinked and should be tackled in
a holistic and whole-of-Government manner. In that
regard, we would like to note the important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund in promoting a coherent approach and addressing
the root causes of conflicts.
Secondly, my delegation emphasizes the importance
of partnerships between national Governments and all
other stakeholders, including the United Nations, as well
as regional and subregional organizations. In particular,
the role of the African Union (AU) and such subregional
organizations as the Economic Community of West
African States is crucial to development and sustaining
peace, based on the principle of African ownership.
Thirdly, we would like to underline the importance
of an inclusive approach to enable better recovery from
the pandemic and ensure long-term and sustainable
capacity-building. The voices of women, young people
and other vulnerable and marginalized populations
must be heard and included in efforts to build capacity
at all levels.
2/27

09/08/2022

The Republic of Korea is deeply committed to
contributing to capacity-building for sustaining peace
in Africa. Korea has contributed more than $16 million
to the African Union’s peace and security activities
since 2016, including the deployment of a level 2 mobile
hospital in Mali and the procurement of armoured
personnel carriers for the African Union Mission
in Somalia. At the United Nations peacekeeping
ministerial meeting in Seoul last year, Korea also
announced several pledges aimed at contributing to
peace and security on the continent, with a particular
focus on technology and medical capacity-building.
They included the contribution of 16 MD-500 helicopters
to be deployed to peacekeeping operations in Africa,
and the launching of a United Nations smart-camp pilot
project with the Republic of Korea contingent in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Korea is fully
committed to faithfully implementing its pledges.
In March, jointly with the AU, Korea hosted the
fifth Korea-Africa Forum in Seoul at the ministerial
level and together with the AU adopted the Seoul
Declaration and Framework of Cooperation 2022-2026,
which stipulates priority areas of cooperation between
Korea and Africa. In line with those documents, Korea
will support Africa’s medical capacity-building for
peacekeepers by providing financial contributions for
the AU Medical Training Centre for Peace Operations
and deploying Korean medical professionals. We also
support efforts to prevent and combat terrorism and
violent extremism, including activities undertaken by
the African Centre for Study and Research of Terrorism,
based in Algiers.
The Republic of Korea renews its commitment
to actively joining international efforts to promote
development and sustainable peace in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Sakowicz (Poland): Mr. President, let me
begin by congratulating the Chinese presidency on
organizing this timely debate, focused on an incredibly
important set of issues regarding peace and security
in Africa. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the briefers for their insightful remarks delivered
yesterday. With its human capacity, political idealism
and economic potential, Africa is absolutely crucial to
global peace and prosperity. By recognizing that, we
will be better positioned to confront challenges and
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

spotlight mutual opportunities, which will benefit the
international community as a whole in the long term.
Poland recognizes the importance of maintaining
peace, stability and sustainable development in Africa.
That is why five of 10 priority countries targeted by
Polish development programmes are in sub-Saharan
Africa. We welcome efforts by various bodies in the
United Nations system to strengthen the peacebuilding
architecture. Today they appear more relevant than
ever, especially on the African continent. In that regard,
we also endorse the work of the Peacebuilding Fund,
which has proved to be an effective tool in addressing
peacebuilding challenges through holistic action.
Poland remains fully committed to supporting the Fund
politically and financially. In the context of today’s
debate, I would like to reflect on two issues, the first
being the link between climate change and security
and the second the colonial past and its neocolonial
legacy today.
First, it is essential to examine the root causes of the
problems and challenges affecting Africa. We believe
that many of them are linked to peace and security
risks related to the environment. Desertification,
deforestation, rising sea levels and a reduced
availability of fresh water are just a few examples of
the negative consequences of climate change. Very
often they become the main drivers of conflict as they
produce more underdevelopment and inequalities.
The already dire climate crisis has also been further
exacerbated by deteriorating food security caused by
the blockage of Black Sea ports. As a result of that,
the world’s breadbasket has shrunk significantly.
We must therefore pay more attention to the climate
security agenda and focus on food systems, especially
in the workings of the Security Council, as well as in
the light of the preparations for next year’s Sustainable
Development Goal Summit.
Secondly, I would like to underline that colonialism
has basically determined State lines on the map of
the African continent, altering the fabric of political,
economic and social realities in ways that are still being
felt to this day. The latest string of coups d’état and social
unrest only confirms that. Even though colonialism is
commonly viewed as a grave mistake of the past, it has
not been completely eradicated, unfortunately. Instead,
it has changed its face to that of neocolonialism and
spread to various parts of the world. As a country with no
colonial history, Poland is particularly sensitive to any
forms of violent subjugation, let alone illegal military

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

aggressions taking place in its close neighbourhood. In
that regard, we call on Russia to drop its neocolonial
agenda and stop its senseless war in Ukraine, for it
is hitting the most vulnerable populations around the
globe. That especially concerns the least developed
countries, a majority of which are in Africa.
Another issue of concern is the presence of private
mercenaries on the African continent, which has
often been linked to brutal violence and a long list of
violations targeting civilians. Their actions hamper the
stabilization efforts undertaken by the European Union
(EU) and its member States, including Poland, whose
military personnel is participating in the EU’s training
mission in the Central African Republic.
We need to modify the perception of Africa and
focus more on its enormous potential, which remains
largely untapped. With that particular message,
President Andrzej Duda of Poland plans to travel to West
Africa on an official visit next month. And with this
message, I would like to assure you, Mr. President, that
Poland will remain fully committed to a comprehensive
approach to preserving peace and security in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): I thank the Chinese
presidency for placing Africa at the centre of this very
important debate today and for giving us the opportunity
to speak to the Council. Like other delegations, I would
also like to commend yesterday’s briefers for their very
insightful remarks.
At the outset, I would like to underline that
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I do not
want to pre-empt what the EU will say, but we fully
share the belief that there can never be a one-size-fitsall solution for sustaining peace in Africa. Every single
effort has to take full account of the heterogeneous
nature of conflicts on the African continent as well
as the rich diversity of African societies. Our joint
commitment to tackling the structural drivers and
causes of conflict, violence and fragility in Africa
requires an integrated approach that closely links
crisis prevention, stabilization, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding with sustainable development initiatives,
as always, under strong African leadership.
After listening to yesterday’s debate, I think we all
agree that ownership and regional initiatives are key

22-455143/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

to success. But we also believe that there is a lot more
we can do collectively to enable our African partners
to expand African-led peace efforts, make them more
effective and help ensure that they are sufficiently and
reliably funded. Merely echoing the slogan “African
solutions to African problems” is simply not enough.
We ought to focus much more and in a more concrete
way on how to translate that slogan into action. For that
reason, strengthening African peace efforts and regional
cross-border cooperation will continue to be a primary
and long-standing guideline of Germany’s Africa
policy. So far, Germany has supported the African
Union (AU) to the tune of more than €500 million. That
makes Germany one of the largest bilateral donors to
the Union and many of its milestone projects such as
the Border Programme. Germany is a key political and
financial supporter of the African Peace and Security
Architecture — not only in the areas of early warning,
mediation and good governance, but also in fostering
human rights protection and the promotion of women’s
inclusion in peace processes. We believe that Germany
thereby contributes in a very meaningful way to helping
to achieve the common goals of the African Union’s
Agenda 2063.
Our line of support for the African Peace and
Security Architecture is complemented by deepened
bilateral security cooperation with a number of African
countries. In the Lake Chad basin we have partnered
with the United Nations Development Programme and
the Governments of Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon and
Chad to create a regional stabilization facility that
has been instrumental in supporting locally led peace
efforts. Likewise, our Enable and Enhance Initiative
for African security forces is based on the firm belief
that local actors are better placed to sustainably pacify
local conflicts, provided that they are well trained and
equipped and that they act in accordance with the rule
of law. For instance, we support the Niger’s border
security and border management in that context.
The
humanitarian
and
economic
crisis
from rising inflation and food insecurity in
Africa — further exacerbated by Russia’s war of
aggression in Ukraine — makes it all the more important
not only to provide the countries affected with immediate
relief, but to also strengthen the African Union’s vital
role in preventive diplomacy and fostering democratic
resilience. It is also our shared responsibility to do more
to support African regional organizations. We therefore
encourage all Member States to follow the call of the
4/27

09/08/2022

African Union for increased support to African-owned
regional conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The last Arria Formula meeting,
organized by Ghana, reminded us very clearly of
the largely unmet need for predictable and sustained
United Nations support to African peace initiatives,
and we ought to change that. Progress in that area is
more urgent than ever. In that context, we also strongly
support the call of the African Union and others for
ensuring the adequacy and sustainability of funding for
United Nations peacebuilding, including through the
introduction of assessed contributions.
Let me close by reiterating that Germany, together
with its EU partners, stands ready to do its part to
identify concrete ways for the United Nations and its
Member States to support the invaluable efforts of the
African Union and other African regional organizations
to maintain peace and security on the continent of
Africa and beyond.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova, and the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, align themselves with this statement.
First, I would like to thank the briefers for sharing
their insights. We welcome this open debate on the topic
of capacity-building for sustaining peace in Africa, a
discussion that is much needed today, when the world
is facing the highest number of violent conflicts it has
seen since 1945.
Sustaining peace means breaking the vicious cycle
of violent conflict. It means preventing conflict while
at the same time building peace. It means healing the
wounds of war while raising a new generation in peace.
It is a colossal endeavour for any society. According
to the United Nations, one quarter of humankind lives
in conflict-affected areas. Sustaining peace is one of
the most crucial tasks of our time. The European Union
believes firmly that sustaining peace in Africa is a
challenge that should be addressed in a holistic way.
There are no shortcuts. We cannot support security
structures while ignoring economic development. We
cannot fight terrorism while ignoring human rights
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

and accountability. Peace has to be supported from
all sides — through good governance and democratic
institutions and sustainable economic and social
development, and by advancing gender equality and
respecting the rule of law and human rights.
Let me elaborate on how the EU and its member
States are working together with our African partners to
implement this holistic approach. This is a long-standing
cooperative relationship premised on strengthened
political dialogue and African solutions to African
problems. The EU recognizes the needs of the African
continent and is dedicating €1.5 billion to supporting
conflict prevention and peace and security initiatives at
the national and regional levels in sub-Saharan Africa
for the period from 2021 to 2027. Since 2004, the EU
has provided some €3 billion in support of Africanled peace and security operations on the continent.
We are and will remain heavily engaged politically
and financially, as was recently demonstrated by
our adoption of a €600 million package in support
of the African Union’s mandated peace and security
operations on the continent for the period from 2022
to 2024.
Capacity-building and training, which are the
focus of this debate, play a crucial role in building
resilient institutions that are a fundamental pillar
of peace. Good examples of this are the EU training
and capacity-building missions and operations, which
can be complemented by the provision of equipment
through the African Peace Facility of the European
Union. The EU has 11 such missions on the African
continent, with 3,000 women and men providing
training to more than 30,000 African soldiers, police
officers and magistrates. Most recently, the EU
launched a training mission in Mozambique that will
train and equip 11 selected units, making up a quick
reaction force to support the Mozambican armed forces
in Cabo Delgado. Other missions are active across
Africa from the Sahel to Libya and from the Central
African Republic to Somalia.
The EU and its member States are also keen
supporters of African mediation efforts, transition
processes and peacebuilding efforts across the board,
including through support to the African Union and
the United Nations. The United Nations peace and
security advisers are a good example of capacitybuilding for peace, and they receive strong support
from the European Union and its member States. The
EU and its member States are also among the biggest

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

contributors to the Peacebuilding Fund, providing more
than 60 per cent of that mechanism’s funding. However,
we do recognize the gap between the demands and the
available resources of the Peacebuilding Fund and
peacebuilding efforts at large. To ensure the best results
with limited resources, we must prioritize strengthening
cooperation and finding synergies between key
peacebuilding actors such as the United Nations, the
EU, the international financial institutions and regional
development banks. We look forward to the upcoming
negotiations on peacebuilding financing facilitated
by Kenya and Sweden, which will be an opportunity
to improve the sustainability and predictability of
financing for peacebuilding, including through the
introduction of assessed contributions.
While those targeted efforts for peacebuilding
are crucial, we also recognize that peace cannot be
sustained without addressing the root causes of conflict
and ensuring women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace processes. For long-term
sustainable peace, we have to tackle economic and
social development, poverty, inequalities and climate
change in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063. I
mentioned the example of the EU training mission in
Mozambique. Security cooperation is only one part of
our integrated approach to the crisis in Cabo Delgado.
Our support measures also include humanitarian,
development and peacebuilding activities. Among
those peacebuilding activities are community policing,
interfaith dialogue, the promotion of social cohesion
and support for children affected by conflict.
Building the capacity for sustainable peace means
including the whole population and leaving no one
behind. It means ensuring the meaningful and equal
participation of women and young people in peace
processes. African women laid the foundation for
the women and peace and security agenda and have
shown the world repeatedly that they are formidable
peacebuilders. We know that a more gender-equal
State is also more peaceful and stable. We also know
that the deliberate use of sexual violence in conflict
has devastating consequences for victims, families
and communities. Building resilience and capacities
for peace therefore means removing all barriers to
gender equality and women’s empowerment. It means
combating impunity, promoting accountability and
building a capacity for integrated approaches. It
requires sustainable financing of women-led and

22-455145/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

women-centred organizations that work to address
gender inequality. It requires engaging men and boys in
discussions on harmful practices and stereotypes. It also
requires dedicated leadership at every level, including
in the form of gender-responsive leadership training.
Women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in all peace and security processes and operations is
long overdue.
At this time we are emerging from the coronavirus
disease crisis, which has hit Africa hard. And we are
fighting a crisis of rising food and energy prices while
also battling the effects of climate change. That is
compounded by a global lack of financing, particularly
affecting emerging economies that are already
struggling with high debt burdens. That crisis has been
exacerbated by the Russian war of aggression against
Ukraine, which has prevented the export of grain and
other essential food staples, causing price hikes that
have hit Africa particularly hard. While we welcome the
United Nations- and Türkiye-brokered Black Sea Grain
Initiative, this global food security crisis puts pressure
on fragile societies in Africa, jeopardizing peace
and stability. It also highlights the need to reinforce
maritime security and ensure freedom of navigation, as
well as the importance of ensuring that our partners in
Europe itself can sustain supply chains for food, energy
and other essential goods.
Building capacity and resilience in African societies
is key to withstanding future global shocks. Building
the mobilization of domestic resources and investing
in sustainable agriculture in Africa and in pandemic
preparedness are examples of capacity-building that
will lead to long-term resilience and support sustainable
peace. Through the Global Gateway initiative, the EU
aims to support sustainable and resilient food systems
in Africa by investing in energy, so that Africa can
make use of its abundance of renewable energy sources,
and by supporting education and training.
Finally, we must not forget the individual in all this.
As is pointed out in the concept note (see S/2022/592,
annex), we have to follow a people-centred approach. We
cannot sustain peace without respect for human rights
and human dignity. We can never use peacebuilding as
a pretext for circumventing human rights or the rule
of law. Not only is that morally wrong, but it will also
eventually erode people’s trust in the State and its
institutions. We therefore need to put good governance,
human rights and international humanitarian law at the
top of our agenda. They are the first building blocks for
6/27

09/08/2022

peaceful and resilient societies, in Africa and all over
the world.
Ultimately,
democratic
accountability
and
transparency are guarantors of sustaining peace. The EU
will therefore continue to support the implementation
of the African Governance Architecture, based on
the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance. We can only commend the African
Union’s reform efforts designed to increase the synergy
between the African Peace and Security Architecture
and the African Governance Architecture. An example
of our support takes the form of election observation.
The EU has carried out more than 100 election
observation missions in Africa since 2000, following
invitations by the host Governments. To illustrate
that, let me return to the example of Cabo Delgado. In
addition to the EU training mission, we are preparing to
lend support to the judiciary to bring violent extremists
to justice in a human-rights-compliant manner. The EU
is also supporting the Southern African Development
Community peacebuilding activities in Cabo Delgado
aimed at strengthening the human rights and rule-oflaw capacities of the police and correctional services.
In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President, of
the European Union’s commitment to the SecretaryGeneral’s New Agenda for Peace, which has prevention
and peacebuilding at its core, while also calling for
support for regional prevention. That must address
current and future threats to global peace and security in
a comprehensive and integrated manner. The European
Union will continue to play its part in that through its
strong partnerships with Africa and the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mr. Kuymizakis (Malta): Malta thanks the
Chinese presidency for organizing this open debate,
which acknowledges the mutually reinforcing nature
of peace, security and development in Africa. Malta’s
long-standing commitment to advancing dialogue in
that regard reaffirms our position on leaving no one
behind. We also thank yesterday’s briefers for enriching
the discussion with their insights and experiences.
Addressing the root causes of conflict is an
important element of conflict prevention and
resolution. To that end, long-term capacity-building
can deliver positive outcomes. Malta supports and
encourages continued Security Council engagement
with Africa, and appreciates the crucial work being
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

done by the United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions on the continent. We fully support
the participation of all relevant parties and attach
great importance to the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peacemaking processes, as
well as the crucial involvement of young people.
Tailor-made structures are critical tools for ensuring
that we deal with peace and security issues in Africa as
holistically as possible. Multilateral setups cannot exist
independently or be indifferent to the realities on the
ground. In that regard, it is important to recognize the
importance of regional and subregional organizations,
which are an integral part of the multilateral system
and can make a significant contribution owing to their
unique knowledge of their region and history. The
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union (AU), particularly through the African
Peace and Security Architecture, has enabled the
Council to facilitate peace agreements and strengthen
regional cooperation on the ground.
We cannot speak of peace and security without
speaking of development. Malta would like to point out
that it is also the primary duty of the State to ensure
that its national and international efforts do not run
contrary to its human rights obligations. The climate
emergency and food insecurity are global challenges
that are having a disproportionate impact on Africa. Our
priorities for sustainable development should be aimed
at building effective and reliable policy frameworks and
institutions, solidified by sustainable investments in
connectivity, digital technology and infrastructure, and
by providing access to innovative sources of finance for
expanding the domestic fiscal space and for harnessing
clean energy sources. To that end, Malta is proud to
support the EU’s Global Gateway initiative, which aims
to mobilize investments of up to €300 billion between
2021 and 2027, as well as the commitments made at the
level of the European Union (EU) during last February’s
EU-AU Summit. Those efforts are fully aligned with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals and with the values
of good governance, multi-stakeholder partnerships,
education and research, and climate-neutral and
security-focused strategies. It is only by providing
an enabling environment that we can close structural
gaps and achieve a resilient and inclusive future for our
African partners.
As vaccine rollouts are bringing hope that the end
of the coronavirus disease pandemic may be in sight,

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

it is regrettable that a significant number of African
countries are still lagging behind. Open, affordable and
non-discriminatory access to vaccines should remain
at the cornerstone of international efforts. Malta has
played its part by sharing vaccines and providing
financial support towards the delivery of vaccines to
African countries, because we believe that only through
cooperation can we ensure a sustainable recovery for
every African country.
Malta believes that any capacity-building must
incorporate the need for early-warning mechanisms,
corresponding
early-response
mechanisms
and
formidable preventive mechanisms. We are firm in our
belief that such mechanisms can be created through a
multilateral approach. While such cooperation might
face challenges, Malta believes in the potential that
Africa holds for international peace and security,
and that should encourage us to collectively seek
cooperative approaches that maximize that potential.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): I would
like to congratulate China on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and for
convening this timely meeting. I also thank the briefers
for their valuable insights. Portugal aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the European Union (EU)
and would like to add the following four points.
Africa faces multiple security threats, the root
causes of which are shared by many countries and
include poverty, vulnerability, climate change and
fragile institutions. The impact of the pandemic, together
with one of the most severe droughts in decades and
the consequences for global food security of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine, has altered progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals, with a particularly
devastating impact on small island developing States
and least developed countries, affecting their capacity
to address climate change and conflict.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace cannot be
approached from a security point of view alone. We
also need to prioritize conflict prevention and peace
consolidation programmes, including the promotion
and protection of human rights with a joint commitment
to implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in Africa, in line with the priorities
set out by the African Union. Portugal remains a
committed partner of Africa across the whole scope of

22-455147/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

the peace continuum. We participate in three United
Nations peacekeeping missions — in the Central
African Republic, Mali and South Sudan — and we are
also present in eight of the 11 EU training missions on
the African continent. Bilaterally, we have programmes
aimed at supporting the capacity-building of our
partners’ defence and security forces. We cooperate
closely with our partners in areas of maritime security,
particularly the Gulf of Guinea.
Portuguese cooperation with African States has
traditionally supported institutional capacity-building
in line with the national priorities of partner countries,
particularly in areas such as good governance, the rule
of law, the security sector, education and health. As
a current member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and a regular contributor to the Peacebuilding
Fund, we have been pleased to note — as the PBC
Chair rightly mentioned — the increased interest that
countries and regions in Africa have shown in engaging
with the Commission. That is further evidence that
peacebuilding works. However, we need to ensure
adequate, predictable and sustainable financing if we
want to meet that growing demand.
My second point is about the need to strengthen
cooperation with regional organizations such as the
African Union. Regional organizations bring with
them a vast knowledge of the root causes of conflict
and help ensure local ownership by promoting trust and
dialogue. The partnership between the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union already
plays a very important role in the support provided
to regional organizations and arrangements on the
African continent, and it can be further developed.
Portugal encourages the Security Council to pursue the
debate on predictable, sustainable and flexible funding
for peace support operations undertaken by African
regional and subregional organizations.
Thirdly, for sustaining peace to be a successful
endeavour, it must be inclusive. We support the full and
meaningful participation of women, young people and
civil society in all the areas that affect them. That is
particularly relevant when we are talking about human
rights, democracy, rule of law and good governance.
Providing support to justice systems has also been a key
step in ensuring that the gains made in peace processes
can be sustained over the long term.
Finally, we share the concerns expressed by other
colleagues about the expansion of violence, extremism
8/27

09/08/2022

and terrorism in Africa. Here, too, we must tackle
the problems at their roots. We need to strengthen
human rights compliance. We need to strengthen
resilience to climate change while helping to expand
employment, particularly among young people. We
need to push international financial institutions and
multilateral development banks to do more, and in
a more coordinated way, to address the difficulties
around access to financing for sustainable development
and climate action in Africa. We also need to learn
from and scale up positive past experiences. That might
include, for example, replicating the Rabat training hub
of the Office of Counter-Terrorism in other areas of the
continent, recognizing the roles of victims of terrorism
and their families and enhancing the ability of national
authorities to prosecute and convict terrorism finance.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Portugal’s full
commitment to supporting sustainable peace and
security in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish China success upon assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August, and I thank China for convening this debate
on peace and security in Africa. I also welcome
yesterday’s briefings.
During the process of consultations I undertook
with the Permanent Representatives of African
countries in the context of my country’s campaign to
assume an elected seat on the Security Council, I had
the opportunity and privilege to hear the most diverse
perspectives on how to overcome the current challenges
on the African continent. Notwithstanding the diversity
of visions and the particularities of each region and
subregion in Africa, the common factor that I identified
lies in the will for ownership of the solutions. In other
words, African solutions to African problems.
Of course, that does not mean that peace and
security in Africa is disconnected from international
peace and security; on the contrary, it is a central
component — and it will therefore continue to be a
priority of the United Nations system. Neither does
it mean that African solutions exclude or limit the
participation of countries from other regions; on
the contrary, building capacities to sustain peace in
Africa implies the exercise of responsibility by the
international community, through the fulfilment of
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

commitments and obligations, including those related to
cooperation, assistance and financing for development
and peacebuilding.
I emphasize the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in which Ecuador hopes to fill, in 2023,
the vacancy occupied every year by a State from the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States,
through the Security Council.
My delegation regrets that voluntary contributions
to the Peacebuilding Fund continue to be insufficient,
and I therefore highlight the efforts of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres to promote the mobilization
of resources and to seek a mechanism to meet the
existing needs on the ground, including through
assessed contributions.
The other common factor that I identified and that
will guide Ecuador’s service in the Security Council
is the need for synergies. That is why this debate is
absolutely timely and complements the special highlevel dialogue convened in July 20 by the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council on “The Africa We Want”, built on the outcomes
of the annual Africa Dialogue Series, organized by the
African Union and the United Nations Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa in May.
We will not be able to achieve Sustainable
Development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Peace if we leave out the specific needs and challenges
in Africa, whether in Mali, in Somalia or in any other
country of the greater continent. Moreover, the efforts
of the Council regarding sustainable peace in Africa
must take into account that many of the challenges
facing the continent are transnational, supra-regional
and global in nature, such as climate change, terrorism
organized crime, arms trafficking and food insecurity.
I take this opportunity to commend the agreements
reached to facilitate the export of grain in the Black
Sea ports, which must be fully respected in order to
alleviate the food crisis in Africa and the entire world.
The Council should also express its views on this matter.
Finally, I recognize the substantive contribution of
the three African members of the Security Council to the
Council’s work, and I confirm my delegation’s interest
and determination to work closely with that group and
with the rest of the membership in this organ’s efforts
to strengthen peace and security in Africa.

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I wish to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the People’s
Republic of China on your well-deserved assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month of August.
Mozambique welcomes this important initiative
by China of convening a Security Council open
debate under the theme “Peace and security in Africa:
capacity-building for sustaining peace”. Having a
debate on this important subject in the programme of
work of the Security Council for August is a testament
to the priority and special attention that China and this
organ attach to the issues pertaining to the promotion
of peace and security in the African continent.
We thank the briefers of this meeting, namely,
Mr. Bankole Adeoye, African Union Commissioner
for Political Affairs, Peace and Security; UnderSecretary-General Cristina Duarte, Special Adviser
on Africa to the United Nations Secretary-General;
and Mr. Muhammad Abdul Muhith, Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
History and our own experience point to the fact
that capacity-building is at the core of State formation
in Africa. Whether analysed from a purely internal
perspective or a broader international perspective, we
view capacity-building as a fundamental tool to build
an effective State that can create and promote unity,
cohesion, democracy, peace and development.
In that context, capacity-building can be an effective
enabler for peace and security in Africa, as well as for
effectively addressing the root causes of conflict and
instability. Combating terrorism, which is a global
scourge of the twenty-first century and is eating away at
the fabric of the African State and societies, including
my country, Mozambique, demands cooperation and
capacity-building. In that context, the challenges
that we face today in Africa need comprehensive,
integrated and inclusive policies, as well as sustained
funding, firm commitment, engagement and effective
coordination at all levels from national, regional and
international actors.
In particular, capacity-building for sustained peace
should be aimed at asserting, building or restoring State
authority and governance structures. Furthermore, they

22-455149/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

must be equipped with the ability to perform their basic
duties for their people. To that end, trust has to be built,
the social fabric has to be repaired and the root causes
of conflict should be effectively addressed.
Many speakers who preceded me made reference to
a number of factors that have to be taken into account
in peacebuilding and State-building processes. They
include the promotion of investment and social and
economic development; investment in human resources
and in infrastructure development; the identification
of African solutions to African problems, especially
in conflict prevention and resolution; an increase in
the flow of overseas development assistance; a deeper
understanding of African societies by our development
partners; addressing the immediate needs of conflict
and post-conflict States to prevent a relapse into
hostilities; and reinforcing humanitarian assistance in
conflict and post-conflict situations.
As we mentioned before, a high degree of coherence
and coordination in peacebuilding efforts is needed.
That is particularly required in activities jointly carried
out by the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), such as the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security of 2017 and the AU-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Mozambique further encourages the implementation
of the 2017 memorandum of understanding on a
United Nations-AU partnership in peacebuilding.
That instrument provides a framework aimed at
strengthening cooperation in support of peacebuilding
and sustained peace efforts in Africa.
I wish to conclude by once again praising this
important initiative by China.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.

09/08/2022

Those examples, such as Liberia’s peaceful
transition, the African Union’s efforts to improve early
warning, the tireless work of civil society networks
across the Sahel, among others, are not just African
solutions to African problems; they are examples from
which we can all learn to better prevent conflict and
keep the peace.
We know from many examples on the continent that
lasting peace is built when we recognize and address
the intrinsic links among human rights, sustainable
development, peace and security. Just and inclusive
societies, with the full and complete participation of
all, without discrimination, in the social, economic,
cultural, civic and political life of their communities,
are peaceful societies.
As the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
said, that means building effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions that deliver justice, protect
and promote human rights and address all forms of
discrimination, exclusion and inequality that can lead
to conflict.
Capacity-building means investing in, and
supporting, local efforts, rather than importing and
then exporting external know-how. That is as true for
development as it is for peacebuilding and community
policing. All-foreign teams designing infrastructure or
mediating in protracted conflicts in Africa or elsewhere
are harbingers of problems ahead. Sustainable
peace and development instead require local and
national responses.
We welcome the participation of the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission in this open debate, and
we encourage the Security Council to make better
use of the Peacebuilding Commission’s advisory and
liaison role.
(spoke in English)

Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to make three points regarding today’s topic,
namely, on capacity-building for sustainable peace
in Africa.

Secondly, national ownership is crucial to building
and sustaining peace. Fortunately, there are many
examples of African Member States assuming such
ownership, such as in Liberia, Sierra Leone and the
Gambia, while continuing to benefit from a positive
partnership with the United Nations.

First, I would like to commend the efforts and
examples of African States themselves, African regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU), and African civil society organizations in
building and sustaining peace on the continent.

Worryingly, however, several such previously
positive partnerships are under strain elsewhere,
as certain Governments undertake actions that risk
undermining the ability of the United Nations to
support their efforts to sustain peace.

10/27

22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Inclusive national ownership means working
together to empower communities and people, in
addition to supporting the State. It is essential to
support the capacity of local civil society organizations
and, in particular, women peacebuilders in building
and sustaining peace.
But recognizing the important role played by those
organizations is not enough. We must urgently improve
access to adequate funding for women peacebuilders
to elevate their voices and address the rising levels of
violence against them.
Canada is working closely with the African
Union Commission in that regard, including through
a $10 million grant that will help build the AU’s
institutional capacity in gender equality, as well as
increase the involvement of women in peacebuilding,
early-warning and mediation efforts. We are also
seeking to provide more sustainable and flexible
support to women peacebuilders, including through a
dedicated $5 million envelope to support local grassroots women peacebuilders.
My third and final point is on the need for sustained
engagement and partnerships, particularly amid the
interlinked challenges facing the continent. Yesterday
we heard very clearly from the African Union
Commissioner that climate change represents a clear
threat to peace and security in Africa. Furthermore,
the coronavirus disease and other health security
threats exacerbate fragilities and inequalities and
seriously undermine sustainable development. Rising
food insecurity, exacerbated by Russia’s illegal war
of aggression against Ukraine, threatens the lives and
livelihoods of millions on the continent.
Such threats — climate challenge, health risks and
food insecurity — risk erasing hard-won peacebuilding
gains in Africa. If the Security Council is serious about
preventing conflict and sustaining peace on the African
continent, it should listen to the voices of African
States, regional organizations and civil society, and
address those threats with the priority and attention
that they deserve.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): On behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark — let me begin by thanking
China for convening this timely meeting and for allowing

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

us to speak in the Security Council without worrying
about time. I also want to put on record our gratitude to
the briefers for their insightful interventions.
The need to explore ways to further strengthen
conflict-prevention measures and peacebuilding
capacities across Africa has become ever more
pertinent. The Nordic countries are, and will continue,
working to strengthen the United Nations capacity to
create cohesion, efficiency and accountability across
the humanitarian, development and peace nexus,
particularly through the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission, its Peacebuilding Fund and, importantly,
regional and subregional organizations. In that context,
we also recognize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and underline the importance that its
implementation contribute to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace in countries in conflict and postconflict situations.
In the context of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, regional and subregional organizations
are instrumental in developing context-specific and
tailor-made approaches. They are often the first to
react in crisis response and to engage with the parties
concerned to ensure the protection of civilians.
They are uniquely placed to build trust and promote
dialogue among the parties concerned and offer
support in mediation and reconciliation; and they can
be influential in advocating for the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and young people
in all aspects of peace and security.
The Nordic countries will continue to strengthen our
cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
the African Union. Our cooperation focuses on
adequate training, capacity-building and equipment,
and strengthening African-led peace operations. In this
vein, we are working to ensure funding for Africanled peace operations in support of African solutions
for crises on the African continent. We commend the
progress on the African Union Peace Fund, including
the efforts made by States members of the African
Union to ensure predictable and sustainable financing.
Regional organizations can also play a critical role
in supporting political transitions and upholding
democratic principles, as seen with the commendable
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States in the Sahel, which have played a crucial
role for not only national but also regional security
and stabilization.

22-4551411/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

An integral part of capacity-building for sustaining
peace is strengthening the capacity of judicial actors
and law-enforcement officials to ensure accountability
for conflict-related crimes, in particular conflict-related
sexual violence. Conflict-related sexual violence and
gender-based violence remain cruel tactics of war,
terror, political repression and torture. The fight against
sexual and gender-based violence must be at the centre
of our work to secure international peace and security.
Ensuring access for survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence to comprehensive services, including sexual
and reproductive-health services — and fighting
impunity for perpetrators — should be fundamental to
any peace effort.
In line with the women and peace and security
agenda, we all need to further step up our interaction
with civil society and support for local women’s
organizations and women peacebuilders. We must
establish partnerships with women-led organizations
that involve capacity-building, and we must ensure
women’s inclusion in the decision-making processes.
Their contextual and local expertise is crucial for
the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. At the same time, we must not forget
the critical importance of including youth. We fully
support the implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda. Engaging youth in conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding is essential to building
inclusive and lasting peace.
We recognize that conflict prevention and enduring
peace cannot be sustained without addressing the root
causes of insecurity and conflict. To ensure long-term
sustainable peace, we must support economic and
social development, and address poverty, inequality
and climate change in line with the 2030 Agenda and
the African Union’s Agenda 2063. A comprehensive
whole-of-system response by the United Nations,
in cooperation with regional actors, should work
preventively to address the factors that cause and
exacerbate conflict, including poverty, inequality and
climate change, inter alia, and doing so by promoting
the rule of law, strong democratic institutions and the
protection of human rights. This entails, as I mentioned,
working across the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus to promote greater cooperation, coherence,
coordination and complementarity among efforts in
development, disaster-risk reduction, humanitarian
access and sustaining peace. We hope that by further
strengthening the cooperation between the United
12/27

09/08/2022

Nations and regional partners, we can build a true
culture of prevention while placing an emphasis on
bolstering regional peacebuilding capacities.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr.
Chindawongse
(Thailand):
Thailand
wishes to thank China for organizing this important
Security Council open debate focusing on Africa.
My appreciation also goes to the African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security,
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their valuable contributions.
On this important issue of peace and security in
Africa, particularly capacity-building for sustaining
peace, I wish to make the following four points.
First, with regard to Africa, Africa knows best.
Every continent and every region has its own particular
challenges, but in Africa, the countries of the region,
particularly those affected by these challenges, each
with its own unique circumstances, are best placed
to identify and help create sustainable pathways for
resolution. We should therefore pay stronger attention
to African priorities and African-driven processes,
culminating in home-grown solutions. In this regard,
Thailand wishes to commend the pivotal leadership
and critical role exercised by the African Union (AU)
in addressing peace and security challenges as well as
other challenges on the continent, and the contributions
of subregional organizations throughout Africa.
Secondly, regional-global partnerships continue
to be relevant. Such partnerships remain important in
supporting regional efforts at overcoming peace and
security challenges. In tandem with the African Union’s
achievements, the contributions made by the United
Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, now in its sixth year, continue to
be significant, as have been the triangular partnerships
with regional economic communities.
Thailand supports the close cooperation between
the Security Council and Africa, whether it be the
affected or concerned countries, the African Union or
relevant subregional organizations, in addressing the
broad spectrum of peace and security challenges on the
continent. Particular attention must be paid to the views
of the African members of the Council in deliberations
about Africa. From peacekeeping operations to
peacebuilding missions, it is important for the United
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Nations and the international community to continue to
provide support.
Thirdly, contributions and cooperation can come
from far and wide, and even from small countries. As
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Thailand will continue to play its part in supporting
these global-regional endeavours for Africa, including
by encouraging greater consultations and coordination
between the Security Council, the PBC and the Economic
and Social Council to better mobilize capacity-building
assistance and resources to support African countries
in conflict settings.
Furthermore, through its 300 Thai personnel
currently deployed to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, Thailand will continue to make an
active contribution to peace in Africa. While the Thai
contingent’s main task is to contribute to stability and
rebuild essential infrastructure in the country, its other
priorities are to engage with local South Sudanese
communities in capacity development in such areas,
for example, as sustainable agriculture and water and
land management.
This leads me to my fourth and final point, namely,
that sustaining peace will be sustainable only if there is
progress in sustainable development. The key is using
effective capacity-building in selected areas that will
reinforce sustainable development and enhance the
conditions for sustainable peace. To this end, Thailand
has been actively engaged with its partners in Africa
on capacity-building through bilateral programmes
as well as South-South and triangular cooperation
modalities. Also to this end, we are guided and will
always be guided by the priorities of the host country
and by the priorities of the Agenda 2063 and of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development regionally.
In addition to targeted technical assistance through
the Thailand International Cooperation Agency in
such areas as public health and micro-small-andmedium-enterprise development, the Friends from
Thailand volunteers have also been dispatched to a
number of African countries to provide capacitybuilding in agriculture, education, engineering and
community development, to name a few. In view of
the current food crisis and the growing trend towards
greater food insecurity around the world, including in
Africa, capacity-building in sustainable agriculture
to strengthen food-security resilience in the long run
will be as important as immediate measures to address

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

hunger and starvation. As a major rice exporter to
Africa, Thailand will continue to support safe and
effective supply chains for food and agricultural
products to Africa.
In conclusion, Thailand will continue to play
its part in supporting the United Nations and other
international efforts to reinforce partnerships with
Africa so as to promote peace and security and
sustainable development on the continent. We will also
do so through and in partnership with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, which incidentally celebrated
its birthday yesterday; it is now 55 years and one day
old. Now, with African countries having acceded to the
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia
and with the great potential offered by the African
Continental Free Trade Agreement as well as the
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East
Asia, we look forward to the future enhancement of ties
between Southeast Asia and Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Romiti (Italy): Mr. President, I would like to
thank you for organizing this open debate.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of the European Union (EU), in its
capacity as observer.
The coronavirus disease pandemic and the war in
Ukraine have affected international peace and security,
dramatically exacerbating the root causes of conflict
on the African continent. We must converge on the
priority that the African Union (AU) summarized in
the 2063 Agenda and support effective partnerships to
make financing for development a key priority.
I will focus on three points.
First, we believe that further investing in a strategic
dialogue between the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations may strengthen positive
dynamics in Africa. Both at a national level and
within the EU, Italy has always paid careful attention
to positions endorsed by the African Union and other
regional organizations.
We commend the African Union — through its close
cooperation with regional blocs — for successfully
facilitating peace agreements and reducing conflict
escalation in several countries. That is why we stand
ready to support and invest in the programmes and

22-4551413/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

initiatives considered key by the Security Council
and the AU for sustaining peace and stability on
the continent.
Italy will continue to support the African Peace
and Security Architecture with financial assistance,
training and capacity-building programmes and is in
favour of using United Nations-assessed contributions
for African-led peace operations, provided that
appropriate standards are met. To that end, Italy
supports the work of the Carabinieri corps, entrusted
by the Italian Foreign Ministry with the mandate to
cooperate with AU partners on building the capacity of
police and security forces.
As repeatedly stated by Italy, the issue of Africa’s
presence in United Nations institutions should also
be addressed, with specific reference to the Security
Council, in order to make it more representative,
democratic, accountable, transparent and effective.
Secondly, in order to sustain peace, conflict
prevention must be effective, which leads us to discuss
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We
believe that we can overcome some difficult dynamics
within the Security Council by reinforcing the role of
the PBC, in the interest of peace and security in Africa.
We firmly believe in PBC priorities as drivers of peace
and stability. Investing in resilience, social cohesion and
the active participation of women and youth in conflictprevention and capacity-building can foster virtuous
cycles that can lay the foundation of sustainable peace.
Tackling transborder issues is another crucial area
that the PBC clearly has on its agenda, with the aim
of de-escalating dangerous situations among local
communities and between neighbouring States. As
members of the PBC starting next year, we are ready
to do our part.
Thirdly, sustaining peace in Africa, while
demanding a strong commitment within the multilateral
framework, also constitutes a national priority for
Italy. Ours is a multidimensional strategy. We support
African countries through direct assistance and
capacity-building programmes aimed at promoting
human rights, the rule of law and good governance. We
also believe, however, that there can be no sustainable
development without peace, and no peace without
sustainable development. Food security, health and
education are the main pillars of the Italian Agency for
Development Cooperation’s strategy in Africa, with a
focus on gender equality, youth and job creation across
14/27

09/08/2022

the board. Our initiatives are launched in coordination
with local authorities, while paying particular attention
to ownership and the priorities identified by our partners.
We will also continue to facilitate partnerships between
Italian and African companies, since the private sector
needs to be supported to grow and generate wealth
for African communities. A step in the right direction
would be the completion of the African Continental
Free Trade Area, which we welcome and hope will help
Africa gain greater stability.
In conclusion, Italy is ultimately engaged, both
at the bilateral and multilateral levels, on fronts that
are inextricably linked to peace and security, such as
climate change and terrorism. During the Italian Group
of 20 presidency, we put the fight against climate
change at the very core of our international agenda,
building on efforts to enhance climate finance from
developed countries and debt reduction for African
countries. Moreover, we are particularly active in the
Global Coalition against Da’esh. There is no single
solution to sustain peace and security in Africa, but
collectively we are called to make every effort in that
direction, aware that multilateralism remains key.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Chinese presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this open
debate dedicated to peace and security in Africa,
an important theme on which Belgium advocates
increased cooperation, in line with the joint declaration
of the Heads of State and Government that punctuated
the European Union (EU)/African Union Summit
in February.
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the European Union, which
rightly emphasizes that any peacekeeping effort is
futile if the root causes of conflict are not addressed.
I would like to mention three points in particular.
First, ownership over peacekeeping efforts by
African countries and their regional organizations
has been growing steadily of late. That should not be
underestimated. It is essential that collaboration on
capacity-building be driven by and for Africans. At the
same time, it is our duty to support them in that respect.
And Belgium, as a partner committed to Africa’s
development, is walking the talk.
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

On that basis, Belgium supports the training of the
Nigerien army in the Sahel. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, too, our collaboration in Kindu aims to
contribute to the ultimate goal of a lasting peace in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My second point concerns security sector reform,
which is a crucial aspect in the establishment of
sustainable peace in Africa, and Belgium fully supports
all efforts to that end. We pay particular attention to
several essential principles: first, national ownership of
the security sector reform process, with a focus on the
involvement of local communities, women, youth and
civil society; secondly, democratic control; and thirdly,
the essential coordination among humanitarian action,
development and security, also referred to at the United
Nations as the “nexus”.
My third and final point concerns the importance of
human rights in our capacity-building efforts. Belgium
is particularly committed in that regard, as illustrated
by our commitment to the fight against impunity
and in the area of transitional justice in particular,
an area in which we have worked extensively in the
Security Council with our South African friends. The
deployment of a Belgian judge to the Special Criminal
Court in the Central African Republic since May 2021
demonstrates this Belgian priority.
For peace to be sustainable, it must inevitably
establish responsibility for human rights violations
and the most serious crimes. That is a crucial aspect
of restoring public confidence in institutions. A
comprehensive approach is therefore needed to support
sustainable peace across the African continent,
and Belgium welcomes bilateral, interregional and
multilateral collaboration to that end.
I will conclude with an expression of gratitude
to the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for having given us this opportunity to participate in
today’s dialogue on this important topic.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands thanks you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate and for this opportunity to
discuss capacity-building for sustaining peace on the
African continent.

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

We align ourselves with the statements made earlier
by the representative of the European Union (EU) and
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The African continent has huge possibilities and
great aspirations. It is blessed with an almost limitless
potential of its countries and peoples. Yet parts of the
continent are faced with myriad challenges when it
comes to sustaining peace. Those need to be addressed
in a holistic way.
Allow me to make two points on which the
international community, in our view, should focus
its support.
The first area is financing for peacebuilding. As
we know, peacebuilding is highly effective, but the
financing of United Nations peacebuilding has been
labelled inadequate, unpredictable and unsustainable.
Considering the bulk of the Organization’s peacebuilding
activities are implemented on the African continent, the
necessity to find a solution to those funding deficiencies
is of prime importance here today.
As one of the biggest donors to the Peacebuilding
Fund, we play our national part, but we need to find
a sustainable way forward for the international
community as a whole. That is why the Kingdom of
the Netherland supports assessed contributions for
the Peacebuilding Fund. We will continue to support
that during the negotiations on the peacebuilding draft
resolutions that are ongoing, facilitated by Sweden and
Kenya, and during negotiations in the Fifth Committee,
which are due to resume in the autumn.
Given the catalytic function of the Peacebuilding
Fund, the funding gaps that we see and the demand for
peacebuilding activities and prevention, investing in
more United Nations capacity towards sustaining peace
is not only the right thing to do; it is the smart thing
to do. We call on all States to support such efforts for
more sustainable and better predictable financing.
Secondly, we need strengthened institutional
capacity-building. We wholeheartedly support earlier
statements that referred to the importance of training
and of prioritizing inclusive justice, the fight against
impunity and guaranteeing human rights. Sustainable
peace is built on, and built by, institutions that are
trusted by the population they serve.
Building capacity for sustainable peace means
including the whole population and leaving no one
behind. It means ensuring the meaningful and equal

22-4551415/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

participation of women and youth in peace processes.
It means healing the wounds of conflict, while raising
a new generation in peace through mental-health and
psychosocial support.
We support strengthening the coordination of United
Nations-African Union (AU) activities on political
dialogue and reconciliation efforts. Promoting security
in African countries requires the close cooperation of
the EU with both the African Union and the United
Nations, as well as with regional organizations, such
as the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Economic
Community of West African States. We will continue
to cooperate in the field of cyber, countering violent
extremism and addressing the root causes of conflict.
When it comes to United Nations peacekeeping,
we see that a closing and drawdown of missions
can result in sudden capability gaps, which puts
sustainable peacebuilding at risk. That requires further
cooperation and dialogue between the United Nations
and the AU and sustainable financing for national
capacity-building.
Building capacity and resilience in African
societies is key to withstanding the challenges that the
African continent is facing, including rising food and
energy prices, exacerbated by the Russian aggression
in Ukraine, and climate change, which is hitting
African countries hard. There is a need to break cycles
of conflict and prevent new and re-emerging conflicts
from happening.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
to support African countries and the African Union,
both politically and financially, to sustain peace on
the continent.
The President (spoke in Chinese); I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to congratulate China on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I thank China for organizing this open
debate on an extremely important topic for Morocco,
namely, peacebuilding and sustaining peace in Africa,
our continent. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their informative briefings.
In line with the guidance of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, Morocco works tirelessly for
peacemaking, peacebuilding and peacekeeping on
our continent. As a member of the Peace and Security
16/27

09/08/2022

Council of the African Union, Morocco therefore does
everything that it can to prevent and resolve conflicts
in Africa. As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
country-specific configuration on the Central African
Republic and an active member of the Commission,
the Kingdom of Morocco makes sustaining peace an
absolute priority in its diplomatic activities. Moreover,
having contributed to United Nations peacekeeping
operations on African soil since the 1960s, the brave
peacekeeping troops of the Royal Moroccan Armed
Forces contribute honourably and selflessly, sometimes
paying with their lives, to promoting peace in several
African countries and to strengthening stability on
our continent.
African countries have come a long way and made
a great deal of progress in ensuring peace, stability
and security on our continent. In order to support that
momentum, it is the responsibility of the international
community to continue to support the leadership of
African countries to strengthen and consolidate what
has been achieved, in accordance with the priorities
of those countries and their national ownership. Based
on the reality of the peace, development and security
nexus, and the fact that there can be no lasting peace
without economic development, it is necessary to adopt
a holistic, consistent and multidimensional approach
that involves Governments, international, regional
and subregional organizations, international financial
institutions and civil society actors as part of a shared
effort to build Africa’s capacities to promote peace
and socioeconomic development. That collective
effort is particularly important in the context of the
post-coronavirus disease era in order to effectively
overcome the socioeconomic, political, environmental
and humanitarian repercussions of the pandemic for a
stronger recovery that will guarantee peace and stability.
Moreover, we stress the importance of sustainable,
adequate and predictable financing for development,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. In that context,
it is essential for the international community to
implement its commitments to financing development
in Africa. Similarly, Morocco reiterates its full support
for the Secretary-General’s proposal to allocate
$100 million to the Peacebuilding Fund in United
Nations assessed contributions, aware that Africa
is a major part of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
agenda. Furthermore, we reiterate the need to respond
favourably to Africa’s legitimate request for the
financing of African Union peacekeeping operations
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

authorized by the Security Council to be based on
assessed contributions from the United Nations budget.
In recent years, the terrorist threat has unfortunately
increased in an unprecedented and extremely dangerous
way in Africa, undermining peace and security on the
continent, in particular due to proven links among
terrorist groups, transnational criminal networks and
separatist groups. In that regard, the international
community’s coordinated and cooperative effort is
critical to supporting African countries in their fight
against that scourge.
The Kingdom of Morocco remains firmly
committed to a comprehensive, coherent approach in its
support for African countries in dealing with terrorism,
combining the security dimension, particularly
through regional and continent-wide cooperation,
with achieving economic and human development and
preserving cultural and religious identities.
Morocco hosts the Office of Counter-Terrorism’s
programme for counter-terrorism capacity-building in
Africa and seeks to share its expertise and resources
by providing, in partnership with the United Nations,
quality training on counter-terrorism and border
security for African countries. In coordination with
that Office’s programme, Morocco hosted the first
conference of heads of counter-terrorism and security
agencies in the West African region in Marrakesh on
23 and 24 June.
In addition, Morocco, which also hosted a
ministerial meeting of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh on 11 May, co-chairs the Africa Focus Group, set
up as part of the Coalition, which focuses on a forwardlooking strategic approach to cooperation against the
threat represented by that terrorist organization, while
also ensuring coordination with existing multilateral
and regional initiatives and structures.
In line with Morocco’s Africa policy guidelines,
set up by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, the
Kingdom is promoting a new model based on SouthSouth cooperation and solidarity. Morocco is working
to strengthen the resilience of African States by
promoting integration, continental solidarity and
collective responsibility as key elements to respond
to the changes that are taking place on our continent.
In that regard ,South-South cooperation between
Morocco and brother African countries has reached
unprecedented levels, with the signing of more than
1,000 partnership and cooperation agreements in all

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

areas, in particular economic, trade, political, social,
humanitarian and environmental, in the context of
structural megaprojects for the present and future of
Africa and its young people, thereby strengthening
economic development and further political stability
across the continent.
Lastly, Morocco remains fully committed,
alongside its African partners and brothers, to restoring
sustainable peace in Africa, which will ensure the wellbeing and prosperity of the populations of our continent.
The President (spoke in Chinese); I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely open
debate. We thank the briefers for their valuable remarks.
Slovenia aligns itself with the European Union
(EU) statement, and I would like to make the following
remarks in our national capacity.
Slovenia highly values the contributions of African
regional organizations towards a peaceful and secure
Africa, supporting the capacities and capabilities of
African States to manage security challenges on the
continent. African organizations have come to play
an increasingly important role in mediating internal
disputes. We therefore emphasize the importance of,
and the need for, African solutions to African problems.
While the African Union and other subregional
organizations are best placed to support the needs of
African States, strengthened African Union (AU)United Nations cooperation, as well as AU cooperation
with other organizations, including the European
Union, could further empower African States in
strengthening conflict-prevention capabilities and the
peace, security and governance architecture. We also
support promotion of the relationship between civil
society and regional organizations, all with a strong
gender component.
The international community needs to do its utmost
to support predictable and flexible financing that will
enable peacebuilding capacity on the continent. Tailormade approaches play a crucial role in this context.
At the national level, Slovenia allocates 30 per
cent of its humanitarian assistance to post-conflict
activities. It focuses on peacebuilding, support for
women and children and post-conflict rehabilitation.
These activities are further complemented by

22-4551417/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

resilience-building and preventive action. We would
be happy to learn even more from the experience of
our Africa partners, as well as to continue to provide
our support.
There can be no sustainable development without
peace and no peace without sustainable development.
Governments
aspire
to
providing
peaceful
environments and good governance combined with rule
of law, thereby enabling environments of inclusiveness,
equal opportunity, education and health. At the same
time, these aspirations can be achieved only through
a holistic approach, where the needs for sustainable
development are taken up together with peace and
security, including the respect for human rights. The
international community also needs to increase its
support for capacity-building in African States to
manage security challenges arising from terrorism.
In conclusion, any capacity-building for sustainable
peace must take into account societies as whole
entities, and it should, in the spirit of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, leave nobody behind. We
echo the need for meaningful and equal participation
of women and youth in peace processes, as this paves
the way for more equal societies and greater respect for
human rights in future.
We hope that debates such as the one we are having
today can enhance trust among Member States and
between Member States and the wider United Nations
system. As we are obliged at times confront missing
information with respect to these relations, much more
must be done to enhance this trust.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to congratulate
China for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August and wish you,
Mr. President, the best in the discharge of your
responsibilities. I would like to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Bankole Adeoye, African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security,
for his valuable briefing yesterday (see S/PV.9106). I
also thank the Under-Secretary-General and Special
Adviser on Africa, Ms. Cristina Duarte, and Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings,
and I acknowledge all the speakers before me for their
important contributions to this debate.
18/27

09/08/2022

Africa is the youngest continent, with more than
70 per cent of its population under the age of 30.
According to United Nations demographic forecasts,
five of the eight countries that will contribute most
to the increase in global population are in Africa.
Additionally, sub-Saharan Africa will contribute more
than half of the global population increase projected
for 2050. If African countries are to ensure sustainable
socioeconomic development, this reality will be a
source of dividends for peace and prosperity.
Accordingly, realization of Africa’s economic
potential is the best security policy of all. We strongly
believe that poverty reduction and the expansion of
opportunities for the increasing population on the
continent form a critical strategy to ensure human
dignity, prevent conflict and sustain peace. To this end,
genuine and mutually beneficial cooperation in support
of national priorities and efforts to foster development
and alleviate aid dependency are paramount. It is
therefore necessary to avoid approaches that create
undue prioritization and competition between peace
and security, on the one hand, and development, on
the other.
In the year 1994, the African Union adopted the
Declaration on a Code of Conduct for Inter-African
Relations, Assembly of Heads of State and Government.
This Declaration recognizes
“the proliferation of hot beds of tension in Africa
and the serious threat they pose to the stability,
independence and credibility as well as to the
development of our States”.
It also outlines the commitment of AU member States
to find African solutions to African problems. The
present-day reality and the hot beds of tension we
encounter in North Africa, West Africa and the Sahel,
the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa, and
the global political dynamics within which they are
occurring, show much remains to be done and therefore
compel us to do more. This situation calls primarily
for even stronger leadership and inter-Africa solidarity
and cooperation.
Ethiopia is of the conviction that ownership and
self-reliance must be embedded in the short-, mediumand long-term plans for Africa. To this end, we in Africa
need to strengthen our national security institutions and
foster progress in inter-Africa cooperation in the areas
of institution-building, developing and training human
resources, and intelligence-sharing, and we need to live
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

up to our obligations to resolve our own challenges.
This requires States, inter alia, to determine “freely,
in full sovereignty and complete freedom, [their]
political institutions”, as set forth in the African Union
Resolution on the Right of States to Decide on Their
Political Options Without Foreign Interference. It is
critical to note that this solemn declaration adopted in
Dakar is the basis for Africa’s long-standing position
against unilateral coercive measures that mostly target
the security sector and undermine the ability of States
to fend off internal and external security threats. It is
necessary for the international community, including
the Security Council, to stand in opposition to unilateral
coercive measures and to address their impacts that
undermine the capability of States to ensure peace
and security.
I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the African Peace and Security Architecture.
The Architecture is setup with the African Peace and
Security Council at its core, and with diplomatic and
military components, including the African Standby
Force. However, the African Peace and Security
Architecture must be backed by necessary and sufficient
capability and resources for it to implement decisions
in the areas of conflict prevention, peacemaking, peace
support operations, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. In this regard, the United Nations,
and particularly the Security Council, must assume
its rightful role and act responsibly to help bridge the
capacity deficit.
The rationale and justification for this call for
support is clear, and it goes beyond citing the scarcity of
resources at the regional level to appealing for support
for regional mechanisms. First, we should note that the
African Peace and Security Architecture is established
in compliance with the normative requirements of the
United Nations Charter. In line with this, African peace
operations, although initiated at the regional level,
undergo the clearance and endorsement of the Security
Council. Furthermore, the outcome of African peace
operations benefits public and private interests, not
only in Africa, but also for stakeholders from outside
the continent. It is therefore legitimate and practical
for the United Nations system to allocate the necessary
resources for African peace operations.
In addition, given that the African continent
remains the only security complex excluded from
decision-making power at the Security Council,
support for African regional mechanisms must be

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

viewed as part of the Charter responsibility to ensure
global peace and security. Supporting African peace
operations that are adopted with the full ownership and
participation of African States will help the Security
Council address the credibility and trust deficits it is
encountering in relation to United Nations missions on
the African continent.
In connection with our standing call for African
peace operations to have access to United Nations
assessed contributions, I would like to state that this
arrangement is a transitory mechanism. Africa aspires
to silencing the guns and setting a development
trajectory. We expect to become self-reliant in
addressing conflicts and deploying effective conflictprevention and conflict-resolution mechanisms. The
support Africa seeks today is to halt conflict from
being the factor that engenders socioeconomic decline
and the suffering of our populations. It is a call for joint
work to break the cycle of conflict.
On the issue of terrorism, we recognize and indeed
support the repeated condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. However, an approach
that differentiates terrorist groups based on factors
other than their dangerous and criminal disposition
to the country and region concerned hinders counterterrorism cooperation. Furthermore, a tentative
approach in fighting terrorism that hinges on the
goodwill of certain Administrations and States have
proved counterproductive. We call for the Council to
scale-up action against terrorism in Africa and to halt
the disproportionate sacrifice of a few countries and
regions in the fight against terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ethiopia’s
commitment to implement the principles and objectives
of the African Peace and Security Architecture and
to play its part in the creation of a self-reliant and
viable system capable of enforcing decisions for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and
supporting peacebuilding efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): Let me start by congratulating
China on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I also thank African
Union Commissioner Adeoye, Special Adviser Duarte
and Ambassador Muhith for their briefings yesterday.

22-4551419/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

Rwanda commends the choice of theme for this
debate — capacity-building for sustainable peace — and
its focus on the underlying issues contributing to the
vulnerability and instability of countries experiencing
or emerging from conflict.
Africa is affected by both continental and global
conflicts. Those geopolitical tensions have resulted
in broad and harsh economic challenges, such as
insecurity in the food, energy and health sectors
across the continent. In the aftermath of the genocide
against the Tutsi in 1994, Rwanda experienced
destruction — not only of the people but also of our
entire social fabric and institutions. There were no
adequately functioning systems, and people had little
to no trust in Government institutions.
Against that backdrop, I would like to share some of
Rwanda’s experiences as part of the recommendations
for the Council’s consideration.
First, comprehensive security sector reform is
key to ensuring that national security institutions are
realigned to meet new challenges. They should be
restructured by the inclusive views of the people in order
to ensure that the population has trust and confidence
in their institutions. Security sector reform should seek
reconciliation, justice and equality — locally initiated
and driven by international support.
Secondly,
comprehensive
disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement is
critical. That is an undertaking that no country can
achieve on its own without the support of other national
and international partners, including civil society. It
is linked with security sector reform in countries that
must lay solid foundations in order to ensure the smooth
and sustainable demobilization and resettlement or
reintegration of combatants.
Thirdly, we must address the root causes of
insecurity. It has been proven beyond doubt that
no degree of capability can resolve a conflict if
efforts are not directed against its real causes. Often,
people deliberately refuse to solve the root causes
of a problem, even when they are clear and visible
to all. Solving the root causes requires concerted
efforts, a shared understanding and focus. Only then
can we achieve long-term solutions that come with
socioeconomic transformation.
Fourthly, we must promote and support homegrown
solutions. Rwanda’s rebirth relied on its own homegrown
20/27

09/08/2022

solutions. Such solutions must be enhanced, not
ignored; they should be encouraged and promoted.
The introduction of Gacaca courts and mediation
committees in Rwanda’s justice system addressed many
issues that would not have been resolved by the classic
justice system. The Gacaca court system brought about
transitional justice and reconciliation in Rwanda, hence
promoting sustainable peace in the country.
Countries experiencing conflict need solutions
that are tailored to specific problems and realities.
One of those solutions is peacekeeping. Unfortunately,
peacekeeping as a tool for the maintenance of peace and
security is proving to not be efficient and effective. It
has rarely met the expectations of the people it serves. In
that regard, Rwanda strongly believes that innovations
must be introduced to make that vital tool more effective.
Rwanda’s approach to peacekeeping, in all the missions
where we deploy personnel, tries — within the means
available — to solve human security challenges beyond
physical insecurity, to help overcome sanitary, health
and environmental degradation issues and to help build
classrooms for children.
Rwanda also believes in a multilateral approach that
blends regional or bilateral peacekeeping mechanisms
to overcome global and evolving security challenges.
Experiences in the Central African Republic and
Mozambique have proven this approach effective and
efficient. Rwanda’s path to peacebuilding was paved by
blending classic solutions with homegrown ones, and it
was fruitful. A case in point was the Gacaca jurisdiction,
which handled over 1.6 million cases of genocide in 10
years, when it could have taken hundreds of years for
classic courts.
Against that backdrop, Rwanda believes that
the Peacebuilding Commission is essential, and
financing its activities is a matter of great significance.
Accordingly, we welcome the ongoing consultations
on financing for peacebuilding under the leadership of
Kenya and Sweden.
On the issue of terrorism, we need a common
approach because it is a global challenge and no country
is spared by its consequences. Africa suffers in various
ways. On one hand, we suffer the physical damage
caused by the act of terror itself and, on the other,
we bear the impact of the interpretation of terrorism
when it is on African soil. Calling terrorists activists
or political opposition leaders, as certain capitals do,
is counterproductive. Furthermore, the tendency to
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

label and acknowledge only terror targeting certain
parts of the world and not others is not helpful. It is
equally important to respect the independence of the
justice systems in African countries when handling
cases of terrorism.
In conclusion, the implementation of the African
Union’s 2063 Agenda, the continent’s strategic
framework that aims to deliver on its inclusive and
sustainable development goal, is key to delivering
peace, security and development in Africa. We call
upon Member States and the international community
to support and embrace the 2063 Agenda rather than
coming up with parallel frameworks for Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Prvý (Slovakia): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening a discussion on this
subject. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks. We welcome this discussion and
take note of its great urgency. Sustaining peace means
breaking the vicious cycle of violent conflict and
preventing conflict while building peace.
We believe that sustaining peace in Africa is a
challenge that needs to be addressed in a holistic way.
For many years now, Slovakia has identified security
sector reform as one of the key elements for effective
conflict prevention and successful post-conflict
rebuilding and stabilization. Direct experience from
many United Nations and African Union (AU) peace
missions and operations clearly shows that a nationally
led and inclusive security sector reform process can
progressively deal with the root causes of insecurity
and fragility and create an enabling environment for
sustainable development and peace to take place.
In our capacity as co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of Security Sector Reform, we are proud to
recall the successful realization of the two events, in
2014 and 2018, respectively, focused on the AU policy
framework for the security sector reform in the context
of the United Nations. Under the auspices of the United
Nations, the AU, the European Union and Slovakia,
those events provided a much-needed platform to frame
the discussion on different aspects of policy frameworks
towards SSR processes.
In addition, SSR is directly linked to the protection
of civilians and the rule of law — two critical tasks
that have become an integral part of almost every

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

peace operation. Slovakia underscores the importance
of women’s and young people’s equal and effective
participation and full involvement in all stages of
the SSR process. Gender-sensitive SSR is therefore
key to developing security sector institutions that are
non-discriminatory, representative of the population
and capable of effectively responding to the specific
security needs of diverse groups.
International support for SSR processes must be
coherent and be aligned with the actual needs and
priorities of the country concerned, context-specific
and adjusted to local needs and realities.
National ownership, however, which is regarded as
an overarching guiding principle of the SSR process,
is directly linked to effective capacity-building and
training. Such elements play a crucial role in building
resilient institutions, which are fundamental pillars of
peaceful societies and are key to the withstanding of
future global shocks.
People-centred SSR can further engender legitimacy
by creating trust between communities and newly
established or strengthened democratic institutions,
thereby contributing to the conditions necessary for
sustainable peace. As previously mentioned, Slovakia
affirms that SSR should incorporate the principles
of good governance, the professional, effective
management of public resources, the rule of law and
respect for human rights.
It is clear that, in the current security environment,
the United Nations can no longer rely solely on
traditional methods to counter emerging threats and
challenges. We need to continue being innovative,
adjust and remain flexible. We need to step up to new
challenges before so-called spoilers disrupt delicate
peace processes.
Following the adoption of resolution 2553 (2020), it
is now widely acknowledged that reform of the security
sector, particularly in conflict-affected societies,
creates an environment conducive to political and
socioeconomic growth. In that context, I would like to
applaud the Secretary-General’s new, ambitious report
on “Strengthening security sector reform”. Among
many invaluable insights, it has provided us with the
possibility of a fresh and bold new vision on SSR
and governance that considers a number of important
existing global agendas, such as Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), women and peace and security, youth, peace
and security and sustainable development, recognizes

22-4551421/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

impact areas and highlights important priorities for
collective action.
Interestingly, as one of its four priorities, the report
points to the role of SSR not only in sustaining peace,
but also in facilitating sustainable development. It also
offers a crucial observation of the interlinkage of the
SSR and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and views them as mutually reinforcing frameworks.
Those notions serve as yet further complementary proof
of the invaluable nature of an effective SSR process.
In addition to all the crises in the region, we are
witnessing a crisis of rising food and energy prices,
which has been fuelled by the Russian illegal and
unjustified war of aggression against Ukraine. That has
prevented the export of grain and other essential food
staples, causing price hikes that hit Africa particularly
hard. In that context, we welcome the United Nationsand Türkiye-brokered Black Sea Grain Initiative.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Slovakia’s continuous
commitment to the Secretary-General’s leadership in
this domain, including the Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative, which provides a framework for our
response and a road map for our collective efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Webster (Australia): Australia welcomes this
important debate on promoting peace and security
in Africa. We thank China for having convened this
meeting as part of its presidency. I also thank the
briefers from the African Union and the Peacebuilding
Commission for their valuable insights.
Australia is gravely concerned by the recent decline
in peace and security in some parts of Africa. Extraconstitutional changes of Government and an erosion
of democratic institutions have directly caused, or have
significantly contributed to, that decline.
We recognize the important role that the
Peacebuilding
Commission,
relevant
African
institutions, including the African Union Peace and
Security Council, subregional organizations and
African leaders play in negotiating peaceful resolutions
to conflict. International capacity-building efforts
should work to support those institutions to deliver peace
and security outcomes and to strengthen democratic
institutions and the rule of law on the continent.
22/27

09/08/2022

It has long been understood that addressing the root
causes of conflict is fundamental to finding long-term
solutions. The Peacebuilding Fund, in close coordination
with the Peacebuilding Commission, peacekeeping
missions and United Nations country teams, has
been working in many African countries to prevent
conflict and promote peace. The work of the Fund has a
particular focus on the inclusion of women and youth in
the peacebuilding process. Australia strongly supports
inclusive peacebuilding processes, as an important
contribution to sustainable peace. We urge all Member
States to support the work of the Peacebuilding Fund by
providing voluntary contributions. We need to provide
more flexible, transparent, sustainable and predictable
resources to facilitate a shift to conflict prevention
instead of crisis response.
We are deeply concerned by the proliferation of
terrorist organizations and other violent non-State
actors, which are undermining peace and security in
Africa. So, too, are the human rights abuses committed
by Russia’s Wagner Group and other private military
companies in a number of countries.
Australia is committed to supporting Africa-led
counter-terrorism efforts. That is why we are supporting
counter-terrorism capacity-building through the Office
of Counter-Terrorism in Morocco and the International
Academy for the Fight Against Terrorism in Côte
d’Ivoire.
Russia’s unjust and illegal invasion of Ukraine has
placed significant pressure on global food security,
with grave implications for human security in many
countries, including in Africa. We welcome the recent
shipments of grain under the deal brokered by the
United Nations and Türkiye, which will help address
the disruption to global food exports and alleviate
pressure on food prices.
United Nations peacekeeping missions continue to
play a vital role on the continent in protecting civilians
and human rights, while enabling the conditions for
progress towards peace. Australia continues to play its
part to ensure more effective, inclusive and accountable
peace operations. We recognize the tireless efforts
of the Blue Helmets and civilian staff in the field,
working with local communities to advance the women
and peace and security agenda and to strengthen the
capacities of the security sector and judicial system.
We extend our deep sympathies to the peacekeepers
killed recently in Mali and the Democratic Republic of
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

the Congo, and call for stronger efforts towards safety
and security.
The scale, nature and compounding impact
of today’s global peace and security challenges is
immense, and it is seriously straining the resources
and the capacity of the United Nations to respond. The
international community must do more in support of
sustainable peace, both in Africa and globally.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate China on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
I wish its delegation every success. I commend the
choice of today’s topic, which has special importance
given the situations and developments witnessed on the
international scene and on the African continent. I also
thank the briefers for their valuable interventions.
Despite United Nations efforts through peace
missions, the initiatives and contributions of the
African Union and subregional organizations, national
efforts and the Silencing the Guns initiative, several
countries and regions on the African continent are still
suffering from conflicts and a lack of security, peace
and stability. That leads to humanitarian tragedies,
growing numbers of displaced persons and refugees and
increasing violations, in addition to the consequences
of such situations for peace and security in the
neighbouring countries and regions and at the regional
and international levels. The coronavirus disease
pandemic, climate change and recent international
developments have all exacerbated those situations.
There are a number of factors and structural
challenges that create obstacles to the sustainability of
peace and demand that we work harder to address issues
of peace and security on the African continent through
a more comprehensive approach that takes account of
all those challenges rather than being limited to simply
ending conflicts. Such an approach should also focus
on preventing the onset of violence and its escalation,
persistence and recurrence; building, sustaining
and preserving peace; strengthening stability; and
dealing with the root causes of conflicts, violence
and vulnerabilities. Among those causes are political,
economic and social exclusion and marginalization, the
absence of an effective State in certain areas, and weak
governance, including ineffective implementation of the
rule of law and a failure to provide basic services and

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

ensure the equitable distribution of wealth. All of those
weaknesses are in some cases worsened by external
interference and widespread corruption, an issue that
Tunisia raised in a high-level meeting convened under
its presidency of the Security Council in January 2021
(see S/2021/24).
While achieving peace requires great effort at
many levels, the fact is that preserving and sustaining
peace requires even greater efforts, along with a longterm vision that includes strategies for enhancing the
role of institutions and supporting sustainability and
resilience. In that context, strengthening the nexus
between peace and security, development and human
rights — through the adoption of political solutions,
capacity-building, strengthened institutions and
enhanced, sound governance and sustainability — helps
guarantee that the transition from conflict to peace
will not be reversed. It also allows for the adoption of
strategies that are adequate to tackling existing and
emerging challenges in the fields of development,
the environment, politics and security, as well as
peacebuilding and human rights.
The success of this kind of approach, based on
building local capacities and enhancing legitimacy,
is closely linked to making use of local assets and
adopting clear strategies to ensure the inclusive
participation of every sector of society, granting a
special role to women, young people, civil society and
the private sector at all stages of the building process.
In parallel, cooperation and effective partnerships
among the United Nations, Governments, regional and
subregional organizations and international financing
institutions will help to guarantee the success of
that approach, promoting its preventive dimensions
and the sustainability of its results. In that context,
Tunisia commends what has been achieved in terms
of cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. We also support
enhancing the peacebuilding architecture, which is
an important tool for enabling the United Nations to
face the changing nature of conflict, especially on the
African continent. That can be undertaken through new
and innovative financing mechanisms to guarantee
adequate, sustainable and predictable funding for peace
processes and sustainable peace.
We hope that the implementation of Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), launched by the Secretary-General,
will contribute to helping the African continent build
its capacities and promote sustainable development

22-4551423/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

while achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063,
given that there can be no sustainable peace and
security without sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As I take the floor, at the outset I would like to
congratulate China on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We wish China every success
for the month of August and express our deep gratitude
for its inclusion of such an important item on the
agenda for open debate. I would also like to thank the
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
of the African Union, Mr. Bankole Adeoye, and the
Chair of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission,
Mr. Muhammad Abdul Muhith, for their comprehensive
briefings, as well as for the excellent work they continue
to do in the exercise of their functions.
The continued existence of traditional conflicts,
alongside emerging challenges such as transnational
crime, problems of cybersecurity and biosecurity, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, climate
change, maritime piracy and other non-traditional
security issues, is becoming increasingly evident. It is a
manifest reality that despite the continuing and positive
efforts being made by States, subregional organizations
and the United Nations, the maintenance of international
peace and security remains a clear challenge for us
all. The security challenges currently facing Africa
are numerous and diverse and point to an uncertain
and unstable future. That unsustainable situation
obliges us all to collectively redouble our efforts in the
quest for comprehensive and lasting solutions for the
sustainable stability of the African continent, which is
also a prerequisite for the sustainable development of
our region. In that context, we would like to make the
following three observations.
First, since the States of the region have a sovereign
responsibility to ensure the security and social needs of
their peoples, they must have the capacity to respond
to their peoples’ multiple concerns. It is therefore
imperative that they work to find effective and lasting
solutions in the areas of security and defence, early
warning and the control of intercommunal violence, as
well as in the fight against poverty and unemployment,
among other things, all of which fuel violent extremism
and increased instability across the African continent.
24/27

09/08/2022

Secondly, in the face of those complex and diverse
security threats, it is vital to strengthen multilateral
cooperation, take into account African concerns and
respect the will and choices of African countries,
strengthen coordination with a broad vision and
eliminate the root causes of conflicts. The African
Union and our subregional organizations have a key role
to play in that regard — being on the ground, they are in
a better position to support and lead conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa. It is therefore crucial to explore
more effective ways to strengthen the cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations and
the African Union on the one hand and the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, as well as other regional organizations, on
the other. Strengthened cooperation and coordination
will help to promote peace infrastructure and risk
management, enabling us to explore further solutions
for the allocation of resources and capacity-building for
African countries.
Thirdly, while it is true that the number of violent
conflicts in Africa has declined considerably in recent
years, the escalation of conflicts that persist in several
African countries with deadly consequences — caused
by transnational crime, terrorism and the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, among other
things — remains significant and worrisome. Their
effects have been further exacerbated by the existence of
lawless spaces that leave room for illegal activities and
the persistence of corruption and illicit financial flows.
Those illicit financial flows facilitate the financing of
illegal weapons and conflicts, the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, the funding of insurgencies and
rebellions and the free and easy acquisition of weapons
by armed groups and non-State actors in parallel
markets, to mention only a few issues.
Turning to another issue, we are concerned about
the adverse effects of certain aspects of Security
Council sanctions regimes on the maintenance of
peace and security in some countries. Despite the
socioeconomic and humanitarian consequences
associated with any sanctions regime and the high
costs that they entail for the societies concerned, their
results do not improve countries’ ability to deal with
the scourge of wars and armed conflicts. Indeed, we
continue to see that the imposition of sanctions on
certain countries, as in the case of the Central African
Republic, for example, increases instability in the
country. Thanks to the sanctions, its democratically
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

elected Government is severely limited or completely
unable to acquire adequate weaponry to combat the
armed groups that continue to destabilize the country.
Meanwhile, the armed groups are free to acquire arms
in parallel markets, affording them superiority in
terms of force over the national armies of the countries
affected, as in the case of the Central African Republic.
In that connection, we wish to stress the urgent need to
mitigate the negative consequences of sanctions regimes
on countries. They should be a means to maintain peace
and security, not an end in themselves.
We would also like to make another appeal to the
international community and to the countries of our
continent in particular, which must take the lead in the
process of combating, preventing and eradicating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects. That way, we can achieve together the success
that the initiative of silencing the guns deserves,
for the sake of the stability and development of the
African continent.
In conclusion, we are aware that Africa’s progress
depends on its peace and stability. Therefore, and in order
to make further progress on building and developing
Africa so as to achieve the objectives of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, we would like to encourage our
regional organization to continue its leadership and its
commitment to finding African solutions to African
problems. We also recommend that the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission continue
to strengthen their comprehensive strategic partnership
and align their visions to offer a more rapid and effective
response to African conflicts, in close coordination and
collaboration with the African Union Commission.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): Along with the members
of the Security Council, I recognize the representative
of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat of the Soviet
Union. We thank the Chinese presidency for convening
this open debate and thank all the briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.
Ukraine has enjoyed well-developed relationships
with many African States and has contributed in
particular to infrastructure projects and education.
The maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent has always been a focus for my country as
well. Until 24 February, Ukraine contributed to five

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

United Nations peacekeeping missions on the continent
with personnel and military hardware. It is a matter
for concern that Russia’s aggressive behaviour has
been multiplying conflicts, thereby undermining our
ability to concentrate on resolving those that already
exist. It also demonstrates the interlinkages within the
global security architecture, as the Russian invasion
of Ukraine has led to a food crisis in other parts of
the world.
African States have been among those taken hostage
by Russia’s war on Ukraine. The lives and health of
some 400 million people dependent on Ukrainian grain
exports will remain at risk for as long as Russia maintains
its morbid desire to revive the practices of its colonial
past in relation to Ukraine. As long as Russian forces
continue to set our fields on fire, bomb our farms and
grain storage facilities and steal agricultural hardware
from our farmers, the threat of famine will continue
to loom and food prices will continue to rise. Even in
the current circumstances, however, Ukraine remains
determined to contribute to resolving the food crisis.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative is a powerful example.
Despite the Russian rocket attack on the port of Odesa
the day after the Initiative was signed in Istanbul, we
are continuing our efforts to ensure its implementation.
Ten ships have been sent out of Ukrainian ports so far.
Now it is the responsibility of our international partners
to ensure Russia’s compliance with its obligations and
thereby the safe functioning of the grain corridor.
It must be made clear, however, that the threat of
hunger would ultimately be removed if the Russian
war of aggression were halted and if respect for the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in relation
to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity were
fully restored. It is the war that is the root cause of the
food insecurity, not the sanctions, which are simply a
response to the aggressor in an attempt to undermine
its capacity to keep on attacking.
This year, Ukraine has significantly updated its
policy on Africa. We have approved our first ever
strategy for the development of Ukraine’s relations
with African States and the President has appointed
a special representative for African States. Ukraine’s
Foreign Minister has scheduled a trip to visit a number
of African States and there are initiatives under way to
activate the parliamentary dimension of our cooperation.
It sent an important message that President Zelenskyy
was invited to speak to the Bureau of the Assembly of

22-4551425/27

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in Africa

the African Union on 20 June. I would like to conclude
by quoting him.
“Our number one task now is to finally get rid of
the threat of famine.... That is why, in order to avoid
famine, the efforts of States like Russia to return
to the aggressive policy of colonialism must end.”
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina congratulates the Government of China on
holding this debate on a topic of such importance for
the international community, as well as the approach it
has chosen.
Argentina recognizes that the responsibility for
peace and security in Africa, including the ability
to address the root causes of conflicts and resolve
them by peaceful means, lies primarily with African
countries. At the same time, we recognize the need for
the international community and the United Nations to
support them, taking into account the Organization’s
responsibilities in that area in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Sustainable development, conflict prevention and
resolution and peace are interdependent and must be
addressed as such. In order to achieve and maintain
a virtuous circle of development and peace, countries
need internal structural changes to enable them to
address poverty, exclusion and marginalization,
increase health and education services, reduce
inequality and lack of opportunity and address
hunger, food insecurity, environmental degradation
and water scarcity, among other things. Those muchneeded economic, security, social and environmental
structural changes, among others, are all part of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
implementation of the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) will lead to more inclusive and socially
cohesive societies. The SDGs are closely related to the
African Union’s Agenda 2063, its strategic vision for a
prosperous and peaceful Africa. A partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations for the
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
will help accelerate development and reduce conflict.
Similarly, Governments and societies can strengthen
other objectives, such as the promotion and protection
of human rights, the consolidation of democracy and
the rule of law and constitutional order.
26/27

09/08/2022

Governments must take the necessary measures
to put an end to internal conflicts and civil wars
and eradicate armed gangs and transnational crime
and terrorist groups. The international community’s
cooperation and coordination is also required to make
peace a reality. With the assistance of the United
Nations, much progress has been made by African
States, the African Union and other subregional
organizations in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Partnerships with the African Union and
African Member States are vital to achieving collective
efforts for peace and security in Africa. A case in point
was the signing of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, whose fifth anniversary we marked on
19 April. That agreement solidified the relationship
between the two organizations and their shared quest
for peace and security in Africa.
Finally, let me emphasize that United Nations
peacekeeping operations are an essential instrument
for achieving the Organization’s goal of maintaining
international peace and security. Argentina’s active
presence in those missions is a clear manifestation of
our commitment to the system. Argentina has been
participating in peacekeeping operations since 1958.
My country contributes to several peace missions
in Africa — the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and with police observers
in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, as well
as missions in other regions.
The main motive for our participation in
peacekeeping operations is our commitment to the
development of a transparent and democratic collective
security system within the framework of the United
Nations, with consolidated multilateral institutions and
mechanisms that serve to fulfil international law. We
understand that peacekeeping operations must form part
of a holistic strategy that includes conflict prevention,
peacekeeping
and
sustainable
peacebuilding,
integrating the perspective of sustainable development
and addressing the root causes of conflict.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I congratulate the
delegation of China on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
22-45514

09/08/2022

Peace and security in Africa

thank it for organizing this very important debate.
I appreciate the presence of the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser on Africa and the African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
and thank them for their insights. I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, I want to underscore the instrumental role
of peacekeeping missions for capacity-building in
Africa. The African continent hosts the majority of
peacekeeping operations. Since the 1960s, there have
been more than 30 peacekeeping missions in Africa.
As the current largest troop- and police-contributing
country, Bangladesh has more than 6,500 peacekeepers
deployed in six peacekeeping missions in Africa.
Our peacekeepers have been protecting civilians,
creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, building national institutions,
especially in the security sector, and supporting peace
processes in Africa in line with the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
Our peacekeepers are also engaged in providing
medical facilities, building and protecting schools,
constructing roads, enhancing social cohesion,
conducting training for local authorities and providing
vocational training and assistance in agricultural
development, among other things. In addition to our
uniformed personnel, our women judges are involved in
strengthening the rule of law and the judicial sector in
African countries. Moreover, the Bangladesh Institute
of Peace Support Operation Training has been offering
training courses, including for contingent commanders,
military observers, staff and logistics officers, as well as
courses on women and peace and security and securitysector reform, among others. Through September 2021,
70 personnel from 12 African countries attended various
courses at the Institute. We believe that leveraging the
experience and expertise of peacekeepers can greatly
contribute to capacity-building in Africa. In that
regard, we call for increased programmatic funding for
peacekeeping missions to enable them to scale up their
peacebuilding activities. We ask the Council to take
that into consideration when setting up mandates for
peacekeeping missions, not only in transitions but from
the very beginning.

S/PV.9106 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, we emphasize the role and contribution of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), international
NGOs and other civil-society actors in capacitybuilding for national and local authorities, as well as in
supplementing national priorities in sustaining peace.
For example, we would like to point to the work of
the Rural Advancement Committee for Bangladesh,
BRAC, the world’s largest NGO, which originated in
Bangladesh. BRAC has been working in seven African
countries with the aim of having a sustainable impact
in Africa by developing innovative solutions and
effectively implementing development programmes at
scale in resource-constrained environments, as outlined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Its work extends to the fields of agriculture, food
security, livelihoods, education, health, microfinance,
social enterprise, ultra-poor graduation, women and
youth empowerment, early childhood development,
emergency preparedness and response programmes,
among other things. We call for creating enabling
environments for NGOs, international NGOs and
civil-society organizations in line with the national
priorities of African countries. We also call for
increased support to those civil-society organizations
working for capacity-building for women- and youthled organizations at the local and national level.
Thirdly, we would like to highlight the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in supporting
the national peacebuilding priorities of countries and
regions in Africa. We have already heard the statement
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The convening role
of the PBC should be leveraged to bring all actors
on board in order to take a coordinated approach to
sustaining peace in Africa.
Finally, while the partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations and international financial
institutions are crucial, at the same time we underscore
the importance of South-South and triangular
cooperation in addressing the challenges in Africa. That
cooperation can address issues such as climate change,
the digital divide, human resource development,
resource mobilization and capacity-building for local
and national institutions and so forth.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

22-4551427/27
