United Nations

S/PV.6532

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6532nd meeting
Wednesday, 11 May 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2011/277)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-33181 (E)

*1133181*

S/PV.6532

On a positive note, the seven-month-old
Government of Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed came in with a promising road map. I am
delighted to be sitting next to the Prime Minister. The
road map emphasized good governance and began to
put in place an administrative system for its
implementation, but it still lacks capacity for civilian
institution-building and the delivery of basic services.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2011/277)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Ethiopia and Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Prime
Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on Somalia, contained
in document S/2011/277.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahiga.
Mr. Mahiga: Let me once again thank the
members of the Security Council for the support they
continue to render to the peace process in Somalia. As
members of the Council are aware, the current
transitional period in Somalia is expected to end on
20 August 2011, in line with the Djibouti Agreement
and the Transitional Federal Charter. The run-up to
August 2011 has generated anxiety within the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) and confusion
among the Somali public and some key stakeholders in
the region on how to proceed towards ending the
transition. Disagreement over the election issue
between the TFIs is causing a political paralysis in
Mogadishu. There is therefore a need to develop
urgently a consensus on when and how to hold
elections and to define the mandate of the next
dispensation while seeking to defuse the stalemate
between the legislative and executive branches of
Government.

2

On the security front, forces of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) have made significant
territorial gains in Mogadishu. Allied militia forces are
also making impressive gains on the central, western
and southern frontiers. Political and civilian
administrative structures need to be put place by the
TFG in the newly liberated areas as the insurgents
retreat and are growing increasingly weaker. There is
an urgent need to build civilian institutional capacities
and deliver basic services, including much-needed
humanitarian assistance in those areas.
On a not-so-encouraging note, the process of
political outreach for inclusive dialogue and
reconciliation by the TFIs has stalled since the signing
of the Djibouti Agreement. The efforts of the
international community and regional actors to
facilitate dialogue have not been fully reciprocated by
the TFIs. The High-level Committee provided for by
the Djibouti Agreement to promote Somali-Somali
dialogue has not met since December 2009, despite my
constant calls on the TFG for the Committee to be
convened.
Agreements between the TFG and the regional
entities have not been followed through, while civil
society groups, such as elders, women’s groups and the
business community have not yet been actively
involved in the political process. Most regrettable is
the absence of communication and working relations
between the executive and legislative branches of the
Transitional Federal Institutions for the past several
months. The President and the Speaker have not
worked together since the beginning of February this
year. At the same time, the unilateral extension of the
Parliament for three years and the decision of the
Government to defer elections for one year have
further polarized relations between the two branches.
It is against this background that, on 12 and
13 April, in consultation with regional and
international partners, I convened in Nairobi a

11-33181

S/PV.6532

consultative meeting of stakeholders to encourage
dialogue among the TFIs on the transition and to
initiate a similar dialogue with the regional entities that
have signed agreements with the TFG. The agenda was
built around exchanging information on the respective
responsibilities of the TFIs for implementing
transitional tasks and on sharing experience and
improving working relations between the TFIs, on the
one hand, and local administrations, on the other. The
meeting was intended to initiate a process of
consultative dialogue that would be followed by a more
substantive meeting in Mogadishu.
Regrettably, and despite my relentless efforts to
persuade the leadership of the TFG, neither the
President nor the Prime Minister attended the meeting
in Nairobi. They ostensibly objected to the separate
invitations extended to Parliament and regional
administrations and to the holding of the meeting in
Nairobi rather than in Mogadishu. The Government
complained about the meeting and a section of the
Somali media attacked the initiative.
I am heartened, however, that the TFG has, since
the Nairobi meeting, decided to convene a meeting of
various stakeholders in Mogadishu between 11 and
16 June 2011 to carry on the consultative process. I
fully support this initiative of the TFG, and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) will
provide the necessary assistance. As this initiative goes
on, the issue of the elections for the presidency in July
or the deferral of the elections for one year has
lingered on and has further polarized Parliament and
the executive branch. The polarization is unfortunately
resonating within the Somali public and the region as a
whole.
I have taken another round of initiatives to
encourage the President, the Prime Minister and the
Speaker to overcome the deadlock between the two
institutions. Belatedly, the President is becoming more
amenable to the need for dialogue, but the political will
is still lacking. The President has promised to prepare a
plan for political outreach, including visits and
dialogue with the regional entities. That remains to be
seen. I have just held meetings with the leaders of
Djibouti and Ethiopia and attended a meeting of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU)
and a tripartite meeting with AMISOM and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
on how to resolve the current situation in Somalia.

11-33181

I have requested IGAD and the African Union
(AU) to help in resolving this issue. The Council of the
Wise of the African Union will meet and take up the
issue of Somalia on 12 May, and IGAD is preparing to
convene a summit soon to discuss, among other issues,
the end of the transition in Somalia. I appeal to the
Security Council to weigh in on this issue. The single
most divisive issue among the political groups in
Mogadishu today is the timing of the elections, as
provided for the Charter, and whether to hold this in
July or to defer them to a future date.
Regardless of the election date that would be
agreeable to all the TFIs, UNPOS is preparing a road
map that will suggest benchmarks for the next
Government in implementing priority transitional tasks
that have not been implemented by the current or
previous Governments. I will work to ensure that both
Parliament and the executive branch are engaged, as
this process must be Somali-owned. The road map will
contain suggested benchmarks, timelines and resource
requirements. The most urgent issue is to help the two
institutions to resolve their differences on the issue of
elections and to get them to start to work together.
Of late, the TFG, with the support of AMISOM,
has made significant territorial and military gains
against the insurgency. However, continued in-fighting
within the leadership of the TFIs could negatively
affect the progress that has so far been made on the
ground. As most territories are captured by the TFG
and the allied forces, it is critical that the TFG move in
partnership with local communities to establish
effective administrations in those areas and begin to
provide basic services as peace dividends. The United
Nations and the international community as a whole
have a crucial role to play in assisting the TFG and
regional administrations in establishing viable
administrations in those liberated areas. UNPOS and
the country team are stepping up their access to and
presence in those areas.
The role of AMISOM in the stabilization of
Somalia is crucial. The current strength of AMISOM is
9,000 personnel, with an additional 3,000 expected
soon from Burundi and Uganda to reach the total
strength of 12,000 authorized by the Security Council.
I would like to commend Member States, particularly
those that have offered equipment and supplies for the
additional troops mandated by resolution 1964 (2010),
for their continued generous support to AMISOM.
There is, however, still great need for force enablers

3

S/PV.6532

and specialized capabilities; in particular, the need for
helicopters became more evident and pressing during
the February offensive.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report
(S/2011/277), AMISOM continues to suffer critical
resource gaps that adversely impact the Mission’s
effectiveness. As the offensive against insurgent groups
continues and the transitional period draws to an end, it
is important that AMISOM receive full support from
Member States in order to enable it fully discharge its
challenging mandate. In particular, support for the
capacity of troops to be self-sustaining is required, as
are in-kind contributions to close equipment gaps.
Financial contributions without caveats to the trust
fund in support of AMISOM would also be welcome.
The United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
continues to deliver a United Nations logistical support
package to AMISOM comprising basic supplies and
equipment, engineering and construction, medical
services, aviation and transportation, strategic and
tactical telecommunications capability, and so on.
Importantly, this support will now include
accommodations, offices and supplies for 13 AMISOM
civilian personnel who are expected to deploy in
Mogadishu this month.
The African Union is still of the view that the
Security Council should take more robust action to
prevent supplies from reaching the insurgents. The port
of Kismaayo has increasingly become a commercial
hub that provides vast revenues to Al-Shabaab with
impunity. Action against violators of the United
Nations arms embargo operating through Kismaayo
harbour and airport needs to be considered and taken
by the Sanctions Committee of this Council. Several
other fields in south-central Somalia continue to be
used by violators of the arms embargo to resupply
Al-Shabaab.
Piracy in Somalia continues to threaten world
maritime trade and to undermine the economies of
Eastern African countries. The work of the
international naval coalition to protect shipping and
deter pirates is commendable, but has not been
successful in stopping the menace. The real solution
lies on land and in an overall political and security
construct to restore peace, security and stability in
Somalia. The recent resolution 1976 (2011) sets out a
number of key deliverables, and UNPOS is actively
engaged with the Office of Legal Affairs in urgently

4

preparing a report to the Council on establishing
specialized courts to try pirate suspects, and in
continuing to develop prosecution and prison capacity
throughout the region, as recommended in the Lang
report (S/2011/30). We are also taking forward the
Council’s directive to report on the issue of protecting
natural resources, toxic waste dumping and illegal
fishing. My office is urgently setting up a piracy unit as
the United Nations focal point to coordinate all of
these activities and, more importantly, to actively
engage the Somali authorities in addressing this
problem through the Kampala process. We look
forward to the Council’s continued support in our
assigned tasks.
In conclusion, let me underline, as I have done
before, that the humanitarian situation in Somalia is
reaching catastrophic proportions. This is exacerbated
by the unabated drought and the intensifying fight
against the extremists who continue to block the
provision of critically needed humanitarian assistance
to the areas under their control. As they retreat, they
are leaving behind landmines and explosives that are
slowing down humanitarian access. The United
Nations Mine Action Service is working to facilitate
safe access for humanitarian action. We need to
provide more support to those efforts, while mobilizing
additional resources for the much-needed humanitarian
assistance to the people of Somalia. UNPOS is
undertaking coordinated action to address the issue of
defectors from the ranks of the Al-Shabaab, whose
numbers are increasing by the day.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mahiga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of
Somalia.
Mr. Mohamed (Somalia): It gives me great
pleasure to appear before the Security Council today
for the third time since I took office, in November of
last year. During my two previous appearances (see
S/PV.6467 and S/PV.6494), I reported to the Council
on the achievements made by the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs), the challenges we face and the way
forward. I am delighted to continue that trend and to
once more provide the Council the latest updates on the
challenges we face at this critical time. However, I am
also here to listen to the constructive views of Security

11-33181

S/PV.6532

Council members on how we can make progress
beyond the transition phase, which ends in August.
As I mentioned in January and in March, my
Government’s five main priorities have been to
improve security, enhance reconciliation, complete the
transitional tasks — including the completion of our
constitutional process — address the humanitarian
crisis and promote good governance.
Let me begin by expressing once again my
heartfelt gratitude and sincere appreciation for the
ongoing support of the United Nations, the African
Union and the international community to Somalia. In
particular, we are exceptionally grateful to the young
men and women from Uganda and Burundi who make
up the African Union troops and who make the ultimate
sacrifice for the safety and security of the Somali
people. We salute and mourn those soldiers who have
died in Somalia. We extend our condolences to their
friends and families and assure them that their loss will
not be in vain. Our nation will be eternally grateful.
I am fully aware that the Secretary-General
recently reported to the Security Council on the key
developments in Somalia; however, let me share with
the Council recent developments in the area of security.
My Government continues to place the highest
priority on security. As a result, our troops and the
forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) are currently making tangible progress in
reclaiming significant territory from extremist groups
in Mogadishu. Our troops are currently making visible
progress in regions near the borders of Kenya and
Ethiopia. They are gradually recapturing key districts
and towns in the Gedo and Jubba regions. In addition,
the military offensive in the capital city has been
successful. The centrepiece was the taking of the
former Ministry of Defence from the extremists — a
strategic objective and one that will prove to be a
pivotal moment in this campaign. Ground is now being
taken at an increasing rate, especially around Bondere
and immediately south of the Bakara market, in
Howlwadag.
Together, the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) and AMISOM forces continue to push the
extremists further back each and every week. Such an
offensive must be properly sustained and logistically
supported, and we implore the international community
to step up its efforts in this area so that the gains can be
consolidated and sustained.

11-33181

We hope that the efforts of AMISOM forces in
Somalia will show the world that African countries can
solve their problems regionally. We are immensely
grateful for the leadership of the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi and we hope that other African
leaders will also contribute to the cause of bringing
peace and stability to Somalia.
Let me now update the Council on the political
developments in Somalia, as well as to once more say,
in no uncertain terms, that my Government is the
Council’s committed and credible partner in our efforts
to stabilize Somalia. As all members are aware, the
Transitional Federal Parliament has unilaterally
decided to extend its term for three years. The
Transitional Federal Government believes that the
Parliament rushed to its decision without proper
consultation among the other TFIs, particularly
considering that the transitional period for the TFIs it
to end by August. The international community has
also rejected the Parliament’s decision and raised both
the legitimacy and the political wisdom of the
legislature’s approach. From the TFG’s perspective, a
question of more practical importance is raised by the
juridical relationships that bind the Transitional
Federal Institutions to both the Transitional Federal
Charter and the 1960 Constitution. This has already
occasioned differences of opinion between the
Parliament and the executive branch of the
Government.
It is the opinion of my Government that under the
simul stabunt vel simul cadent principle, the
Transitional Federal Institutions shall cease to exist as
of August 2011. In other words, both institutions are
indissolubly
connected
from
a
constitutional
perspective. We would have wished to avoid the
current political crisis within the Transitional Federal
Institutions. It is true that my Government considers
the behaviour of the Parliament in extending its
mandate for an additional three years to be
unconstitutional. The legislature’s action is inconsistent
with, and in contravention of, the Transitional Federal
Charter and the 1960 Constitution. Both state that the
term of the Transitional Federal Parliament shall not be
extended and that any amendment with regard to the
term shall not have effect with the tenure of the current
legislature. My Government therefore believes that,
from the constitutional and legal perspectives, the
current Parliament does not have the constitutional
mandate to elect a new President of the Republic. A

5

S/PV.6532

post-August legally elected legislature will be the
legitimate Parliament to elect a President.
We believe that it is the responsibility of the
executive branch of the Government to coordinate
efforts to achieve inclusive pre- and post-transitional
arrangements, which we were in the process of
concluding. The President of Somalia, Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, has asked the Parliament to reconsider
its decision. The Speaker has so far rejected the
President’s proposal for a decision with regard to the
extension of Parliament’s tenure.
The most disturbing consequence of this situation
is the descent into political instability at precisely the
time when the security situation is on the verge of a
breakthrough and governance is making effective
strides forward. I and my Government believe that,
with such visible progress on the ground, this is the
worst possible time to be distracted by untenable
election processes and the divisive campaigning that
will inevitably take place. The TFG also believes that
the diversion of focus from governance and security to
election campaigning will provide the Al-Shabaab an
opportunity of which it will take full advantage. We
cannot offer these extremists such an open goal. It is
our people, especially our youth, who will suffer the
most.
Having considered the state of war envisioned in
article 68 of the 1960 Somali Constitution, the TFG has
discussed the issue at great length with all
stakeholders, and we have therefore proposed to the
Parliament and to our international partners to consider
extending the mandate of the transitional federal
institutions for an additional 12 months. The nation is
at war with internal and external extremist forces and
with the debilitating issue of piracy. The state of war
envisioned in article 68 clearly provides an
extraordinary legal mandate for the legislature and the
executive branch to collectively manage war efforts
with exceptional powers and thereby allow the recent
progress to take hold and develop.
We believe that a further 12 months of progress
in terms of political stability and security will create a
chance for real and fair elections. That is our ambition
and must surely be that of the Council as well. We
believe that this is in the wider interests of the Somali
people. The question is, how can the transitional
federal institutions secure legitimacy without
undermining the current progress with regard to

6

security, stability and war efforts? We believe that the
Security Council has a role to play by upholding
international legality. The Somali people and the
international community cannot accept an Act of
Parliament that is clearly in violation of the Somali
Constitution, that is, a unilateral extension of its
tenure.
In order to move forward, I have appointed a
ministerial committee, of which I am the Chair, and I
have requested that the Parliament meet with us in
order to settle our differences amicably and find an
acceptable and mutually agreed consensus on the way
forward. We are still hoping that the Parliament will
agree to a consultative meeting between the two
institutions. The TFG has always believed that the best
way to resolve our issues is to hold a dialogue among
Somalis, and we ask for the Council’s support in giving
us the space and time to reach our own political
settlement.
As all here are aware, the TFG did not participate
in the consultative meeting organized by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, in Nairobi last month. The TFG
greatly values the role of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the United Nations as a whole
and our key international partners. However, we
believe that consultative meetings should be held
inside Somalia and that Somalis should take the lead.
We simply wish our voice to be heard.
The TFG has long intended to hold a consultative
meeting among all our stakeholders in Mogadishu; it is
scheduled to take place from 11 to 16 June 2011. I am
very pleased to report that Mr. Mahiga has welcomed
this meeting and has agreed that the United Nations
will sponsor it. I have assigned a ministerial-level
committee to organize the meeting in consultation with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and all key stakeholders. We are very grateful for
Mr. Mahiga’s commitment and the excellent work he
has done to bring peace and stability to Somalia.
I would also like to report that support from the
Somali people is growing and that they are fully behind
these security successes. We are very grateful for this,
as this is the first time in decades that a Somali
Government has received such support from the
people. This is due to my Government’s steady efforts
in the areas of the delivery of services and good
governance. We also know that civil society groups are

11-33181

S/PV.6532

beginning to mobilize and gaining the confidence to
make their voices heard.
I would offer three tangible examples of
improved service delivery from the past two months.
My Government, with donor support and assistance
from AMISOM, has opened a new hospital, Martini
hospital. It has a total capacity of around 500 beds and
is already starting to treat and care for injured TFG
soldiers and civilians with a range of illnesses and
injuries.
My Government has taken over the running of a
school attached to the newly established Al-Jazzira
military training camp on the outskirts of Mogadishu.
Again, with AMISOM’s assistance, that school was
established for local children and those of soldiers in
training.
My Government has also established two other
schools in Mogadishu to care for orphans and those
whose parents are too poor to care for them
themselves. We have around 400 children who are
receiving food, shelter and elementary education.
The most exciting symbol of change, however, is
the emergence of private-property renovation and
property investment. It may for now be confined to the
road between Kilometre 4 and the airport, but a new,
five-floor hotel is being built and houses are being
repaired, windows restored and roadwork undertaken.
That is the surest sign of public confidence, as no
private individuals would spend their money if they
thought their efforts would turn to rubble. In addition,
as I previously reported to the Council, my
Government continues to provide service delivery to its
people, such as street-cleaning, road repair and street
lighting, as well as improving the justice system,
promoting human rights and giving a sense of hope to
our citizens. We have recently relaunched our first
national television station in 20 years and our national
newspaper, Dalka.
As I mentioned earlier, we are the first line of
defence against two evils: the scourge of piracy and the
plague of terrorism. We feel that the pressure and the
war against terrorism must be intensified until we have
eliminated all extremists from our soil. In the light of
the killing of Osama Bin Laden, my Government has
declared a state of high alert as a result of credible
information that Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab are planning
revenge attacks, which could endanger or kill innocent
people. On 7 May, an Al-Shabaab spokesperson

11-33181

confirmed that the group was planning revenge attacks
and stated that it would intensify its terrorist activities.
We need to defeat those aggressors at their source; that
will require strong political will, cooperation and
collaboration on our part, and resilient commitment
and support on the part of the international community.
We have to understand that the root cause and the
breeding ground of both terrorism and piracy is
lawlessness, coupled with poverty and unemployment.
As I have previously reported, the scourge of
piracy cannot be defeated on the high seas. The
solution is to bring back the rule of law on land in
Somalia. We are very grateful for the work carried out
by Jack Lang, the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Legal Issues related to Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, which has highlighted the urgent need to
establish an effective judicial capacity for piracy trials.
My Government believes that such courts should be in
Somalia. My Government strongly welcomes this
proposal and believes that, if the country has a strong
national Government with an effective coast guard
within a secure exclusive economic zone, we can help
to reduce or even stop piracy. The Transitional Federal
Government is grateful for the operations of the
European Union Naval Force and many other
international navies in our seas.
My Government has started to work with the
United Nations with regard to the stabilization and
reconstruction of new areas coming under the control
of the TFG, both in Mogadishu and in the regions. This
is very important and requires urgent support and
attention from the international community.
Another area in which we desperately need
assistance is disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We have witnessed a high number of
young people defecting from Al-Shabaab. We do not
have the resources to provide the array of facilities,
training and care necessary to help them recover,
resettle and rehabilitate their lives. The stories we are
hearing from those young people are shocking. Not
only commitment but leadership will be required from
the international community so that we can win the war
on terror, not only by force but also by educating our
young people and providing them with the hope that
they have long been waiting for.
In conclusion, we are gradually, but effectively,
winning the support of the Somali population. My
Government is determined to help our people, and I

7

S/PV.6532

can affirm our commitment to them and to the Council.
The interests of our nation and our people must come
first. We know that we, the Government, must work
tirelessly to meet the expectations of us and to lead by
example with transparent and effective governance.
Defeating extremists in Somalia requires the same
level of commitment as that of Afghanistan and Iraq.
We will do everything that it takes to regain our status
as a functioning State that protects its citizens, ends all
forms of international piracy and extremism, promotes
good governance, and produces a nation at peace with
itself and its neighbours.
I would like to conclude with the SecretaryGeneral’s comments on Somalia in his recent report:
“The international community must keep its end
of the bargain. The Transitional Federal
Government urgently needs assistance for
Mogadishu’s
stabilization,
recovery
and
reconstruction. If we reinforce the military gains,
provide humanitarian relief and achieve political
progress, we can set Somalia on course to greater
stability and peace. If we fail, we risk a growing
humanitarian crisis, a deteriorating security
situation and a worsening threat to regional peace
and stability.” (S/2011/277, para. 109)
The President (spoke in French): I thank Prime
Minister Mohamed for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Ethiopia.
Mr. Nega (Ethiopia): On behalf of the States
members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on Somalia.
We are pleased by the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of
Somalia. We would also like to express our
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his
continuous efforts to promote peace in Somalia. We
wish to acknowledge the excellent working
relationship among the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), IGAD and the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia.
First, the present situation can be described in
terms of a few points, some of which have existed for
some time, while others are, in effect, recent. To start

8

with recent developments, which are essentially happy
ones, the progress made in the security area over the
past week, if used properly and with a sense of purpose
and determination, has the potential to change the
whole political landscape in Somalia or, at least, to
provide the foundation for such a change. Accordingly,
what has been achieved in the security domain in
recent weeks and the series of defeats suffered by
Al-Shabaab must not be understated. The gains made
should be preserved and built upon, including because
great sacrifices have been made to achieve what has
been gained. That also involves ensuring that whatever
is done in other areas does not cause a loss of
momentum in the security field. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/277) underlines such
progress. We endorse everything that the report affirms
in that regard.
The second development in Somalia relates to the
humanitarian tragedy in the country, which has been
worsening recently, making that a matter of the highest
priority for the TFG and the international community.
The activities of the TFG in that area and to be seen to
be active in addressing the tragedy will no doubt
contribute to enhancing the credibility of the TFG in
the eyes of the Somali people.
The third point that needs to be highlighted is the
fact that the political situation in the country does not
show much change. Relations among senior politicians
have once again become a source of serious concern.
For some reason, the squabble among officials of the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) worsens, by
coincidence or otherwise, whenever the security
situation shows a major improvement. Obviously, one
reason might be that, with the prospect of a more stable
and better security situation, holding office becomes
far more attractive and, thus, competition is literally
ratcheted up. The lesson here is that whatever is done
to improve or to change the political landscape should
not jeopardize what has been gained in the security
area.
The other major factor that defines the situation
in Somalia at this juncture is the fact that the end of the
transition period is fast approaching. There are only
three months left before the transition is completed.
What makes the issue so vital now is that the transition
is coming to an end before the major tasks that were
supposed to be handled during that period have been
carried out. In that regard, the TFIs and their
authorities have been found greatly wanting. Indeed,

11-33181

S/PV.6532

whatever differences there might be on this point, there
is a consensus among the friends of Somalia on the
ways and means of addressing it.
What has made the issue all the more critical is
that it has not only become a source of much
misunderstanding among the TFI authorities, but also
further undermined the international community’s
confidence in the TFI authorities. The situation has
been exacerbated by Parliament’s decision to extend its
mandate for three years beyond the transition period.
While the concerns of the international
community in that regard are legitimate, it is
nonetheless obvious that allowing the transition to end
without putting in place mechanisms to ensure the
preservation of the foundation of the Djibouti
Agreement would be potentially dangerous and, in fact,
inadvertently a major reward, including for
Al-Shabaab. That explains why IGAD, and
subsequently the African Union, proposed the
extension of the mandate, although not for three years.
Even if an election has become unavoidable, it should
be handled in such a way as not to undermine the gains
made in the security area.
What to do is now the question faced by the TFIs
authorities and their partners at the subregional,
regional and international levels. At this point, perhaps
what is critical is not to jump the gun. The situation in
Somalia is very delicate. Much has been gained in the
security area, and since such progress has major
positive implications for the fight against international
and regional terrorist networks, it should not be
allowed to be reversed. One recalls the situation only a
few months ago when the terrorists were literally
knocking at the doors of Villa Somalia. The current
progress should be used to bring the threats posed by
such dangerous elements to the region and the wider
world to a definitive end.
Moreover, it is very clear that focusing only on
the weakness of the Somali authorities might not be all
that fair. Furthermore, that approach might not serve
our common objectives. In that regard, the SecretaryGeneral is right in believing that more help in the
security area is needed for AMISOM to enhance its
capacity and in terms of the provision of reliable and
predictable support for the TFG in a whole range of
areas.
Regarding how to proceed, what can be stressed
at this point is the need for serious consultation with a

11-33181

view to making use of the current progress in the
security area to sort out Somalia’s political problem.
This must be done brick by brick, for nothing can be
done in Somalia in one fell swoop. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General highlighted,
Somali ownership of the process is the best approach
and, ultimately, the most rewarding. IGAD is always
ready to collaborate with the international community
and will remain committed to peace and stability in
Somalia.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Ethiopia for his statement.
I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council —
I give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Before the Council adopts the presidential
statement, I should like to propose that members
engage in consultations.
The President (spoke in French): Ambassador, I
understood that your delegation was in agreement with
the presidential statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Sir, you are absolutely right, but we have
listened to three very important statements. It seems to
me that it may be useful to discuss those statements
before the Council gives its final endorsement to the
text.
The President (spoke in French): I therefore
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting was suspended at 11.05 a.m. and
resumed at 1.30 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): After
consultations among Council members, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern at the continued instability in Somalia
which has led to a multitude of problems,
including terrorism, acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, hostagetaking and a dire humanitarian situation, and
reiterates the need for a comprehensive strategy

9

S/PV.6532

to encourage the establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia through the collaborative
efforts of all stakeholders.
“The Security Council reiterates its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. It reaffirms
its support for the Djibouti Agreement and peace
process as the basis for the resolution of the
conflict in Somalia. It reiterates the importance of
political outreach and reconciliation in Somalia
and stresses the importance of broad-based,
representative institutions reached through a
political process ultimately inclusive of all.
“The Security Council expresses its support
for the work of Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations and the African Union to promote
peace and reconciliation in Somalia.
“The Security Council notes that the
transitional period will end in August 2011. It
commends the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to facilitate the
consultative process among Somalis in their
efforts to reach an agreement on post-transitional
arrangements,
in
consultation
with
the
international community and within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement. In this
regard, it welcomes the high-level consultative
meeting held in Nairobi on 12 and 13 April 2011.
The Security Council welcomes the participation
of a wide range of Somali stakeholders and
partners. It deeply regrets the failure of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
participate in this consultative meeting and urges
the TFG to engage fully, constructively and
without further delay in the consultative process
facilitated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to support his efforts to
move the peace process forward.
“The Security Council welcomes the
upcoming consultative meeting to be held in
Mogadishu, which will further the debate
generated at the high-level consultative meeting
in Nairobi. The Council urges all Somali
stakeholders to participate in this meeting and to
play a role in finalizing arrangements for ending
the transition in August 2011. It calls upon the
international community, the United Nations and

10

international organizations to fully support this
meeting.
“The Security Council reiterates the primary
responsibility of Somalis to achieve peace,
security and reconciliation in Somalia. It regrets
the decisions taken by the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) to extend their mandates
unilaterally and urges them to refrain from further
unilateral action. The Security Council urges the
TFIs to focus on implementing reforms to build
their
legitimacy,
representativeness
and
credibility and to reach agreement as soon as
possible on the holding of elections for the
positions of President and Speaker of Parliament,
without which there can be no extension.
“The Security Council expresses concern at
the discord between the TFIs and its impact on
the political process and the security situation. It
calls upon the TFIs to ensure cohesion, unite and
focus on the completion of the transitional tasks
set out by the Djibouti Agreement and the
Transitional Charter. It stresses the importance of
cooperation and collective leadership by the
President and Speaker.
“The Security Council notes with concern
that many core transitional tasks remain
outstanding and urges the TFIs to demonstrate
tangible results on the completion of these tasks
before the end of the transition, prioritizing
progress on reconciliation, the Constitution and
facilitating the delivery of basic services. It notes
its intention to keep the situation under review
and notes that its future support to the TFIs will
be contingent upon the delivery of tangible
results.
“The Security Council strongly commends
the progress made by the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali security
forces in consolidating security and stability in
Mogadishu, and recognizes the significant
sacrifices made by these forces. It calls on the
TFG to take advantage of these tactical gains by
demonstrating progress on facilitating the
delivery of basic services, the integration of
military objectives into a clear political strategy
in line with the Djibouti Agreement, and all the
other benchmarks spelled out in paragraph 3 of
resolution 1964 (2010). It calls for an increased

11-33181

S/PV.6532

United Nations presence in Mogadishu and other
parts of Somalia and calls on the United Nations
to work in a coordinated manner.
“The Security Council reiterates its full
support to AMISOM and expresses its continued
appreciation for the commitment of troops by the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda. It stresses
the importance of predictable, reliable and timely
resources for AMISOM in order for it to better
fulfil its mandate. The Security Council calls
upon the international community to make
contributions urgently to AMISOM, without
caveats. It notes the recommendations on Somalia
of the African Union Peace and Security Council
of 15 October 2010 and underlines its intension
to keep the situation under review.

11-33181

“The Security Council calls upon all States,
particularly in the region, to fully implement the
Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes. The
Security Council condemns attacks, including
terrorist attacks, on the TFG, AMISOM and the
civilian population by armed opposition groups
and foreign fighters, particularly Al-Shabaab. It
calls upon all opposition groups to lay down their
arms and join the peace process.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/10.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

11
