A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/25
10 December 1993

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 43
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.23/Rev.1)]
48/25.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, 1/
Recalling the agreement of 15 November 1965 on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity as updated and signed on
9 October 1990 by the Secretaries-General of the two organizations,
Recalling also its resolutions on the enhancement of cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, in particular
resolutions 43/12 of 25 October 1988, 43/27 of 18 November 1988, 44/17 of
1 November 1989, 45/13 of 7 November 1990, 46/20 of 26 November 1991 and
47/148 of 18 December 1992,
Recalling further that in its resolutions 46/20 and 47/148 it,
inter alia, urged the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the relevant
agencies of the United Nations system to extend their support for the
establishment of an African economic community,
Taking note of the resolutions, decisions and declarations on
democratization, conflict resolution and economic integration adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its fifty-eighth

____________
1/

A/48/475 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/48/25
Page 2

ordinary session, held at Cairo from 21 to 26 June 1993, 2/ and by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of that organization at its twentyninth ordinary session, held at Cairo from 28 to 30 June 1993, 3/
Considering the important statement made by the representative of the
current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity before the General Assembly on
28 September 1993, 4/
Mindful of the need for continued and closer cooperation between the
United Nations and the specialized agencies and the Organization of African
Unity, in particular in the political, economic, social, technical, cultural
and administrative fields,
Noting the establishment by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in June 1993 of a mechanism
for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in Africa, 5/
Also noting the efforts of the Organization of African Unity, and the
support and assistance of the United Nations, to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflicts in Africa and the harmonious continuation
of the process of democratization,
Deeply concerned that, despite the policies of reform being implemented
by most African countries, their economic situation remains critical and
African recovery and development continue to be severely hindered by the
persistence of lower level commodity prices, the heavy debt burden and the
paucity of funding possibilities, as well as by the effects of the devastating
drought affecting certain regions of the continent,
Aware of the efforts under way by the Organization of African Unity and
its member States in the area of economic integration and, in particular, of
the adoption by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of that
organization on 3 June 1991 at Abuja of the Treaty establishing the African
Economic Community,
Deeply concerned also about the gravity of the situation of refugees and
displaced persons in Africa and the urgent need for increased international
assistance to help refugees and, subsequently, African countries of asylum,
Acknowledging the assistance already rendered by the international
community, particularly to refugees, displaced persons and African countries
of asylum,

____________
2/

See A/48/322, annex I.

3/

Ibid., annex II.

4/

See A/48/PV.7.

5/

See A/48/322, annex II, declaration AHG/Decl.3 (XXIX)/Rev.1.

/...

A/RES/48/25
Page 3

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the meeting
between the representatives of the secretariats of the United Nations system
and the General Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity, held at
United Nations Headquarters from 8 to 10 September 1993, 6/
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity 1/ and of his
efforts to strengthen that cooperation and to implement the relevant
resolutions;
2.
Takes note also of the conclusions contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the meeting between the representatives of the
secretariats of the United Nations system and the General Secretariat of the
Organization of African Unity, held at United Nations Headquarters from 8 to
10 September 1993; 6/
3.
Notes with appreciation the increasing and continued participation
of the Organization of African Unity in the work of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
4.
Calls upon the United Nations organs, in particular the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, to continue to involve the
Organization of African Unity closely in all their activities concerning
Africa;
5.
Commends the establishment by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in June 1993 of a mechanism
for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in Africa;
6.
Commends the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
for their ongoing cooperative activities in the resolution of conflicts in
Africa, and stresses the need to enhance and strengthen the existing pattern
of exchange of information and consultations, especially in the area of
monitoring and early warning of conflict situations;
7.
Calls upon the United Nations to coordinate its efforts and to
cooperate with the Organization of African Unity in the context of the pacific
settlement of disputes and the maintenance of international peace and security
in Africa, as provided for under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations;
8.
Notes with appreciation the assistance provided by the United
Nations and its agencies to African countries in the context of the
democratization process;
9.
Urges the United Nations and its Member States to continue to
provide assistance, as appropriate, to the Organization of African Unity,
should the latter decide to launch a peace-keeping operation;

____________
6/

A/48/475/Add.1.

/...

A/RES/48/25
Page 4

10.
Urges the United Nations to continue to support the Organization
of African Unity in its efforts to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflicts and peacefully to manage change in Africa;
11.
Urges all Member States and regional and international
organizations, in particular those of the United Nations system, as well as
non-governmental organizations, to provide the necessary and appropriate
economic, financial and technical assistance to refugees and displaced
persons, as well as to African countries of asylum, taking into account recent
disquieting developments in this respect;
12.
Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African
Unity to promote multilateral cooperation and economic integration among
African States, and requests United Nations agencies to continue to support
those efforts;
13.
Stresses that the economic, technical and development assistance
provided to Africa by the organizations of the United Nations system must
continue, and emphasizes the current need for those organizations to accord
priority to Africa in this field;
14.
Urges the Secretary-General and Member States, regional and
international organizations, non-governmental organizations and relevant
agencies of the United Nations system to extend their support to the
establishment of the African Economic Community and to assist in economic
integration and cooperation;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to support the efforts
of the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity with a view to
holding sectoral meetings on the priority areas of cooperation, particularly
the establishment of the African Economic Community and the strengthening of
the African regional and subregional organizations;
16.
Requests the agencies of the United Nations system working in
Africa to include in their programme at the national and regional levels the
activities which will enhance regional cooperation in their respective areas
and to facilitate the realization of the objectives of the Treaty establishing
the African Economic Community;
17.
Calls upon United Nations agencies to make an effort to coordinate
their regional programmes in Africa in order to create inter-linkages among
them and to ensure harmonization of their programmes with those of the African
regional and subregional economic organizations;
18.
Emphasizes the urgency of the need to adopt appropriate measures
to ensure the implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s, 7/ in particular in the areas of resource
flows, debt relief and diversification of African economies;
19.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to work in close coordination and
cooperation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
__________
7/

Resolution 46/151, annex, sect. II.
/...

A/RES/48/25
Page 5

in particular on follow-up to review and evaluate the implementation of the
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s;
20.
Endorses the agreement reached between the organizations of the
United Nations system and the Organization of African Unity on the convening
of a meeting between the secretariats of those organizations, to be held in
1994 at Addis Ababa, to review and evaluate the progress made in implementing
the proposals and recommendations agreed upon in September 1993 on cooperation
between them in 1993-1994 and to adopt new and effective joint action;
21.
Calls upon the relevant organs of the United Nations to ensure the
effective, fair and equitable representation of Africa at senior and policy
levels at their respective headquarters and in their regional field
operations;
22.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the
United Nations information network continues to disseminate information so as
to increase public awareness of the situation prevailing in southern Africa,
as well as of the social and economic problems and needs of African States and
of their regional and subregional institutions;
23.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-ninth session on the implementation of the present
resolution and on the development of cooperation between the Organization of
African Unity and organizations of the United Nations system.
65th plenary meeting
29 November 1993
