S/PRST/2005/26

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 June 2005
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5212th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 June 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Lebanese parliamentary elections
held between 29 May and 19 June 2005. It commends the fair and credible
character of the vote and pays tribute to the Lebanese people who
demonstrated, throughout the process, their strong commitment to democracy,
freedom and independence.
“The Security Council congratulates the newly elected members of the
Lebanese Parliament.
“The Security Council commends the Lebanese Government for the
successful conduct of the elections, in accordance with the constitution and the
planned schedule. It expresses its appreciation for the advice and technical
support given to the Lebanese authorities by the UN Electoral Assistance
Division. The Security Council also pays tribute to the crucial contribution of
the international observers, notably from the European Union. In this regard, it
welcomes the report of the EU observer mission and its conclusions regarding
the satisfactory conduct of the four electoral stages.
“The Security Council looks forward to the formation of a new
government in the near future. It stresses that the establishment of this
government in accordance with the constitutional rules and without any
foreign interference would be another sign of the political independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the Lebanese people must be
allowed to decide the future of their country free of violence and intimidation.
It strongly condemns, in this context, the recent terrorist acts in Lebanon, in
particular the heinous assassination of former leader of the Communist Party
George Hawi, and calls for their perpetrators to be brought to justice.
“The Security Council reaffirms its profound commitment to a stable,
secure and prosperous Lebanon. It underlines accordingly the need for the
newly elected Lebanese authorities to exercise their full sovereignty over the
entire territory, to preserve unity through national dialogue, to strengthen

05-39544 (E) 220605

*0539544*

S/PRST/2005/26

nation’s institutions and to respect the principles of good governance, in the
sole interest of the Lebanese people.
“The Security Council calls upon the international community to stand
ready to examine possible requests from the newly elected Lebanese
authorities for enhanced assistance and cooperation, in support of a credible
governmental program of political and economic reform.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the full implementation of all
requirements of Resolution 1559 (2004) and urges all concerned parties to
cooperate fully with the Security Council and the Secretary General to achieve
this goal.
“The Security Council also calls for the full implementation of
Resolution 1595 (2005) and looks forward to the cooperation of the newly
elected Lebanese authorities in this regard.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong support for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized borders and under the sole and exclusive authority
of the Government of Lebanon.”

2
