16

General Anembly-Twenty-ninth Session

for the promotion of international co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space, including the practica,l
applications of space technology;
30. Request., the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue, as appropriate, to provide the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space with progress reports on their
work relating to the peaceful uses of outer space and
to examine-and report thereon to the Committeethe particular problems that may arise from the use
of outer space in the fields within their competence
and that should, in their opinion, be brought to the
attention of the Committee;
31. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present and previous resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at its thirtieth
session.
2280th plenary meeting
12 November 1974
3235 (XXIX). Convention on Registration of
Objects Launched into Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Rea/firming the importance of international co-operation in the field of the exploration and peaceful uses
of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, and of promoting the rule of law in this new
field of human endeavour,
Desiring, in the light of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration
and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies,10 the Agreement on the Rescue of
Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return
of Objects Launched into Outer Space11 and the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused
by Space Objects, 12 to make provision for registration
by launching States of space objects launched into outer
space with a view, inter alia, to providin; States with
additional means and procedures to assist m the identification of space objects,
Bearing in mind its resolution 3182 (XXVIII) of
18 December 1973, in which it requested the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to consider
as a matter of priority the completion of the text of the
draft Convention on Registration of Objects Launched
into Outer Space,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peacdul Uses of Outer Space, 11
Noting with satisfaction that the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Legal Sub-Committee have completed the text of the draft Convention
on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space,
1. Commends the Convention on Registration of
Objects Launched into Outer Space, the text of which
is annexed to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to open the Convention for signature and ratification at the earliest
possible date;
1 0 Resolution

2222 (XXI), annex.
11 Resolution 2345 (XXII), annex.
12 Resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex.
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/9620).

3. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to this Convention.
2280th plenary meeting
12 November 1974
ANNEX
Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into
Outer Space

The States Parties to this Convention,
Recognizing the common interest of all mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Recalling that the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies of 27 January
196 7 affirms that States shall bear international responsibility
for their national activities in outer space and refers to the
State on whose registry an object launched into outer space
is carried,
Recalling also that the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects
Launched into Outer Space of 22 April 1968 provides that a
launching authority shall, upon request, furnish identifying data
prior to the return of an object it has launched into outer
space found beyond the territorial limits of the launching
authority,
Recalling further that the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects of 29 March 1972
establishes international rules and procedures concerning the
liability of launching States for damage caused by their space
objects,
Desiring, in the light of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodits, to make
provi~ion for the national registration by launching States of
space objects launched into outer space,
Desiring further that a central register of objects launched
into outer space be established and maintained, on a mandatory basis, by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Desiring also to provide for States Parties additional means
and procedures to assist in the identification of space objects,
Believing that a mandatory system of registering objects
launched into outer space would, in particular, assist in their
identification and would contribute to the application and devel•
opment of international law governing the exploration and use
of outer space,
Have agreed on the following:
ARTICLE I

For the purposes of this Convention:
(a) The term "launching State" means:
(i) A State which launches or procures the launching of a
space object;
(ii) A State from whose territory or facilit_y a space object
is launched;
(b) The term "space object" includes component parts of a
space object as well as its launch vehicle and parts thereof;
(c) The term "State of registry" means a launching State on
whose registry a space object is carried in accordance with
article II.
ARTICLE II

1. When a space object is launched into earth orbit or beyond, the launching State shall register the space object by
means of an entry in an appropriate registry which it shall
maintain. Each launching State shall inform the SecretaryGeneral cf the United Nations of the establishment of such
a registry.

l'7

Resolutions adopted on the reporlll of the Firat Committee

;z. Where there are two or more launching States in respect
of any such space object, they shall jointly determine which
one of them shall register the object in accordance with para-

araph 1 of this article, bearing in mind the provisions of
article VIU of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, and without
prejudice to appropriate agreements concluded or to be concluded among the launching States on jurisdiction and control
over the space object and over any personnel thereof.
3. The contents of each registry and the conditions under
which it is maintained shall be determined by the State of

registry concerned.
ARTICLE III

1. 1be Secretary-General of the United Nations shall maintain a Register in which the information furnished in accordance with article IV shall be recorded.

2. lbere shall be full and open access to the information
in this Register.
ARTICLE IV

1. Each State of registry shall furnish to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, as soon as practicable, the following information concerning each space object carried on
its registry:
(a) Name of launching State or States;
(b) An appropriate designator of the space object or its
registration number;
(c) Date and territory or location of launch;
(d) Basic orbital parameters, including:
(i) Nodal period,
(ii) Inclination,
(iii) Apogee,
(iv) Perigee;

(e) General function of the space object.
2. Each State of registry may, from time to time, provide
the Secretary-General of the United Nations with additional
information concerning a space object carried on its registry.
3. Each State of registry shall notify the Secretary-General
of tho United Nations, to the greatest extent feasible and as
soon as practicable, of space objects concerning which it has
previously transmitted information, and which have been but
no longer are in earth orbit.
ARTICLE V

Whenever a space object launched into earth orbit or beyond
is marked with the designator or registration number referred
to in article IV, paragraph 1 ( b), or both, the State of registry shall notify the Secretary-General of this fact when

submitting the information regarding the space object in accordance with article IV. In such case, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations shall record this notification in the Register.
ARTICLE

VI

Where the application of the provisions of this Convention
bas not enabled a State Party to identify a space object which
has caused damage to it or to any of its natural or juridical
persons, or which may be of a hazardous or deleterious nature,
other States Parties, including in particular States possessing
space monitoring and tracking facilities, shall respond to the
greatest extent feasible to a request by that State Party, or
transmitted through the Secretary-General on its behalf, for
assistance under equitable and reasonable conditions in the
identification of the object. A State Party making such a request shall, to the greatest extent feasible, submit information
as to the time, nature and circumstances of the events giving
rise to the request. Arrangements under which such assistance
shall be rendered shall be the subject of agreement between
the parties concerned.

ARTICLE VII

1. In this Convention, with the exception of articles VIII
to XII inclusive, references to States shall be deemed to apply
to any international intergovernmental organization which
conducts space activities if the organization declares its accept•
anco of the rights and obligations provided for in this Convention and if a majority of the States members of the organization are States Parties to this Convention &.nd to the Treaty
on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies.

2. States members of any such organization which are
States Parties to this Convention shall take all appropriate
steps to ensure that the organization makes a declaration in
accordance with paragraph I of ,this article.
ARTICLE

VIII

1. This Convention shall be open for signature by all States
at United Nations Headquarters in New York. Any State
which does not sign this Convention before its entry into
force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.

2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory States. Instruments of ratification and instruments of
accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
3. This Convention shall enter into force among the States
which have deposited instruments of ratification on the deposit
of the fifth such instrument with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
4. For States whose instrument& of ratification or accession are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this
Convention, it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit
of their instruments of ratification or accession.
S. The Secretary-General shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature, the
date of deposit of each instrument of ratification of and accession to this Convention, the date of its entry into force and
other notices.
ARTICLE

IX

Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to the Convention. Amendments shall enter into force
for each State Party to the Convention accepting the amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties
to the Convention and thereafter for each remaining State
Party to the Convention on the date of acceptance by it.
ARTICLE X

Ten years after the entry into force of this Convention, the
question of the review of the Convention shall be included
in the provisional agenda of the United Nations General
Assembly in order to consider, in the light of past application
of the Convention, whether it requires revision. However, -at
any time after the Convention has been in force for five years,
at the request of one third of the States Parties to the Convention and with the concurrence of the majority of the States
Parties, a conference of the States Parties shall be convened
to review this Convention. Such review shall take into account
in particular any relevant technological developments, including those relating to the identification of space objects.
ARTICLE XI

Any State Party to this Convention may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Convention one year after its entry into
force by written notification to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. Such withdrawal shall take effect one year
from the date of receipt of this notification.

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

18
AllTICLE

Xll

The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic,
Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are
equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall send certified copies
thereof to all signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this
Convention, opened for signature at New York on 14 January 197S.

3254 (XXIX). Reduction of the military budgets
of States l>ermanent members of the Security
Council by 10 per cent and utilization of part
of the funds thus saved to provide assistance
to developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 3093 B (XXVIII)
of 7 December 1973 it requested the Secretary-General to prepare, with the assistance of qualified consultant experts appointed by him, a report on the reduction of the military budgets of the States permanent
members of the Security Council, which should also
cover other States with a major economic and military
potential, and on the utilization of a part of the funds
thus saved to provide international assistance to developing countries,
Having examined the report of the Group of Consultant Experts on the Reduction of Military Budgets,
transmitted to the General Assembly by the SecretaryGeneral on 14 October 1974, 14
Noting that Governments have not had the time necessary to study that report with the attention and care
which the important and complex questions covered in
it merit,
Considering, therefore, that it would be advisable to
postpone any assessment by the General Assembly regarding the substance of those questions,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and to the Group of Consultant Experts, as well
as to the Governments and international organizations
which rendered assistance in the preparation of the
report requested by the General Assembly in resolution
3093 B (XXVIII);
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the report to be issued as a
United Nations publication and widely distributed;
3. Invites all States to communicate to the Secretary-General, before 30 June 1975, their views and
suggestions on all those points they deem pertinent with
regard to the matters covered in the report, including
the following:
(a) Meaning and scope of a definition of "military
budgets" which has the greatest probability of receiving
general acceptance;
( b) Feasible and adequate procedures so that the
United Nations may establish a system of standardized
military budgets of the States envisaged in resolution
3093 B (XXVJII);
(c) Per cent reauction advisable for the States permanent members of the Security Council, bearing in
mind that ~ 10 per cent reduction has been proposed;
H A/9770.

(d) Definition of what should be understood by
"other States with a major economic and military
potential";
( e) Per cent reduction advisable for those States;
(/) Part of the resources released through the reduction of military budgets which should be allotted to
international assistance for developing countries;
(g) International system or mechanism, within the
framework of the United Nations, which should be
employed in order to achieve the best distribution and
utilization of the additional assistance allotted to the
developing countries, taking into account the goals set
for the Second United Nations Development Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute as
a document of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, not later than 1 August I 975, a report containing a compilation, by countries, of the views and suggestions requested in the present resolution and a
tabulation of the same according to the matters covered
therein, particularly regarding the seven points specified in paragraph 3 above;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Implementation of
General Assembly resolution 3254 (XXIX): report
of the Secretary-General".
2 309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3255 (XXIX). Napalm and other incendiary
weapons and all aspects of their possible
use

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in resolution 2932 A (XXVII) of
29 November 1972, it welcomed the report of the
Secretary-General entitled Napalm and Other Incendiary
Weapons and All Aspects of Their Possible Use 15 and
e:v'.)ressed its conviction that the widespread use of
111any weapons and the emergence of new methods of
warfare that cause unnecessary suffering or are indiscriminate call urgently for renewed efforts by Governments to seek, through legal means, the prohibition of
the use of such weapons and of indiscriminate and cruel
methods of warfare and, if possible through measures
of disarmament, the elimination of specific, especially
cruel or indiscriminate weapons,
Recalling that, in resolution 3076 (XXVIII) of
6 December 1973, it took note of the comments submitted by Governments 11 ; on the abow-mentioned report
of the Secretary-General and of the widcspr~ad wish
that intergovernmental action should be taken with a
view to reaching agreement on the prvhibition or restriction of use of these weapons,
Recalling further that by the same resolution the
General Assembly pointed to the extensiye factual
report prepared under the auspices of the International
Committee of the Rt:d Cross entitled Weapons That
May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or Have Indiscriminate Effects, 17 covering, inter alia, high-velocity projectiles, blast and fragmentation weapons, time-delay
weapons and incendiary weapons, and endorsed the
Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.1.3.
A/9207 and Corr.1 and Add. I.
17 International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, 1973.

15 United
1G
