S/PV.8004

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8004th meeting

Monday, 17 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Melki
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Kyslytsa
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299 (2016) ( S/2017/592)
Fifteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/596)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-21595 (E)
*1721595*

S/PV.8004

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

population. By adopting a humanitarian concept of
operations, they reduced civilian losses and suffering.
They also showed a readiness to hold themselves and
others accountable for any violations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2299 (2016) (S/2017/592)
Fifteenth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2017/596)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/592, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2299 (2016),
and document S/2017/596, which contains the fifteenth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: On 10 July, Prime Minister Al-Abadi
announced the liberation of Mosul, attributing that
victory to the Iraqi security forces’ planning and
execution as the only fighting force present on the
ground. Praising the Iraqi security forces, including the
popular mobilization forces, as well as the Peshmerga
and tribal and local volunteers, he also thanked all the
countries that supported Iraq in the war on terrorism.
Our prayers and thoughts go to all those killed and
wounded, military and civilians both, and to their loved
ones. It is critical that the families of the martyrs and
wounded receive the necessary support.
Per Prime Minister Al-Abadi’s directives, the
liberation operation was marked by an exceptional
effort on the part of the liberation forces and their
international partners to save and protect the civilian
2/9

17/07/2017

In stark contrast, Da’esh terrorists have shown
absolute disregard for human lives and civilization. They
booby-trapped and destroyed houses and infrastructure
as well as religious and cultural monuments, including
the iconic monument of Islamic civilization, the
Great Al-Nuri mosque and its Al-Hadba minaret.
They deliberately targeted civilians, indiscriminately
shelling them in the liberated areas, using them as
human shields, locking them in their homes and using
rooftop snipers to kill people — women, children and
men — attempting to flee to safety. They butchered
them by using suicide bombers, who included females
and brainwashed children, including in camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs).
The fighting in Mosul has also claimed the lives
of numerous local and international journalists. Their
sacrifices have not been in vain; free and impartial
media are essential to safeguard the public interest
and to ensure the necessary degree of transparency
and accountability. Here I wish also to acknowledge
the access that the Iraqi authorities, including those of
the Kurdistan region, provided for both national and
international media during the Mosul campaign.
The historic liberation of Mosul should not
overshadow the fact that the road ahead is extremely
challenging. Reclaiming the remaining territories still
under Da’esh control in other parts of Ninawa and
Anbar governorates; in Hawijah, Kirkuk governorate;
and in pockets in other governorates will not be easy.
Moreover, Da’esh supporters continue their vicious
terrorist activities against civilians in Iraq and beyond.
Hand in hand with liberation comes demining,
stabilization and reconstruction so as to enable the
return of IDPs as well as the elimination of Da’esh
cells, criminal gangs and militias operating outside of
the control of the Government. The enforcement of law
and order, the rule of law, justice and accountability,
as well as reforms, good governance and development,
including in the southern provinces, is also crucial.
To turn the gains of the military victory into stability,
security, justice and development, the Government
will have to do everything possible to give the people
back their lives in security and dignity. To achieve
that, Iraq will continue to need substantial regional and
17-21595

17/07/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

international support. Victory cannot be achieved by
just supporting the military campaign.
It is encouraging that the recent regional tour of
Prime Minister Al Abadi in June to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Kuwait
confirmed the willingness of those countries to
continue and enhance their support. I pay tribute to all
Iraq’s partners, including those from the international
anti-Da’esh coalition, and urge them to continue
to stand with Iraq and its people and to continue
providing support.
Da’esh’s ultimate defeat can be secured only through
inclusive solutions and by addressing the grievances,
needs and aspirations of the Iraqi people. A national
settlement and societal reconciliation are indispensable
parts of a broader comprehensive effort towards
achieving long-term unity, stability and prosperity.
I applaud the guidance of the Marja’iya religious
authorities who, in their victory sermons, stressed
that Iraqis need to learn from what happened in the
years before Da’esh and remedy the long-standing
problems. Furthermore, they stated that using violence,
oppression and sectarianism as a means to an end only
causes destruction and leaves the country vulnerable to
interference by regional and international actors, where
there is no winner and Iraq is first among the losers;
that all those in positions of power and Government
have to work according to a principle that sees all
citizens as equal in their rights and duties regardless
of religion, sect, ethnicity or nationality. Were that
approach implemented strictly, it would restore the
people’s trust in the Government and its institutions.
The Marja’iya’s statements also mentioned the need to
combat financial and administrative corruption, and
sect- and party-linked quotas, and to ensure standards
of competence and professionalism in the appointment
of Government officials.
The United Nations is committed to further
facilitating processes of national settlement and
grassroots societal reconciliation, in full coordination
with the Government of Iraq and in cooperation with
all Iraqi stakeholders, including women and youth, to
address the concerns of all components, communities,
groups and citizens in a manner that is just and fair.
At a meeting, on 7 June, of political parties in
the Kurdistan region of Iraq, chaired by President
Barzani, a decision was made to hold a referendum
on 25 September with the question: “Do you want the

S/PV. 8004

Kurdistan region and the Kurdistani disputed areas
outside the administration of the Kurdistan region to
become an independent state?” On 11 July, President
Barzani reiterated, during his address to the European
Parliament in Brussels, the determination to hold the
referendum as planned, while maintaining that no
country had clearly opposed it.
Such an important issue ought not to be pursued
without a common understanding between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
In line with the recommendations of Secretary-General
Guterres, I urge both parties to enter into negotiations
without further delay, in the spirit of genuine
partnership and based on the Constitution, to urgently
find common ground and a road map to address this
and other critical topics, notably the implementation of
article 140 of the Constitution, on disputed territories,
including the status of Kirkuk, budgetary issues, oil
and revenue sharing, and other areas and principles that
determine the relations between the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government. The absence
of meaningful political dialogue and negotiations
could turn a conflict of interests into a different kind
of conflict.
Complex electoral processes loom in Iraq,
including in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, this and
next year. On 21 June, the Independent High Electoral
Commission informed that it will not be able to conduct
the governorate council elections as scheduled on
16 September. It is of primary importance that all the
necessary measures be taken to ensure, first, that the
Council of Representatives elections be held at the
latest in May 2018, as required by the Constitution,
and, secondly, that the governorate council elections
be rescheduled.
The cumulative number of people displaced since
military operations began in October is now nearing
1 million individuals, although the rate at which people
are fleeing the fighting has slowed in recent weeks.
Under the United Nations Development Programme
Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization, by July
2017 more than 1,050 projects were under way or had
been completed in 23 liberated towns and districts
in Anbar, Ninewa, Salah al-Din, Diyala and Kirkuk
governorates. Now that Mosul has been fully liberated,
the scope of projects there will increase exponentially.
Of particular concern is the rising popular
sentiment in favour of collective punishment of families

17-215953/9

S/PV.8004

The situation concerning Iraq

perceived to be associated with Da’esh. Countrywide,
Iraqis perceived to have links with Da’esh are being
increasingly subjected to evictions, the confiscation of
homes, and other retribution and revenge measures. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
has recommended that the Prime Minister take urgent
steps, within his prerogative, to maintain the rule of
law and order and halt evictions and vindictive acts.
UNAMI has prioritized accountability to provide
justice to individuals affected by human rights
violations and abuses committed in the ongoing armed
conflict. Given the large scale of serious crimes,
UNAMI is pursuing a strategy at the national level with
a view to allowing domestic courts to have jurisdiction
over international crimes. That would also complement
international initiatives to gather evidence on the most
serious crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant.
As the fight to eliminate Da’esh from Iraq comes to
a close, the United Nations is repositioning its responses
to sexual violence with a focus on supporting survivors
of sexual violence in reintegrating back into their
communities. I welcome the renewed commitment of
the Government of Iraq to ensuring the implementation
of the joint communiqué and the national action plan.
The United Nations, at the highest levels, has
engaged with senior Iraqi officials on the establishment
of the Interministerial Committee on Grave Child
Rights Violations. The Committee is expected to
provide a forum to coordinate a response by the Iraqi
authorities with regard to issues pertaining to children
in armed conflict, including occasional reports of
recruitment and the use of children by pro-Government
forces. Furthermore, we urge the Government of Iraq
to ensure that children arrested by security forces,
including for terrorism-related charges, are transferred
to juvenile institutions.
The Mission continues to work with the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
towards the implementation of the Iraqi national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000) where funding limitations
have impeded its implementation. I call on international
partners to pledge support in particular to specialized
programmes for women and female-headed households.
The issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property was one of the
key topics of the visit of Prime Minister Al-Abadi to
Kuwait on 21 June. In a meeting with the Amir of the
4/9

17/07/2017

State of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah,
the parties discussed means to settle all outstanding
issues related to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990.
On 22 and 24 May, Iraq, for the first time in 14
years, successfully hosted in Baghdad the ninety-ninth
session of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite
mechanism, and the forty-fourth session of the
Tripartite Commission. I echo the statement (SC/12870)
issued by the Security Council, on 14 June, calling on
Iraq and Kuwait to continue their cooperation through
the tripartite mechanism and to depend on steadfast
commitment, action and the adoption of new and
innovative ways to push this file forward.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ján Kubiš for his informative and comprehensive
briefing and thank him and his entire time for their
ongoing work in the context of such a difficult field of
operations such as Iraq.
Uruguay recognizes the arduous work of the
Special Representative and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) carry out in
close collaboration with the Government of Iraq, which
has enabled them to tackle the various emergencies
the country faces. The Security Council’s trust in that
process was manifest on Friday when we unanimously
adopted resolution 2367 (2017) — extending the
UNAMI mandate for another year, until July 2018.
After nine months of tough combat and many
Council meetings, we are finally hearing the news of
the liberation of Mosul, after having been under the
control of the terrorist group Da’esh for three years.
Uruguay congratulates the Iraqi Government for its
courage and the great efforts deployed in that campaign,
as well as for this important achievement, which is not
only a victory for the people and the Government of
that country, but also a great step forward in the fight
against international terrorism.
My country trusts that this important milestone
against Da’esh, which must be safeguarded without
letting our guard down, can serve as a decisive step
in the permanent defeat of that group — which has
committed countless abominations and has brutalized
17-21595

17/07/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

the people under its control since it emerged in 2014. It is
worth noting that the Iraqi and the Syrian peoples have
suffered unimaginable atrocities, including war crimes,
crimes against humanity and even possible genocide,
perpetrated against religious minorities — most notably,
but probably not exclusively against the Yazidi people,
who were subjected to a brutal extermination campaign.
As the entire Council expressed in the press
statement of 13 July (SC/12911), it is now time to
convey our condolences over the hundreds of thousands
of Iraqis, Syrians and other nationalities that have been
the victims of the crimes of Da’esh — which must not,
under any circumstance, remain unpunished. We must
also note that Da’esh did not arise out of a vacuum, but
was rather a product of a series of unfortunate events,
the first of which was the 2003 invasion of Iraq, which
lacked both multilateral legitimacy and the backing
of the Council. That, in turn, as we are all aware, led
to many years of sectarian civil war that ravaged the
country. Moreover, the situation was exacerbated by the
ideological, financial, military and troop support that
some countries — both from the region and outside of
it — provided to Da’esh. The spirit of fighting terrorism
and the solidarity with the Iraqi people must be a top
priority at this stage. Let us learn from errors of the
past so that we do not repeat them.
The liberation of Mosul has now generated two
enormous tasks that the Government of Iraq, with the
support of the United Nations, must address in the near
future — the gradual rebuilding of the city and the return
of hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, many of
whom will find that their homes have been destroyed
and that basic services must be restored. Last Thursday,
we bore witness on television to a little girl, Hanan,
in a totally barren paediatric hospital in Mosul, who
died from entirely treatable renal failure. We encourage
the Iraqi Government to prioritize the protection of
civilians, just as we have on other occasions in previous
months during its offensive in Mosul, so that they can
help the millions of people beset by war and terrorism.
Moreover, the United Nations should support the Iraqi
Government’s reform campaign to attain long-term
political solutions that will help fight extremism and
ensure the country’s stability so as to prevent the
recurrence of a phenomenon like Da’esh.
Political leaders must overcome their historic
divisions and distrust with a view to achieving a broad
national reconciliation agreement that can turn the page
on so many years of suffering of the Iraqi people due

S/PV. 8004

to sectarian and religious divisions. We reiterate that
the war against the scourge of terrorism must be waged
within the framework of international humanitarian
law and human rights and coordinated at the United
Nations in order to prevent atrocities similar to those
committed by those groups.
We are gratified that the renewed UNAMI mandate
calls for the empowerment of women for the immediate
future of the country. In that regard, we call on the
Iraqi Government to promote and defend the rights
of women and girls, and to promote gender equality,
bolster women’s political engagement and address the
urgent problem of the use of sexual violence in conflict
as a war tactic and terrorist act.
As of today, Iraq faces a new and transcendent
chapter in its history. Victory against Da’esh will be
insufficient if the Iraqi authorities do not make progress
in the fight against corruption, the political involvement
of civil society and the enjoyment of rights for all Iraqi
citizens. It will be up to the authorities, with the support
of UNAMI and the Council, to consolidate the agreed
reforms so as to bring about a more modern, inclusive
and peaceful Iraq.
Mr. Kyslytsa (Ukraine): Before going into the
subject matter of today’s discussion, I would like to
draw the attention of my colleagues around this table
that today, 17 July, the world commemorates World Day
for International Justice. Also, it was three years ago
today that the world learned of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17. Today our thoughts and prayers
are with the families and loved ones of every victim
of that tragedy. We also appreciate the attention the
Secretary-General gave to the matter in his statement
today on this sad anniversary. To ensure justice for
its victims and accountability for its perpetrators,
important steps have been taken recently. On 5 July, the
President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral were informed, through document S/2017/580,
about the joint decision of the joint investigation
team countries that the prosecution and trial of those
responsible for this atrocious crime would take
place in the Netherlands. On 7 July, Ukraine and the
Netherlands signed a bilateral treaty on international
legal cooperation in relation to the downing of Flight
MH-17. In that regard, we urge all States to take steps
to ensure full compliance with Council resolution 2166
(2014), which demands that all States cooperate fully
with efforts to establish accountability.

17-215955/9

S/PV.8004

The situation concerning Iraq

Turning to the subject under consideration today,
we note with great satisfaction that a significant
milestone was reached in stabilizing Iraq with the
recent liberation of Mosul. It is a welcome and muchanticipated development that the Government of Iraq,
together with the coalition forces, succeeded in its
military operation. We hope that this victory over
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) will
accelerate its final elimination from the region.
However, those gains have come at a very high price,
since the operation has had severe effects on civilians
in the area. The humanitarian situation in the liberated
city remains dire, since much of Mosul lies in ruins
and a considerable number of people are still trapped in
the old city. Beyond that, in the city’s general vicinity,
there is another serious challenge represented by the
700,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) who want
to return to their homes but who in some cases have
nothing left to return to. In that regard, we encourage
the Government of Iraq to work with its partners on
post-liberation initiatives aimed at rebuilding vital
infrastructure, ensuring respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, focusing on national
reconciliation and facilitating IDPs’ safe and voluntary
return to their homes. We realize the extent of the
difficulties associated with such a momentous task
and hope that the Iraqi Government will receive the
assistance and support it so badly needs in mobilizing
the resources it requires to address those challenges.
Ukraine is encouraged by the commitment of Iraqi
stakeholders, who have been working tirelessly on a
national reconciliation process aimed at uniting the
people of Iraq, regardless of their ethnicity or religion.
Only an inclusive national reconciliation effort can heal
the wounds that the country has sustained and help to
achieve a lasting national settlement. In addition, proper
attention must be given to the issue of accountability
for all those who committed crimes against the
civilian population during the conflict. There can be
no place for victor’s justice, which would undermine
the national reconciliation process. We also emphasize
how important it is for the Government of Iraq, with
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and its international partners, to conduct
comprehensive security-sector reform, with the goal of
establishing trained, professional defence and security
forces committed to carrying out their duties on a basis
of human rights and humanitarian principles. That
aspect is critical, since it will help to prevent sectarian
6/9

17/07/2017

violence in the area and avoid any repetition of the
events that occurred in Ramadi and Fallujah after they
were liberated.
Lastly, I would like to say that I believe that in the
near future the Government of Iraq will announce ISIL’s
final defeat on Iraqi soil in this Chamber, something
that we will all gladly welcome.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for his briefing, and to
assure him of our full support to him in implementing
the tasks with which he is entrusted. We are also grateful
for the key role played by UNAMI in fulfilling its
mandate, which we just renewed through the unanimous
adoption on 14 July of resolution 2367 (2017). We urge
it to continue its work in coordinating and encouraging
dialogue with the goal of strengthening the process of
peace and reconciliation in Iraq.
We
welcomed
the
Iraqi
Government’s
announcement on 10 July confirming the liberation of
the city of Mosul from Da’esh control. We recognize
the profound courage, sacrifice and determination that
the security forces and the people of Iraq in general
have continued to show in their fight to eliminate that
terrorist group’s presence in their country once and for
all. We also acknowledge the interim precautionary
and protective measures that the Iraqi security forces
have taken in their campaign against Da’esh in order
to prioritize the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We would like to emphasize that as long
as this terrorist group is still being expelled from the
territory of Iraq and people are being liberated from
its control, it is vital to ensure that there is full and
unrestricted humanitarian access to United Nations
aid and that the human rights of those caught up in the
conflict steps are respected and upheld.
According to the reports issued on 4 July by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to
date, since the start of anti-terrorist operations in Mosul
in October 2016, more than 900,000 internally displaced
persons have been registered as coming from that city
alone, 709,000 of whom are still unable to return home,
in addition to the more than 3.4 million people who
have been displaced internally since the conflict began.
Furthermore, according to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/592), 445,000 civilians have died just in
17-21595

17/07/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

the period from May to June of this year, bringing the
total number of deaths resulting from the conflict to
some 82,000.
We are also concerned about the information in
the report about serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law by Da’esh such as
mass burials of civilians, abductions and the sexual
enslavement of thousands of women. It has used
improvised explosive devices and carried out suicide
attacks in squares, markets and other very crowded
areas, as well as using innocent civilians as human
shields. In that regard, we firmly condemn all acts
of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of where, when or by whom they are committed. We
particularly condemn terrorist acts that make cowardly
use of civilians, especially women and children, as
human shields.
We reaffirm the importance of ensuring that we
combat such practices by all possible means at our
disposal, within the framework of the Charter of the
United Nations and our obligations under international
law, and that those responsible for such acts are
investigated, prosecuted and punished. With regard to
explosive devices, we believe that while the area is still
being liberated from Da’esh’s control, we should focus
on demining activities and on clearing all explosive
remnants of war in order to ensure that the huge number
of displaced persons can be returned home safely.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia would also like
to pay tribute to the determination and effort of the
Iraqi people to reach a political solution that will help to
begin peacebuilding and to involve the Iraqi people in
establishing their country’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. In that regard, we hope that the
electoral schedule and the legal mechanisms needed to
ensure that it is met can be agreed on with the consensus
of all the political parties and stakeholders involved to
the benefit of the population as a whole.
We also appreciate the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to identify missing Kuwaiti citizens
and property and to return property taken during the
conflict. We take note of the Iraqi Government’s positive
actions in that regard, such as the public call broadcast
on mass media on 15 May inviting all those with
information on missing Kuwaitis to come forward, and
the explorations done in the potential burial locations of
Khamisiyah and Samawah. We hope they will produce
positive results. Lastly, we encourage all stakeholders

S/PV. 8004

to continue working to achieve concrete results through
the reconciliation efforts that are so fundamental to
the process of stabilizing relations between Iraq and
Kuwait and which the Council discussed in its press
release of 14 July.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Marzooq (Iraq): (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate the People’s Republic of China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your organization of the Council’s work, and to
express our gratitude to Bolivia for its leadership of the
Council last month. I would also like to welcome the
briefing by Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), and to thank
him and his team for their efforts in both Baghdad and
New York.
On 10 July, from the heart of Mosul, the secondlargest city in Iraq, Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi
announced that Iraq’s heroic armed forces had achieved
a historic victory, ending the situation of illusion and
extremism in the city. With enormous sacrifices,
our brave forces have regained the city of Mosul and
the Al-Hadba minaret, which the Takfiri terrorists
demolished at the approach of the Iraqi forces. Today,
I can only congratulate our armed forces and our brave
people who have made sacrifices. I also congratulate
all honourable citizens of the civilized world, who have
supported Iraq, and its forces, in its fight against the
terrorist gangs of Da’esh.
Iraq appreciates the role played by the international
coalition, which offered aerial support and cooperated
with the Iraqi air forces, in the battle to liberate Mosul.
I should also like to thank and express gratitude to the
States of the international coalition, as well as all other
nations that have supported the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, offered assistance in the
areas of military logistics and advice, and humanitarian
assistance in order to gain victory against the terrorist
gangs of Da’esh.
The Iraqi Government gave priority to the
liberation of people before land, and thus to the safety
and protection of civilians. The Council is also aware
of the role of the supreme religious authority in Iraq,
which produced a legal opinion, a fatwa, calling for
jihad against Da’esh and giving great momentum to

17-215957/9

S/PV.8004

The situation concerning Iraq

17/07/2017

the fight against the gangs of Da’esh and the fight to
preserve the territory of Iraq.

culture and language. Few diverse nations can make
the same claim.

Official entities in the liberated areas of Iraq are
working to return life to a state of normalcy and to begin
offering services, thus paving the way for displaced
persons, of whom there are approximately three
million, to return and resume their normal life. Iraq is
therefore in dire need of the support of the international
community to face the challenges imposed by this
post-Da’esh phase in Iraq, achieve stability, rebuild
destroyed infrastructure, and remove the mines and the
ordinances planted by the terrorist gangs of Da’esh in
the cities over which we have regained control. That
is based on a comprehensive plan for reconstruction
and domestic governance, which requires financial as
well as technical support, and consultation with our
international partners.

Iraq affirms once again the importance of
implementing the provisions of resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). To strengthen
the rule of law and to prevent terrorists in Iraq from
enjoying impunity, Iraq is currently considering the
various alternatives in the global campaign to bring
justice to Da’esh. Included is a draft resolution that
we are considering with our partners regarding the
collection of evidence pertaining to crimes committed
by the Da’esh gangs in Iraq. We are also undertaking
efforts to strengthen our sovereignty, to preserve
the jurisdiction of our legal system and also to build
capacities in that regard.

Iraq would also like to salute the humanitarian
efforts of our sister nation, Kuwait, particularly its relief
initiative aimed at alleviating the suffering of displaced
Iraqis. We also highly appreciate the efforts of friendly
nations, of the European Union, and of the States
members of the international coalition for the support
and humanitarian assistance they have provided and for
their readiness to support Iraq in achieving stability
and reconstruction.
I would also like to reiterate the critical and vital
role that UNAMI can perform under its mandate, and the
role of the United Nations country team in addressing
humanitarian, social and economic challenges, as
well as those in the fields of health and construction,
assisting in the return of security, stability and essential
services, allowing displaced persons to return to their
homes, providing them with job opportunities, and
allowing them to participate in the reconstruction of
what the extremists have destroyed.
Iraq is a unified and independent federal State that
enjoys complete sovereignty, based on a democratic
federal Constitution that was adopted by all sectors
of Iraqi society in 2005 through a popular, democratic
and transparent referendum. It is based on full respect
for and equality of rights and duties among all
components of Iraqi society and affirms the values of
civic engagement, political participation and effective
political representation for all. The constitutional and
legal rights of all are guaranteed, in particular with
regard to the areas of politics, economics, society,
8/9

We once again reiterate that Council members
must demand that Turkey withdraw its forces from
Iraqi territory and that it respect the principle of good
neighbourliness with Iraq in order to preserve and
maintain international and regional peace and security.
The Iraqi Government is continuously working to
strengthen its relations with Arab and neighbouring
countries, in particular Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan,
Turkey and Iran, in addition to continued relations with
the Syrian Government.
To strengthen our brotherly relations with the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Iraqi Cabinet has
established an Iraqi-Saudi coordination council. The
two countries have agreed to elevate bilateral relations
to the required strategic level; to open new horizons of
cooperation in various areas, including the political field,
security, economics, development, trade, investment,
tourism and culture; to invigorate the partnership
between the private sector in both countries, in addition
to combating terrorism and extremism in their various
forms, eliminating the strongholds of terrorism, drying
up its sources and eliminating its financing, while
respecting the various relevant conventions.
To strengthen reconciliation, we are now hosting
preparation meetings for the Mecca conference. Iraq
remains committed legally and morally to locating the
Kuwaiti missing persons, as well as the Kuwaiti archives
and relevant documents. Iraqi ministries continue to
work hard to document and scrutinize the information
from witnesses, and continue to carry out field visits
and excavations in different locations in order to find
the remains of missing persons and Kuwaiti prisoners
of war.
17-21595

17/07/2017

The situation concerning Iraq

I should like to welcome the Council’s response to
the Iraqi Government’s request to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for
one year based on resolution 1770 (2007), in letter and
in spirit.
In conclusion, we express once again our gratitude
for the work and efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and his team in
providing advice to the Iraqi Government in connection
with its various activities, with a view to preserving the

S/PV. 8004

unity of Iraq, its territorial integrity and its stability
in order that it may be free of terrorism. May Iraq live
in safety, unity, strength, prosperity and stability in its
democratic political system, and glory be to the martyrs
who gave their lives to combat terrorism on behalf of all
of humankind.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

17-215959/9
