General AHembly-Twenty-ninth Session

26

Recalling, in particular, the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of
Tlatelolco),39
Considering that further efforts concerning nuclearweapon-free zones would be enhanced by a comprehensive study of the question in all its aspects,
1. Decides to undertake a comprehensive study of
the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its
aspects;
2. Requests that the study be carried out by an ad
hoe group of qualified governmental experts under the
auspices of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament;
3. Calls upon interested Governments and international organizations concerned to extend such assistance as may be required from them for the carrying
out of the study;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide such
services and to give such assistance for the study as
may be required;
5. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disanna~ent to transmit the comprehensive study of
the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its
aspects in a special report to the General Assembly at
its thirtieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Comprehensive
study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in
all its aspects".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

G
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of non-nuclear-weapon States need
to be safeguarded against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons,
Considering that it is imperative for the international
community to devise effective measures to ensure the
security of non-nuclear-weapon States,
Noting that the non-nuclear-weapon States have
called for assurances from nuclear-weapon Powers that
they will not use or threaten to use nuclear weapons
against them,
Bearing in mind the need to allay the legitimate concern of the States of the world with regard to ensuring
lasting security for their peoples,
Also bearing in mind that the effort to strengthen
world security must be pursued unceasingly in all
appropriate bodies and forums,
Believing it ~ecessary' to consider ways to strengthen
assurances agamst nuclear attack or threat and thus
give greater confidence to the non-nuclear-weapon
States,
1. Declares its firm support for the independence
territorial integrity and sovereignty of non-nuclear:
weapon States;
2. Recommends to Member States to consider in all
appropriate forums, without loss of time, the question
of strengthening the security of non-nuclear-weapon
States.
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3 9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, Ne. 9068, p. 3:>6.

As a result of the enlargement referred to in paragraph 1
of resolution B above, the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament will be composed of the following States:
ARGENTINA, BRAZIL, BUI.GARIA, BURMA, CANADA, CzECHOSLOVAKIA, EGYPT, ETHIOPIA, FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC
REPUBI.IC, GERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF), HUNGARY,
INDIA, IRAN, ITALY, JAPAN, MEXICO, MONGOLIA, MOROCCO,
NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PI:.RU, POLAND, ROMANIA,
SWEDEN, UNION OF SOVIET SociALIST REPUBI.ICS, UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRll'AIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAIRE.

3262 (XXIX). Implementation of General Assem•
bly resolution 2286 (XXII) concerning the
signature and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 2286 (XXII) of
5 December 1967 it welcomed with special satisfaction
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America ( Treaty of Tlatelolco) 40 and declared
that the Treaty constituted an event of historic significanc,e in the efforts to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and to promote international peace
and security,
Noting that as a result of the Treaty, to which eighteen sovereign States are already parties, there exists in
Latin America a zone of increasing area and population subject to the regime of total absence of nuclear
weapons, which at present comprises some 8 million
square kilometres with a population of approximately
150 million inhabitants,
Taking into account that certain territories lying
within the zone which are not sovereign political entities are nevertheless in a position to receive the
benefits deriving from the Treaty through its Additional
Protocol I to which the States which de jure or de facto
are internationally responsible for those territories may
become parties,
Recalling that in resolution 2286 (XXII) it urged
States to which Additional Protocol I is open for signature to strive to take all the measures within their
power to ensure that the Treaty speedily obtains the
widest possible application,
l. Notes with satisfaction that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland deposited its instrument of ratification of Additional Protocol I of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) on 11 December 1969
and that the Kingdom of the Netherlands did likewise
on 26 July 1971;
2. Urges the other two States which under the
Treaty may become parties to its Additional Protocol I
to sign and ratify it as soon as possible, in order that
the peoples of the territories in question may receive
the benefits which derive from the Treaty and which
consist mainly in removing the danger of nuclear attack
and sparing the squandering of resources on the production of nuclear weapons;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the two States to which the above
appeal is addressed and to inform the General Assem4o Ibid.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

bly at its thirtieth session of any measure adopted by
those States;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3262 (XXIX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America ( Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".

2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3263 (XXIX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East,
Desiring to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security by bolstering and expanding the existing regional and global structures for the
prohibition and/or prevention of the further spread of
nuclear weapons,
Realizing that the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones with an adequate system of safeguards could
accelerate the process towards nuclear disarmament
and the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Recalling the resolution adopted by the Council of
the League of Arab States at its sixty-second session,
hel~ in Cairo from 1 to 4 September 1974, on this
subject,
Recalling the message sent by His Imperial Majesty
the Shahanshah of Iran on I 6 September I 974 on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East, 41
Considering that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones, on the initiative of the States situated within each zone concerned, is one of the measures
which can contribute most effectively to halting the
proliferation of those instruments of mass destruction
and to promoting progress towards nuclear disarmament, with the goal of total destruction of all nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery,
Mindful of the political conditions particular to the
region of the Middle East and of the potential danger
emanating therefrom, which would be further aggravated by the introduction of nuclear weapons in the
area,
Conscious, therefore, of the need to keep the countries of the region from becoming involved in a ruinous
nuclear arms race,
Recalling the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa issued by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in
July 1964, 4 ~
Noting that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East would contribute effectively to the realization of aims enunciated
in the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa,
Recalling the notable achievement of the countries
of Latin America in establishing a nuclear-free zone,
4 1 Official Records of the General As.ffmbly, Twenty-ninth
Session. Annexes, agenda item IOI, document A/9693"/ Add.3.
~~ Ibid .. Twentieth Snsiun, A1111exes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.

27

Also recalling resolution B of the Conference of NonNuclear-Weapon States, held at Geneva from 29 August
to 28 September I 968, in which the Conference recommended that non-nuclear-weapon States not comprised
in the Latin American nuclear-free zone should study
the possibility and desirability of establishing military
denuclearization of their respective zones, 43
Recalling the aims pursued by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 44 in particular
the goal of preventing the further !.pread of nuclear
weapons,
Recalling its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June
1968, in which it expressed the hope for the widest
possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by both nuclear-weapon and
non-nuclear-weapon States,
l. Commends the idea of the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East;
2. Considers that, in order to advance the idea of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East, it is indispensable that all parties concerned in
the area proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, testing, obtaining, acquiring or in any other way
possessing nuclear weapons;
3. Calls upon the parties concerned in the area to
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons;
4. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, will lend their full co-operation for the effective realization of the aims of the
present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain the
views of the parties concerned with respect to the implementation of the present resolution, in particular
with regard to its paragraphs 2 and 3, and to report
to the Security Council at an early date and, subsequently, to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3264 (XXIX). Prohibition of action to influt>nee
the environment and climate for military
and other purposes incompatible with the
maintenance of international security, human well-being and health

The General Assembly,
Noting the concern of peoples to consolidate pl'.acc
and to pursue efforts designed to save mankind from the
danger of using new means of warfare, to limit the arms
race and to bring about disarmament,
Bearing in mind that, under conditions of continuou~
scientific and technological progress, new po-;sibilit1e,
arise for using the results of this progress 1101 onlv t,,r
peaceful but also for military purposes,
Convinced that the prohibition of action tn intluent
the environment and climate for military a11d oth:
43 lhid., Twenty-third Senion. agenda item 96. dou•n,:
A/7277 and Corr.I and 2, para. 17.
H Rc,olution 2373 (XXIJ). annex.
