S/2006/779

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 28 September 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Following consultations with the African Union on the proposed United
Nations support package to the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS), I have
the honour to transmit the text of a letter dated 22 September 2006 addressed to
President Omer Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir of the Sudan, co-signed by the African
Union Chairperson, Alpha Oumar Konaré, and myself.
The letter contains the details of immediate United Nations assistance to
AMIS, for which the full cooperation of the Government of the Sudan will be
essential.
I would be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-54573 (E) 041006

*0654573*

S/2006/779

Annex
Letter dated 22 September 2006 from the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission addressed to
the President of the Sudan
As you are aware, the United Nations and the African Union have been
working together in support of the efforts to achieve a lasting peace in Darfur. This
close cooperation is wholly consistent with both organizations’ commitment to
complement each other’s efforts in fostering peace and security in Africa.
In this context, both the United Nations and the African Union consider that
the recent developments in Darfur, particularly the escalation in violence in parts of
the region, and the increasing difficulties faced by the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) in the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement, are very
worrying.
That is why the African Union Peace and Security Council, when it met in
New York at the level of Heads of State and Government on 20 September, decided,
as a matter of urgency, to authorize the extension of the Mission’s mandate for three
months, until the end of 2006. In taking this decision, the Council requested, among
other things, that the United Nations and other partners give AMIS the support
necessary to enable it to carry out its mandate, as envisaged in the Peace Agreement
and in the light of the recent developments in Darfur.
Both our organizations are committed to implementing this important decision
with a due sense of urgency, and have agreed on a package of immediate United
Nations support to AMIS, with a view to making it more effective and better
managed, as well as strengthening its efforts to implement the Darfur Peace
Agreement. This package is in conformity with the Peace and Security Council
decisions of 10 March and 15 May 2006, in which partners and the United Nations
were requested to provide financial and logistical support to sustain AMIS, and with
the recommendation communicated to your Government by the joint United
Nations-African Union assessment mission that visited Sudan/Darfur in June 2006.
The package consists of equipment and personnel dedicated exclusively to
supporting AMIS in the following ways: logistical and material support, military
staff support, advisory support to civilian police, and other staff support in the areas
of assistance in implementing the Darfur Peace Agreement, public information,
mine action and humanitarian coordination.
The United Nations and the African Union are ready to proceed with utmost
urgency in implementing the above package, and we are anxious to do so with the
full knowledge and cooperation of the Government of the Sudan. That is why we are
bringing it to the attention of your Government, and enclose a detailed note on the
support envisaged in each area.

2

06-54573

S/2006/779

We very much count on the full cooperation of the Government of the Sudan,
which will be essential if we are to move forward expeditiously with this important
initiative. We would greatly appreciate your personal support in ensuring that such
cooperation is forthcoming at all levels.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan
Secretary-General of the United Nations
(Signed) Alpha Oumar Konaré
Chairperson of the African Union Commission

06-54573

3

S/2006/779

Enclosure
Darfur: United Nations support to the African Union Mission
in the Sudan
1.
During its meetings of 10 March and 15 May 2006, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union requested African Union partners and the United
Nations to provide all the necessary financial and logistical support to sustain the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS).
2.
For that purpose and pursuant to the agreement between the Government of the
Sudan and Lakhdar Brahimi, the United Nations and the African Union undertook a
joint assessment mission to the Sudan from 9 to 23 June 2006 in order to assess the
requirements for strengthening AMIS.
3.
Based on the findings of the joint African Union/United Nations technical
assessment mission, which were shared with the Government of the Sudan, and
pursuant to the 27 June communiqué of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, adopted at its 58th meeting, and Security Council resolution 1706 (2006),
and at the request of the African Union, the United Nations and the African Union
Commission have identified a number of specific areas in which the United Nations
could provide concrete support to AMIS.
4.
The support package was determined during the United Nations/African Union
technical-level meeting, which was held from 14 to 18 August 2006 in Addis Ababa
and subsequently finalized during senior-level consultations between the African
Union and the United Nations, which were convened at United Nations
Headquarters in New York on 15 September 2006. It comprises personnel fully
dedicated to supporting AMIS and equipment in the following four areas: logistical
and material support, military staff support, advisory support to civilian police and
civilian support in the areas of mine action, public information and support to
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement. The objective of this support is to
immediately enhance the management of AMIS through the proactive advisory role
of the United Nations staff.
Logistical and material support
5.
The United Nations will have agreed, subsequent to a decision of the General
Assembly, to provide 8 fly-away kits, a 36 global positioning systems, 360 nightvision goggles, 36 armoured personnel carriers (provided by a Member State and
including maintenance, training and support, should the AMIS force size be
increased by two battalions) and public information services equipment, as well as
pharmaceuticals for use by the African Union mission in Darfur.
6.
The public information equipment will consist of public address equipment,
photography and digital imaging equipment, web and printing equipment, and a
broadcasting facility will also be made available to AMIS. In addition, funding may
be provided to cover services in the areas of radio production and broadcasting,
technical support, television/video/multimedia production and broadcasting, design,
printing and publishing, community outreach, promotion and production, media
assistance, capacity-building and training, media monitoring and news wires.
__________________
a The fly-away kits will consist of items covering tentage, tables, chairs and cooking ancillaries.

4

06-54573

S/2006/779

7.
In addition to the above, 23 United Nations mission support staff will be
provided, with the following areas of expertise: procurement, logistics, movement
control, communications and information technology, air operations, supply,
planning, finance/budget and human resources.
Military staff support
8.
In order to enable the components of AMIS to integrate and coordinate their
activities, to enhance its efficiency, to assist in the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement through the provision of a functional Ceasefire Commission
secretariat and liaison officers at the sector headquarters level and to assist in
enhancing the monitoring and verification capabilities of AMIS by releasing AMIS
military observers who are presently deployed as staff officers to perform their
primary duties, the African Union has requested and the United Nations has agreed
to supply 105 United Nations staff officers to join AMIS. They would be assigned as
follows: 29 officers at the forward joint mission headquarters and 16 officers for the
Ceasefire Commission secretariat and liaison posts (details on the assignment of the
remaining 60 officers to be provided by the African Union).
9.
Some United Nations staff officers who are currently deployed in the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in Khartoum would deploy to Darfur on
short notice. At the same time, the United Nations would begin a process to generate
the balance of staff officers.
Police advisory support to the African Union Mission in the Sudan
10. At the request of the African Union, the United Nations has agreed to provide
33 police advisers to support AMIS civilian police. The United Nations police
advisers will provide to AMIS the following areas of expertise: logistics, operations,
investigations, personnel, information technology, command and control and other
expertise. The United Nations police advisers will provide advice based on their
experience, consistent with international standards of policing and United Nations
best practice. United Nations advisers will not have operational authority.
11. The United Nations is in the process of identifying officers currently serving in
UNMIS who have the required expertise to be redeployed as advisers to AMIS in
Darfur. Those staff will be supplemented by additional personnel to be recruited.
Other staff support
12. The United Nations will provide 25 civilian staff to assist AMIS in the
following areas:
(a) Support to implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement. The United
Nations will provide assistance to the Chairman of the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and
Consultation in the form of a resource person and other assistance through United
Nations agencies. In addition, UNMIS will provide the African Union with 13 staff
to support implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement, as requested by the
African Union;
(b) Staff support to the senior management of AMIS. The United Nations
will provide senior advisory staff in the areas of military, police and civil affairs to
the offices of the African Union Special Representative in Khartoum and the Deputy

06-54573

5

S/2006/779

Head of Mission in El Fasher, as well as a senior administrative and financial
adviser to the AMIS Chief Administrative Officer in Khartoum;
(c) Public information. United Nations personnel will assist AMIS in
designing and maintaining its website, producing and disseminating copies of the
Darfur Peace Agreement and preparing workshops to explain the Agreement and
promote the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and Consultation;
(d) Mine action. The United Nations will provide one liaison staff to assist in
liaising between AMIS and the United Nations mine action coordination capacity in
Darfur;
(e) Humanitarian coordination. The United Nations will provide three staff
with expertise in the areas of civil-military coordination, protection and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Command and control of United Nations support personnel
13. United Nations staff deployed to Darfur as part of the support package for
AMIS would be fully dedicated to supporting the African Union operation and will
operate under the operational control of AMIS. At the same time, the United Nations
personnel would be administered by and accountable to the United Nations. As
much as possible, the United Nations staff deployed through this support package
will maintain the African character of the African Union Mission in the Sudan.
14. It is understood that the overall planned support shall be conducted in
transparency and with the full cooperation of the Government of the Sudan.
African Union/United Nations
15 September 2006

6

06-54573
