S/PV.9358

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9358th meeting

Monday, 26 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Almahmoud/Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Barnor
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18368 (E)
*2318368*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa in
the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and Peace Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee (spoke in French): Allow me to begin
by thanking the members of the Security Council for
the opportunity to present the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
(spoke in English)
Over the past three months, the security situation in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has continued
to deteriorate in Ituri and North Kivu, despite a lull in
armed clashes between the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) and the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (FARDC). Thus far, the ceasefire between the
M-23 and the FARDC has relatively held and contributed
to some security gains. The relative calm in Rutshuru
territory, for example, has enabled more than 45,000
people from the Bishusha group to return to their homes.
However, the withdrawal of the M-23 from the
occupied areas has been piecemeal, tactical and political.
The M-23 still controls a large part of the Masisi and
Rutshuru territories, as well as the movement of people
and goods in those areas. Moreover, its offensive
repositioning in recent weeks has raised fears that
hostilities could flare up again at any moment. The M-23
continues to create insecurity, reportedly killing at least
47 civilians in North Kivu over the recent period.
2/22

26/06/2023

In that context, we welcome the continued efforts
of regional leaders to prevail on the concerned parties
to implement the decisions of the Luanda road map and
the Nairobi process. We reiterate the readiness of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
assist the Congolese authorities with the pre-cantonment
and disarmament of the M-23. To that end, I am pleased
to note that, last week, MONUSCO and Congolese
authorities undertook a reconnaissance mission at
the Rumangabo base to assess the conditions for the
pre-cantonment of the M-23. For those efforts to bear fruit,
it is urgent that the M-23 withdraw completely from the
occupied territories, lay down their arms unconditionally
and join the Demobilization, Disarmament, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
The relative security gains in North Kivu are
unfortunately fragile and overshadowed by the
deteriorating situation in Ituri. That province has suffered
from the security vacuum created by the redeployment of
the FARDC to North Kivu. More than 600 people were
killed by armed groups during the reporting period.
The Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
(CODECO), the Zaire militia and the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) are the main perpetrators of those atrocities.
A particularly heinous example was the CODECO militia
attack on the Lala internally displaced persons site on
the night of 11 to 12 May. More than 40 displaced people
were killed and 800 shelters were burned. I reiterate our
condemnation of that atrocious attack on civilians who
had already endured significant hardship.
Despite the joint operations of the FARDC and the
Uganda People’s Defence Forces, the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) has extended its area of influence to an
unprecedented level and remains a serious threat to the
security and stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. At the same time, the persistent activities of
armed groups in South Kivu for the control of mining
sites, in particular Mayi-Mayi militias, reminds us that
it is imperative to resolve the root causes of the conflict
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo for peace
to be restored.
We urge all armed groups to cease hostilities and
call for a redeployment of national security forces,
particularly in Ituri, to restore State authority in that area.
The population, especially the most vulnerable, cannot
remain without the protection of the Congolese State.
The consequences of that absence are deeply worrisome.
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In response to the persistent insecurity in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO
continues to do its utmost to deliver on its mandate to
protect civilians. In Beni, Bunia, Bukavu and Goma,
workshops supported by the Mission have served to ease
tensions and build local capacities to better respond to
security challenges, including disinformation.
In parallel, the Mission has provided direct physical
protection to the civilian population, notably through
protection by projection. To date, between 50,000 and
70,000 displaced people are under the direct physical
protection of MONUSCO in Roe site, located in
Djugu territory in the province of Ituri. The Mission
has repelled CODECO attacks against civilians on
numerous occasions. The joint operations between the
FARDC and MONUSCO’s Force Intervention Brigade
have also actively contributed to the fight against the
ADF. These joint operations have concretely resulted in
the protection of a hospital in Oicha and the dismantling
of several ADF training camps.
Beyond the protection of civilian efforts,
humanitarian interventions are still highly needed.
Insecurity in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic has continued to fuel a long-standing
humanitarian crisis that is often overlooked by the
international community. Approximately 6.3 million
people have been displaced in the country, and, since
March 2022, more than 2.8 million people have newly
fled their homes in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu
provinces, due to insecurity. Currently, 28 per cent of
the population in North Kivu and 39 per cent in Ituri
are displaced.
That situation has been further aggravated by
inflation, epidemics and natural disasters, including
the floods experienced last month in Kahele territory
of South Kivu, which killed over 470 people, with
thousands missing and thousands more otherwise
affected. At the same time, almost 26 million people,
more than a quarter of the population, are facing food
insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are particularly concerned about the growing
number of women and girls who have been subjected to
gender-based violence and sexual exploitation. Genderbased violence has increased by 23 per cent nationwide,
and by 73 per cent in North Kivu province alone,
compared to the same period last year. These violations
are linked to the proliferation of armed groups in areas
where displaced people are hosted and to frequent

S/PV.9358

breaches of the civilian and humanitarian character
of these displacement sites. Furthermore, the surge in
sexual violence against children has also increased and
is particularly horrifying.
A significant scale-up of services to prevent and
respond to sexual violence in and around displacement
sites, as well as to ensure better access to food, water
and safe sanitation facilities, is urgently required. We
therefore call on the Congolese authorities to take
stronger action, including the provision of additional
sites, to assist and protect displaced people, and for better
security in the sites and in the fight against impunity.
The humanitarian response falls far short of the
unprecedented level of needs. We applaud the activation
of a system-wide scale-up of the response in eastern part
of the Democratic Republic for an initial period of three
months. We encourage the Congolese State, which has
the prime responsibility and duty to protect its citizens,
to facilitate and support this enhanced response. We
appeal once again to the donor community to contribute
to the 2023 humanitarian response plan, which as of
18 June was funded at 28 per cent.
In addition to the security and humanitarian
challenges in eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, pockets of instability have resurfaced in
the western and southern parts of the country. Violence
has persisted in the provinces of Mai-Ndombe, Kwilu
and Kwango, and it has spread to Maluku in the
Kinshasa province. This violence has resulted in the
death of at least 67 people in the last three months.
Tensions and violence have also been reported in
Kindu, Tshopo and Katanga. We urge the authorities
to hold the perpetrators of violence to account and take
measures to strengthen social cohesion to preserve the
gains made towards stability in these areas.
The human rights situation also remains worrisome.
We are particularly alarmed at the restriction of civic
space and the increase in hate speech. We are also
concerned by reports of a rise in violence against women
political leaders and activists. I urge the authorities,
civil society and political actors to work to promote a
peaceful, tolerant and inclusive civic space, particularly
in the run-up to the December 2023 elections. In that
regard, I welcome the measures announced by the
Independent National Electoral Commission to reopen
voter registration in Kwamouth. I hope that appropriate
measures will also be taken to ensure registration for
all Congolese in the eastern provinces.

23-183683/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In accordance with its mandate, MONUSCO has
been providing logistical support to the Electoral
Commission and training for police officers who will
be responsible for security during the elections. The
United Nations more broadly is also providing technical
assistance for the electoral process through the United
Nations Development Programme election-support
programme. We encourage Member States to support
this programme, which is still largely underfunded at
the moment. Efforts to prevent electoral violence must
also be reinforced, and the support of the Peacebuilding
Fund is important in that regard.
Those efforts can bear fruit only if all stakeholders
are genuinely committed to the electoral process. In that
regard, the independent audit of the electoral register
was an opportunity to strengthen the transparency
and credibility of the electoral process. The quality
of the electoral process depends on the trust of the
stakeholders, and this must be cultivated through
greater transparency and inclusive consultation. A
successful electoral process that renews the legitimacy
of the country’s institutions is also critical, ultimately,
to improving the security situation.
With regard to the transition, the visit of the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in early June, came at an opportune time to
support the consultations. We noted the will of the
Congolese authorities to accelerate the transition, and
we encouraged the finalization of the revised transition
plan, now structured around four priority benchmarks.
The visit also provided an opportunity to highlight
the key role of MONUSCO in the protection of civilians
and to recall our guiding principles for the transition. In
a rapidly evolving national and regional environment,
we must stay on course for an orderly, gradual and
responsible transition. The departure of MONUSCO
is planned, and initial steps are being taken in several
areas. However, MONUSCO’s withdrawal should
not jeopardize the protection of civilians. We must
avoid creating security vacuums. The Mission cannot
responsibly depart from areas where MONUSCO is the
only protection presence.
I recall that the transition of MONUSCO is,
in simple terms, the continuation of the Mission’s
mandated tasks by Congolese authorities. It is up to
the Congolese Government to create the conditions
for that continuation to be viable for the long term.
4/22

26/06/2023

The Mission, jointly with the United Nations country
team, is, for its part, fully committed to assisting the
Congolese authorities in this endeavour. In that regard,
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team have
engaged proactively with the Government to jointly
re-evaluate the joint transition plan, as mandated by
the Council.
That commitment is apparent through our
unwavering support for the regional peace processes.
We salute the commitment of the leaders and facilitators
of the processes through their good offices, the regular
holding of high-level summits and the decision of Angola
to deploy troops to secure M-23 cantonment sites and
protect members of the ad hoc verification mechanism.
The decision of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to deploy troops also signals the
increasing commitment of regional actors to respond to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s need for peace.
In that context, we reiterate the need to ensure that all
these regional initiatives are mutually reinforcing and
coordinated with MONUSCO.
The quadripartite summit, which will take place
tomorrow in Luanda, Angola, under the facilitation of
the African Union and with the participation of Heads
of State and representatives of SADC, the East African
Community, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States, would provide an opportunity, among
other things, to define practical modalities of such
coordination. MONUSCO stands ready to continue
working in concert with relevant stakeholders in
support of those regional initiatives, within the limits
of its mandate.
Our commitment to preparing for the transition
is also visible in our efforts to support disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform. An orderly and responsible transition depends
on the ability of the national security forces to deploy
and intervene effectively wherever the security
situation requires.
As MONUSCO transitions, we are also drawing
lessons from the Mission’s withdrawal from the
Kasais and Tanganyika with regard to support for the
deployment of Congolese authorities and resource
mobilization. The United Nations country team and
the Mission are currently working to mobilize the
necessary funding to implement the transition plan for
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Tanganyika, which amounts to $26 million over a twoyear period, and I appeal to the donor community for
their support.
The Mission has also initiated the formulation of
transition plans for North and South Kivu and Ituri.
This is a geographical approach designed to align the
transition as closely as possible with the realities of each
area. I would like to stress, however, that the primary
responsibility for ensuring protection, development and
social cohesion remains with the Congolese authorities.
Major Government projects are under way, such as
the military programming law and the development
programme for the 145 territories . Those projects must
quickly produce results that live up to expectations.
The gradual and geographical withdrawal of
MONUSCO must continue, in close collaboration with
the Congolese authorities, so as never to create a security
vacuum, including by investing in police capacity
through a successful reform of the security sector.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my thanks
to all the troop- and police-contributing countries
and their personnel and to the Mission’s national and
international civilian personnel. I salute their ongoing
efforts to support the national and provincial authorities
and the defence and security forces in implementing
our mandate.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.

S/PV.9358

France also condemns hate speech targeting
certain Tutsi communities. France is concerned about
the information from the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo confirming that
the M-23 is holding on to the positions it conquered in
recent months in the east of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It calls on the group to withdraw. We are also
concerned about Rwanda’s continued military support
for that armed group and by the presence of Rwandan
soldiers on Congolese territory. That support must stop.
Similarly, the support provided by certain members of
the Congolese armed forces to armed groups, such as
the FDLR, also must end.
The priority must be to bring the Nairobi and
Luanda regional processes to a successful conclusion.
The M-23 must be contained. The inter-Congolese
consultations must continue in order to disarm and
demobilize the Congolese armed groups. States in the
region must demobilize and repatriate foreign armed
groups. The Security Council is preparing to renew the
sanctions regime established by resolution 1533 (2004).
France calls for sanctions to be taken against those who
continue to obstruct peace and commit abuses.
Secondly, the partnership between the United
Nations and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must be adapted to the needs of the population.
To respond to the humanitarian crisis, France calls
on the international community to fund the United
Nations humanitarian response plan. This year, the
European Union has already provided €80 million to
meet humanitarian needs and has shipped 260 tons of
essential supplies.

First, efforts to ensure the withdrawal of the
Movement du 23 mars (M-23) and to demobilize the
armed groups must be accelerated.

The Congolese authorities must also work alongside
MONUSCO to protect the internally displaced persons
(IDP) camps. This month’s despicable attack on the
Lala IDP camp by CODECO demonstrates the urgent
need to reinforce the security of the population.

France condemns the many abuses committed
by the armed groups. The violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law, committed, in
particular, by the M-23, the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), the Cooperative for Development of the
Congo (CODECO) and the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) must not go unpunished.
France calls for the perpetrators of those crimes to be
brought to justice. The decision by the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court to examine the acts
committed in North Kivu is an important signal.

It is imperative that the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes step up their action as
MONUSCO continues its transition. This applies to
the United Nations Development Programme, for
stabilization initiatives, UNICEF, to ensure that every
child has access to education, and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to combat trafficking. The
support of the Office of Counter-Terrorism must be
bolstered in order to respond to a regional threat, as
demonstrated by the recent attack carried out by the
ADF against a school in Uganda.

I wish to focus on three points.

23-183685/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The Secretary-General’s forthcoming report on the
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will have to take
all those challenges into account. We are expecting
concrete proposals in that regard.
Finally, France is ready to support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the run-up to the elections
in December 2023. My country supports the efforts
of the Independent National Electoral Commission to
implement that process within the constitutional time
frame. France wishes to accompany the country on
the path to free elections. We encourage a process that
meets the aspirations of the Congolese people.
France calls on all stakeholders to promote inclusion
and condemn hate speech. Respect for public freedoms
and the establishment of a space for unhindered
expression will contribute to a peaceful election. A
return to stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will require the commitment of all. We pledge
our support on the road to peace.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee for her briefing.
I welcome the Permanent Representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
this meeting.
China has consistently supported the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its efforts to maintain
peace and stability and to promote development and
revitalization. In May, President Tshisekedi Tshilombo
was invited to visit China, injecting new impetus for
China-Democratic Republic of the Congo cooperation.
Currently, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is at
a critical juncture in its political and peace processes.
The international community should provide greater
support and assistance.
I wish to emphasize the following points.
First, China strongly condemns the armed groups
and their recent attacks on the internally displaced
persons camps and schools at the border with Uganda.
We are concerned about the persistent threat posed
by armed groups to the stability in the eastern the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In May, Secretary-General Guterres, together with
regional and national leaders, attended a summit in the
Great Lakes region and called for the armed groups
to cease hostilities. China urges the armed groups to
immediately cease their violent activities, withdraw
6/22

26/06/2023

from the occupied areas and join the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. We commend
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda
and Burundi for their joint operations to address
common threats. We note the efforts being made by
the East African Community, the Southern African
Development Community and Angola to maintain the
security of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and hope that the relevant regional operations
will be better coordinated so as to effectively prevent
the situation from deteriorating further.
Secondly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
general elections at the end of the year will have a
bearing on the country’s development and stability.
China supports the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its efforts to make progress in
areas such as electoral legislation and voter registration,
and expects all the parties to resolve their differences
through dialogue and consultation in order to ensure that
the general elections are held smoothly. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo still faces many difficulties and
challenges in the area of electoral preparation. We call
on the international community and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to respect the
country’s sovereignty and ownership and provide more
logistical and financial support.
Thirdly, the level of peace and stability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is linked to
overall security in the Great Lakes region. Last month
in Burundi, leaders of the Great Lakes region held a
summit marking the tenth anniversary of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes Region. The meeting forged consensus among
the countries of the region on maintaining stability
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
strengthening common security and deepening regional
cooperation, and China appreciates those efforts.
We expect those countries to see the meeting as an
opportunity, bolster the roles of the Nairobi and Luanda
processes, support respect for one another’s concerns and
resolve differences through dialogue and consultation.
China expects Xia Huang, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region, to
redouble his efforts in using his diplomatic good offices.
China supports Special Representative Keita and
MONUSCO in their work in areas such as maintaining
the stability of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9358

Congo, protecting civilians and supporting the electoral
process. The relations between the Mission and the host
country have been a significant issue for some time
now. China encourages MONUSCO to strengthen its
communication with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, maintain mutual trust and
cooperation and ensure that it fulfils its mandate smoothly
and effectively. MONUSCO has recently had multiple
exchanges with the Government regarding the transition
plan. The Security Council should give due regard to the
needs of the Government and its people, factor in the
latest developments in the eastern part of the country and
formulate MONUSCO’s mandate and future transitional
arrangements in a rational, science-based manner. In that
regard, China looks forward to the Secretary-General’s
report to the Council next month and to his pragmatic
and reasonable proposal.

chances of a rapprochement. Only brave and sincere
dialogue can produce lasting compromises. In that vein,
the withdrawal of the M-23 from the occupied areas
should be completed, in line with the decisions of the
Luanda communiqué.

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Pobee for her
briefing, and I welcome the Permanent Representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to today’s meeting.
Let me make some observations on the reporting period.

It is sad to see that the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been a driver
of conflict rather than a pole of shared development.
Albania reiterates its call to all Congolese and foreign
armed groups to end the spiral of violence that has
plagued the country and to rejoin the Demobilization,
Disarmament, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme. At the same time, the recent bill establishing
a military reserve force should be cautiously reviewed
in order to prevent any undermining of the gains
achieved under the Nairobi process.

First, the temporary conclusion of voter registration
was a significant milestone in the electoral process,
despite the inability to conduct the exercise all over the
country. Nevertheless, Albania takes note of the concerns
regarding the process of updating the voter’s register. We
encourage the authorities to address those concerns in an
inclusive and transparent manner.
Secondly, Albania welcomes the regional efforts
to advance peace processes in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The twenty-first extraordinary
summit of the Heads of State of the East African
Community (EAC) provided only temporary rather than
sustainable assurances. We welcome the decision of
the Southern African Development Community troika
to deploy part of its standby force. We also welcome
Angola’s leadership in deploying troops to protect the
staff of the ad hoc verification mechanism and secure
the sites from the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), as
well as the assistance provided by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in that process.
Albania has repeatedly emphasized the crucial need
for enhanced coordination and synergies between the
Congolese armed forces, MONUSCO, the EAC regional
force and the ad hoc verification mechanism. Despite
all the efforts, Kinshasa and Kigali seem to remain
hostage to their respective concerns, suffocating the

Thirdly, turning to the security and humanitarian
situation in the east, Albania is alarmed by the dramatic
surge in violence in Ituri and North Kivu, perpetrated
mainly by the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo (CODECO) and the Allied Democratic Forces,
which have expanded their territorial activities and
deadly attacks on civilians. We condemn in the strongest
terms CODECO’s attack on the Lala internally displaced
persons camp in Ituri and express our condolences to the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The trials and convictions of several individuals for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and other serious
human rights violations have been encouraging, and
we appreciate the support provided to the Government
by MONUSCO and the United Nations Joint Human
Rights Office in that fight.
Lastly, in the context of the ongoing discussions
on the revised transition plan for MONUSCO, I want
to reaffirm our strong support for the Mission and its
undisputed contribution to protecting civilians. In that
context, it will be important to have a gradual exit in
order to prevent any security vacuum.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee for her briefing and welcome
the Ambassadors of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to the Chamber.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing and intensified violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As we have
heard, the situation in Ituri is the worst it has been

23-183687/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

26/06/2023

since 2017, with the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
continuing to expand geographically. In North Kivu
alone, 2.3 million people have been displaced by the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and the ADF, and there
is evidence that the M-23 and the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) are
preparing for a military offensive. Conflict-related
sexual violence is already at an unprecedented level
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are also concerned about the increasing proliferation
of weapons within communities and the dangers that
it poses long-term. We share the Secretary-General’s
concern about the possible integration of armed groups
into the Congolese military, which we believe should be
a red line. We continue to call on all the parties to deliver
on their commitments agreed through the Nairobi and
Luanda political processes. We believe those processes
provide the best opportunity to achieve lasting peace.
We encourage the region to ensure that those processes
do not stall completely, and in that regard, we take note
of the ongoing quadripartite meeting in Luanda.

We therefore encourage the Government to continue
engaging in serious dialogue with MONUSCO to agree
on a process that enables a responsible and sustainable
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We look forward
to receiving the Secretary-General’s report on that
next month.

Against that backdrop, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) continues to do
vital work. We welcomed the recent joint MONUSCOFARDC operations that deterred an ADF attack on a
hospital and dismantled a major ADF camp. On a daily
basis, MONUSCO provides protection for hundreds
of thousands of civilians and enables the provision of
life-saving humanitarian support in the eastern part of the
country. In doing so, it not only supports the Congolese
people but also the Government and the security forces
of Democratic Republic of the Congo, which would
otherwise struggle to protect civilians and facilitate
humanitarian assistance. We must therefore consider
carefully the implications for the civilian population in
the context of the Government’s request for MONUSCO
to withdraw. While the United Nations and international
partners can play a supporting role, the Government
must be willing and able to assume its responsibilities
to the civilian population. We should learn lessons from
previous peacekeeping closures and make sure that we
do not repeat mistakes in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

I would like to share the testimony of a resident of the
village of Arr, in Ituri. “Our children had a good school,
but during the conflict everything was destroyed”. Those
words illustrate the devastating consequences of the
security crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including for future generations. They represent
an urgent call to all parties to engage in a sincere
dialogue and to put the protection of civilians at the heart
of all their efforts. With that in mind, I would like to raise
three points.

We welcome MONUSCO’s progress on provincial
strategies and agree with a geographic approach to the
transition. The United Kingdom is fully committed to
supporting a conditions-based withdrawal of MONUSCO,
guided by key benchmarks of the joint transition plan.
8/22

In conclusion, I want to pay tribute to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita and
MONUSCO for their tireless efforts to help the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo achieve the peace and stability that are so
desperately needed.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa in the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and Peace Operations, Martha Ama Akyaa
Pobee, for her briefing. I also welcome the participation
of the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda in today’s meeting.

First, international humanitarian law and human
rights and the fight against impunity are essential
to lasting peace. The reprehensible attack allegedly
perpetrated by elements of the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo at a site for displaced persons
in Ituri is a sombre reminder of the lack of protection of
civilians. The fight against impunity, including impunity
for sexual violence — we heard the shocking statistics
from the Assistant Secretary-General just now — is a
powerful way to prevent future violations. We therefore
call on the Government to strengthen investigations
and mobile courts in order to prevent and respond to
armed attacks on civilians. Switzerland will continue
to cooperate with the Congolese authorities and the
African Union in the area of the prevention of violence.
Secondly, a sincere and inclusive dialogue is needed
to advance the political processes. At the national
level, that dialogue has to be established between the
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congolese authorities, the political opposition and civil
society. That is particularly important in the context of
the preparations for elections, as tensions are already
being felt. Corrective measures should be taken in
that regard in areas where voter registration has been
hampered by insecurity.
At the regional level, dialogue among the States of
the region remains key to the success of the Luanda and
Nairobi processes. We welcome the quadripartite summit
to be held tomorrow in Luanda under the auspices of the
African Union. Those efforts illustrate the importance of
mutually reinforcing regional peace initiatives.
Lastly, an inclusive dialogue must inform the exchanges between Kinshasa, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations country
team within the framework of the transition plan. Considering the more than 20 years that the Mission has been in
the country, it will be crucial to preserve the gains that the
Government has made with the support of the Mission.
To that end, a common understanding of the next steps
involved in the transition is essential, in particular with
regard to the minimum security conditions required for
the Mission to make a responsible and sustainable exit.
Thirdly, a return to stability and security is key
to sustainable development and prosperity. Violence
against civilians, attacks on civilian infrastructure and
schools and the illegal exploitation of natural resources
impede development. We call on the Government to step
up its efforts to stabilize the country, including through
the restoration of State authority, good governance and
security-sector reform. In that regard, we support the
Secretary-General’s call for ensuring that the draft law
establishing an army reserve corps does not lead to the
de facto integration of armed groups into the country’s
armed forces. Efforts by the authorities to strengthen
their security capacities must comply with human rights
and international humanitarian law.
Switzerland hears the Congolese authorities’ call
for accelerating MONUSCO’s transition. However, the
testimony of the resident of the village of Arr illustrates
the need for the Congolese Government to redouble its
efforts to strengthen the protection of civilians during
this period. Switzerland will continue to work closely
with the Congolese authorities, the United Nations and
the local communities to ensure a peaceful transition,
leading to a peaceful society and sustainable development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/PV.9358

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee for her briefing.
The importance of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the broader region is clear. That is
why the United States is concerned about the increasing
calls by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the Mission to withdraw following the
elections planned for December. As we have said many
times, MONUSCO cannot and should not stay in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo indefinitely. But
there is broad consensus that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will not have met
the benchmarks it agreed to as the minimum conditions
for MONUSCO’s drawdown by the end of 2023. A
precipitous withdrawal of MONUSCO would likely
leave a security vacuum that State authorities will be
unable to fill, with devastating effects for the region’s
most vulnerable populations. Without MONUSCO, we
will probably see more activity by the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham-Democratic Republic of the Congo,
two armed groups that carried out shocking and brazen
massacres at an internally displaced persons camp and
school earlier this month.
The humanitarian crisis is also worsening due
to the continued violence, resulting in 1 million
internally displaced persons, an appalling escalation
in gender-based violence, including conflict-related
sexual violence, and immense human suffering. In
order to address that pressing and urgent situation, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region need political will, a commitment to dialogue
and a willingness to make hard decisions and pursue
much-needed reform. They also need MONUSCO.
Fortunately, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has taken some important steps
that will help achieve lasting peace. We welcome
its report to the Security Council on weapons and
ammunition management, which will provide valuable
insight into the Government’s capacities and enable
the international community to assist in the prevention
of small arms trafficking and diversion. In May, a
military tribunal in South Kivu province sentenced a
commander of an armed group to life imprisonment
for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
the crime of forced pregnancy. The forced pregnancy
conviction is the first time a national court has convicted

23-183689/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

anyone of such an offence. The United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office provided financial and technical
support to the investigation and prosecution. This
exemplifies how the United Nations, MONUSCO and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can work together to bring justice to victims and
accountability to perpetrators. Those important human
rights and rule-of-law initiatives should continue for as
long as the Mission is in place.
But there is still work to be done and progress to be
made, especially in the security sector. We are concerned
about the collaboration of the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with non-State armed
groups in the east, including the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, which is under United Nations
sanctions. As we have done numerous times, we again
call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to fully professionalize its security forces
and work to end such cooperation. The United States is
also concerned about the army reserve corps legislation
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which could
enable members of armed groups to become part of
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo and hamper disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts. We urge the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to ensure that the reserve corps is carefully
vetted and subject to the Demobilization, Disarmament,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme. We
also call on the Government to ensure accountability.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has discouraged and denounced hateful rhetoric,
but I want to emphasize how important it is to call out
hate speech vilifying Rwandophone communities and
peacekeepers alike. Such speech has led to arbitrary
killings, mob violence and harassment. Of course,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not solely
responsible for addressing those challenges. Rwanda’s
continued direct support to the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), which is also under United Nations sanctions,
is a violation of Security Council resolutions and must
stop. I urge other members of the Council to press the
Government of Rwanda to withdraw its troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and cease support
to the M-23 immediately. As that support to the M-23
demonstrates, this is a regional crisis, and it requires
regional solutions that address the root causes of conflict.
The United States supports the mediation efforts led
by Angola, Kenya and the East African Community,
and calls on them to coordinate and de-conflict their
operations with MONUSCO.
10/22

26/06/2023

We are committed to ensuring that MONUSCO can
deliver on its mandate to protect civilians and assist the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in strengthening key governance, justice and security
institutions. In order for the Mission to succeed, it
deserves the support of the Security Council and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
deserve peace. The United States stands with them in
their pursuit of a better future.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Ghana, Mozambique and my country, Gabon.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee for her comprehensive briefing and welcome her
contribution and that of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) to peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also welcome the
participation in this meeting of the representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
Our statement today will focus on the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon stand side by side
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo as it continues
its long and difficult journey towards lasting peace.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing
enormous political, economic and security challenges,
but it has nevertheless remained committed to the
established electoral processes and related time frames.
We welcome the conclusion of the voter registration
process and the external verification of the electoral
register, which took place in April and May, respectively.
We are encouraged by the growing role of women in
electoral procedures and look forward to their continued
involvement in both the political and economic arenas.
We welcome all initiatives aimed at strengthening the
role of women in conflict prevention and resolution.
As the date of the elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which are eagerly awaited by
the population, draws near, the A3 reiterates the need
for all the country’s political actors to pursue the path of
peace, tolerance and social cohesion, in order to prevent
political tensions from degenerating into widespread
electoral violence.
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The A3 remains deeply concerned by the
catastrophic security situation in the eastern provinces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, due to the
unspeakable violence of armed groups, such as the
Mouvement du 23 mars, the Da’esh-affiliated Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo (CODECO), being perpetrated
against civilian and civilian infrastructure. Only
two weeks ago, the Council adopted press statement
SC/15319 on the attack perpetrated by CODECO
against the camp for displaced persons in Lala in Djugu
territory, which left at least 47 civilians dead. The A3
condemns in the strongest possible terms the attacks on
displaced persons camps. For us, attacks against those
populations, who are already experiencing the horrors
of forced displacement on a daily basis, are the height
of inhumanity. We therefore call on all local armed
groups to adhere to the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme,
and we demand the complete withdrawal of foreign
armed groups from Congolese territory.
The spread of terrorism and violent extremism
poses a serious threat to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region as a whole. As the ideological
alignment between the ADF and Da’esh continues to
develop into a toxic and deadly alliance, the A3 recalls
the need to recalibrate the current global peace and
security architecture to make it more resilient in the
face of modern terrorist threats. In that respect, we
echo the Secretary-General’s call for a new generation
of peace enforcement missions and counter-terrorist
operations, led by regional forces, and with guaranteed,
predictable funding. The African Union is the Council’s
clear partner in that endeavour.
We welcome the convening of the twenty-first
Extraordinary Summit of the East African Community,
on 31 May in Bujumbura, which extended the mandate
of the East African Community regional force. The
A3 aligns itself with the decisions of that Summit,
including the decision to strengthen coordination and
synergies between the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, the East African
Community regional force, the ad hoc verification
mechanism and other military actors on the ground.
We also welcome the decision by the Southern African
Development Community to contribute to peace efforts
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by deploying
part of its standby force to eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

S/PV.9358

With regard to MONUSCO’s transition, Ghana,
Mozambique and Gabon reiterate the need for an orderly
United Nations drawdown, in consultation with the
Congolese authorities. The A3 welcomes the progress
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in implementing the benchmarks set out in
the joint transition plan, including the strengthening of
its arms and ammunition management system.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
vast reserves of natural resources, some of which
represent the future of modern technology and global
development. However, we continue to witness a major
paradox, in which people are languishing in poverty
despite abundant natural resources. The A3 encourages
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries
in the region to continue strengthening domestic
control, monitoring and verification mechanisms in
line with regional certification mechanisms to ensure
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s mineral
wealth contributes to its prosperity and development.
Behind the figures and statistics on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
there are men and women, children and young boys
and girls living in deplorable conditions, traumatized
by physical violence and beset by emotional disorders
brought about from the atrocities they have suffered
and the sexual violence and the killings of their loved
ones by armed groups. We recall that the Congolese
authorities have two responsibilities: first, to protect
the lives of people affected by conflict and, secondly,
to provide them with adequate psychosocial support, as
part of the 2023 humanitarian response plan launched
together with the United Nations.
In that regard, the A3 urges the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s international and regional donors and
partners to continue their contributions to the 2023
humanitarian response plan. The A3 also encourages
the Government to continue its cooperation and
partnership with all humanitarian actors to ensure that
they can operate without impediment. We recall the link
between climate change and security in Central Africa,
and we stress the fact that the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is worsened by
the effects of climate change. The 400 deaths caused by
the flooding in South Kivu are a clear example of that.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates that a political
solution remains the most viable means of restoring
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For

23-1836811/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

that reason, we continue to fully support the ongoing
Luanda and Nairobi processes and the planned
revitalization of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework Agreement for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes Region, and we reaffirm
our commitment to the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also welcome the efforts of MONUSCO and
international partners in promoting peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express
my gratitude to Assistant Secretary-General Pobee
for her briefing, and I welcome the participation of
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda.
We continue to observe with deep concern brutal
human rights violations and abuses, including genderbased violence and the consequent humanitarian
crises caused by numerous armed groups, which are
increasing their activities particularly these days.
The recent attack on the internally displaced persons
camp in Ituri province attributed to the members of
the Coopérative pour le Développement du Congo
(CODECO) is one such appalling incident, and we once
again condemn that heinous act in the strongest terms.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
remains an anchor for international efforts to stabilize
the increasingly volatile environment, and Japan
continues to fully support its role.
In July, the Council is expected to receive
the Secretary-General’s report on the options for
MONUSCO’s reconfiguration and the future role of
the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We all share a recognition of the importance
of close and constructive cooperation among all the
stakeholders to make the transition smooth, responsible
and sustainable. Keeping that in mind, I would like to
highlight the following points relating to MONUSCO’s
strategic priorities today.
First of all, achieving a cessation of hostilities and
the protection of civilians are both of utmost importance.
Support of any kind to armed groups exacerbates the
already worsening situation in the region, and it must
stop immediately. While various security entities,
including East African Community regional forces, are
on the ground, national security forces bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. All security
12/22

26/06/2023

efforts should be well coordinated under the leadership
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The further implementation of the national
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery,
and Stabilization Programme is vital to achieving
a sustainable peace. There is an urgent need for
progress in Government-led security sector reform.
The presence of accessible, reliable and professional
police is a cornerstone of social order and stability
in any foreseeable transition. Japan has been a longterm partner for institution-building in this sector.
Programmes to help establish community policing
by the Japan International Cooperation Agency, in
collaboration with the International Organization for
Migration and the Peacebuilding Fund, have reached
Tanganyika province, from which MONUSCO
withdrew last year.
Secondly, the already-started national and local
elections process should become an opportunity to lay
out a common future for all rather than further divide
populations. The election of able local leaders who can
garner people’s confidence is a prerequisite for better
local governance and sustainable peace. This is even
more true in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo due to its chronic instability. While the
preparation for elections accelerates, obstructions of
legitimate political campaigns and incitement must
be avoided. In partnership with the United Nations
Development Programme, Japan plays its part to
support the Government’s efforts to conduct free, fair
and safe elections in an inclusive manner by providing
capacity-building and related equipment.
Finally, we must remain vigilant against ongoing
human security crises. The worsening security
environment in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, triggered by the activities of
armed groups, has caused a massive outflow of refugees
into neighbouring countries. We need an integrated
regional approach to address this humanitarian
challenge. In that regard, we welcome the tripartite
meeting in May between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to discuss
related issues. To support such efforts, Japan has been
implementing projects responding to such basic human
needs as water, food and shelter, in addition to health
services in those neighbouring countries.
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Japan remains committed to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We will continue working together with
MONUSCO and all the countries of the region to
achieve sustainable peace and stability.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, Ms. Martha Pobee. We note the
participation in today’s meeting of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda.
We wish to begin our statement with an expression
of condolences to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the families of its residents who perished as a result
of the floods and landslides that took place in May. We
wish all a speedy recovery to those who have suffered.
I turn now specifically to the situation in the
country. We note the persistently high security threat
levels in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In our view, the most dangerous challenges
are the protracted hostilities between the Congolese
Government forces and the Mouvement du 23 mars
group in the North Kivu province, the fraught relations
between Kinshasa and Kigali, and the activities of
the islamist Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), which
increasingly resorting to terrorist methods. We
emphatically condemn what took place on 16 June by
ADF fighters, namely, the attack targeting a school in
Uganda. This was a vile terrorist attack giving rise to
43 casualties, most of whom were school-age children,
which is further evidence of the fact that security and
stability in the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo reflects the interests of all States in the Great
Lakes region. We extend our deepest condolences to the
families of the dead and to the Government of Uganda.
We hope that the perpetrators of this abhorrent crime
will be found and punished.
We are troubled by the activities of other armed
groups rampant on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the Cooperative
pour le développement du Congo, the Résistance pour
un État de droit au Burundi, the Mayi-Mayi and the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, which
have no plans to abandon violent methods, continue to
reinforce their positions in a number of eastern parts
of the country, participate in the looting of its natural
resources and terrorize civilian populations. We are
concerned by factors that have been compounding the

S/PV.9358

armed conflict, including the worsening humanitarian
crisis, the growing number of internally displaced
persons and refugees, human rights violations and the
day-to-day suffering of civilian populations.
The figures speak for themselves. But behind these
figures are specific histories of specific individuals. We
believe that of principled significance are the efforts of
States of the region through the Nairobi and Luanda
negotiations processes. We welcome the involvement of
the South African Development Community (SADC)
in resolving the conflict in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in line with the
decision taken during the SADC summit in Windhoek
on 8 May.
We believe it is important to continue to pool the
complementary efforts initiatives towards regional
assistance. The priority in that regard is to achieve an
end to hostilities and a comprehensive and inclusive
dialogue. There is an important need to pursue efforts to
implement in full the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, dated 2013. We applaud the focus
of the African Union and countries in the region on
revitalizing this document.
We support the initiatives of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Huang Xia, including efforts to establish inter-State
dialogue to dispel tensions in the region. Clearly, military
methods alone cannot result in long-term normalization
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region. Only a political solution will
result in a comprehensive cessation of hostilities and
establish real conditions for sustained stabilization.
We support the efforts of United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its leadership. We believe that
the presence of the Mission in the conflict zone remains a
key stabilizing factor. In order to more effectively shape
efforts for the protection of the Congolese population,
we look forward to greater coordination between the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo and the Mission, as well as those of regional and
national forces on the ground.
We expect by July of this year, pursuant to resolution
2666 (2022), a proposal from the Secretary-General on
the reconfiguration of the Mission in the light of the
work carried out jointly with Kinshasa to review the
plan for the phased withdrawal of the Blue Helmets

23-1836813/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

from the country. As for implementation of the plan, we
believe that it is necessary, first and foremost, to take into
account developments of the situation on the ground, as
well as to operate in a phased and responsible way. At the
same time, we wish to emphasize that responsibility for
the fate of the country ultimately lies with the Congolese
people themselves, and a key objective thereof is the
establishment of a security sector that can independently
ensure control and order throughout the entire country.
In that regard, we support the decision of the
Security Council to lift the arms embargo against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Russian position
was and remains consistent both for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for other similar situations.
Security Council sanctions should always reflect the
real situation on the ground and facilitate stabilization
of such situations. By no means should these sanctions
create obstacles to national security forces. Restrictions
need to be regularly reviewed and modified until
they are fully lifted. It is unacceptable to supplement
Security Council sanctions measures with illegitimate
unilateral measures.
In conclusion, I wish to welcome the ongoing
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in preparation for the general elections
in December and wish it every success in organizing
the vote.
On our part, we reiterate our commitment to
facilitating the stabilization of the situation in the eastern
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region by promoting dialogue and constructive
cooperation among regional States. We look forward
to interacting closely with the relevant institutions and
representatives of the United Nations system.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Martha
Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, for her
informative briefing, and I acknowledge the presence
of the representatives of the Permanent Missions of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in
today’s meeting.
Our visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in March allowed us to see first-hand and identify the
needs and challenges that the country still faces in
achieving peace and development through the process
of political and economic reconstruction. We also
witnessed the tremendous work carried out by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
14/22

26/06/2023

the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the various United Nations agencies on the ground amid
a humanitarian and security crisis, especially on the
eastern border of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We acknowledge the efforts made in preparation
for the elections, especially the finalization of the voter
registration, carried out by the Independent National
Electoral Commission. We hope that this process will
continue in a transparent and inclusive manner, always
taking into account the discrepancies of the opposition
and including the voices of women and civil society. We
also call for respect for civic space and the freedom of
expression, opinion and assembly. We underline that
the protection of human rights defenders, journalists
and civil society must be paramount at all times, but
especially in the pre-electoral period.
Ecuador is concerned about the security situation,
especially in the east, despite regional efforts to advance
the peace process. In that regard, we condemn the attack
on the Lala internally displaced persons camp, in Ituri
province. The protection of the vulnerable civilian
population must be a priority.
The acts of violence committed by the Cooperative
for Development of the Congo, the Allied Democratic
Forces, the Zaire, the Movement du 23 mars (M-23),
the Mayi-Mayi, the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda and other armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in Ituri
and Kivu, have claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians,
including women and children.
In that regard, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict on the
urgent need to implement the national action plan, the
objective of which is to reduce sexual violence and the
recruitment and use of boys and girls by armed groups.
The implementation and fulfilment of the decisions of
the Luanda and Nairobi process are critical to achieve
a peace process in the region. The armed groups,
especially the M-23, must leave the occupied areas. In
that regard, we stress the need for Rwanda to direct its
efforts towards collaborating in the joint fight to combat
those risks. We hope that the outcome of the high-level
meeting in Angola will enable the implementation of the
agreed measures.
The violence continues to exacerbate the
humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. With 26.4 million people acutely food insecure
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and 6.3 million displaced, the international community’s
contribution is required to address the needs of the
civilian population.
The coordinated actions of MONUSCO — together
with humanitarian organizations — in conflict areas
controlled by M-23 must be able to access assistance,
in strict compliance with international law and
international humanitarian law.
We call for an end to disinformation and
misinformation campaigns, which affect MONUSCO’s
work. We applaud the initiatives that have been carried
out by the Mission, especially the training that has
strengthened the justice systems in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We highlight, for example,
the identification of local women peace ambassadors
that empowers them within their communities, while
raising awareness and conducting training on conflict
prevention, misinformation, conflict resolution and
prevention of domestic violence.
Ecuador is attentive to the next steps for the transition
of MONUSCO and its responsible withdrawal. We hope
that the Government and the Mission will establish a
plan with the objective of maintaining the results that
have been achieved so far with a view to bolstering the
institutionalization of peace, the protection of civilians
and the conditions for reconciliation, such as judicial
bodies and their consolidation, among others. In that
regard, we commend the signing of the memorandum
of understanding with the International Criminal Court
during the Prosecutor’s visit to the country.
From our meetings with the authorities and civil
society representatives, we recognize the commitment
of leading the country to the building of a new way of
life, with lasting peace. The region and the international
community have a key role to play in that regard, and
they can count on Ecuador’s help.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I too thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee for her insightful remarks
today and welcome the Ambassadors of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
We find ourselves at a crucial point in the history of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The appalling
brutal attacks against the population perpetrated by
armed groups, such as the Cooperative for Development
of the Congo attack on the Lala internally displaced
persons camp and the deadly Allied Democratic Forces
attack on a school near the Democratic Republic of

S/PV.9358

the Congo border in western Uganda are deplorable,
and provide a harrowing reality to the people of the
region. While we extend our deepest condolences to
the families of the victims, we emphasize the need for
all armed groups to lay down their weapons and urge
parties to refrain from actions that can block the path to
peace and stability.
The upcoming general elections present a
unique opportunity. In that regard, we take note of
the temporary conclusion of voter registration and
commend the attention given to gender parity. While
we acknowledge that registration may have faced
security challenges in certain regions, we encourage
authorities to respect, protect and promote the right to
peaceful assembly or association, freedom of opinion
and expression. Those are essential components of
democracy and are indispensable to the full enjoyment
of all human rights.
We are concerned about developments on the
recent law establishing the military defence force, as
it has the potential to undermine the efforts of both the
Nairobi process and the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
We underline the importance of aligning legislation
with international standards, with the technical support
of the relevant United Nations entities.
We commend the United Nations Joint Human Rights
Office for its support to the Government in combating
impunity. We recognize the recent conviction for crimes
against humanity by the Military Tribunal of Uvira, in
South Kivu, which sets an important legal precedent.
The Joint Human Rights Office, in collaboration
with the force mobility and security provision of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
enables field investigations and mobile courts, which
serve as strongholds against impunity.
We welcome the significant regional, political
and military efforts being undertaken. We hope that
confidence-building measures will prevail over hate
speech in public discourse. We urge for immediate
de-escalation and restraint between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda and encourage
the utilization of regional verification mechanisms to
defuse tensions.
The figures for human rights violations and
abuses are alarming. They include widespread sexual
and gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and

23-1836815/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

abuse, the recruitment and use of children and attacks
on schools, which have recently tripled. According
to reports, the situation in the eastern provinces,
particularly Ituri, is worse than ever. In view of that, we
underline the need for a survivor-centred and genderresponsive approach in preventing and responding to
those forms of violence and abuse, taking into account
the specific needs of all vulnerable groups, without
any discrimination. With 25 per cent of its population
currently facing acute food insecurity, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has some of the highest numbers
of food-insecure people in the world. As we prepare to
engage in the transition of MONUSCO, we advocate
for a tailored approach that prioritizes the protection of
civilians. However, we cannot afford a security vacuum.
We firmly believe that protecting civilians, including
children, preventing sexual violence in conflict and
ensuring accountability should remain front and
centre. With the aim of supporting stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the European Union
is currently implementing a set of actions amounting to
a total of €17 million under the Global Europe rapid
response mechanism.
Achieving peace and security in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo hinges on addressing
the underlying causes of conflict, in addition to the
support provided by regional initiatives. The abundant
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s fertile land should serve as a catalyst for
ensuring the country’s welfare and for the commitment
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities
to expanding State authority, promoting accountability
and implementing transitional justice measures, which
should remain at the core of our efforts.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee for her comprehensive
briefing and welcome the representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
today’s meeting.
When the Security Council last met to discuss the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/PV.9298), we had recently returned from
our visit to the country. There we heard time and again
from the authorities and civil society about the impact
of the conflict on the population. We witnessed the
plight of internally displaced people and heard directly
from them about how their lives had been disrupted.
16/22

26/06/2023

Of the dozens of illegal armed groups that are
operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the one that was mentioned most often was the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). While it is not large
in terms of personnel, the M-23 has a disproportionate
impact because it is highly organized and wellequipped. It has therefore been encouraging to see a
marked reduction in the hostilities between the M-23
and the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the past few months. We hope that the M-23
will lay down its arms and fully comply with the Luanda
communiqué of 23 November 2022. We commend
the mediation efforts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s neighbours within the framework of the
Nairobi and Luanda processes, which deserve the full
support of the international community.
Unfortunately, just when the violence from the
M-23 seems to be abating, there has been a horrifying
surge in attacks by other illegal armed groups. Brazil
condemns in the strongest terms the attack on an
internally displaced persons camp in Ituri province on
12 June. There is no justification for attacks on civilians.
We reiterate the Council’s call for all armed groups to
lay down their arms and disband. All external support
to illegal armed groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must stop. Brazil has also vehemently
condemned the attack on 16 June perpetrated by the
Allied Democratic Forces on a school in Uganda. That
attack is yet another reminder, if reminders were still
needed, of the regional dimension of the conflict in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region.
We take note of the full deployment of the East
African Community (EAC) regional force and the
imminent deployment of Angolan troops, which
will help enforce the M-23’s cantonment, as well as
the decision of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to send its own contingent. We
also take note of the EAC’s decision to create a civilian
head of mission in order to enhance political contacts
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The presence
of foreign contingents must be accompanied by
greater coordination between the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo and MONUSCO in
order to maximize their contributions to the security of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We look forward
to the results of the quadripartite summit that will take
place tomorrow in Luanda between the Economic
Community of Central African States, the EAC, the
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

International Conference on Great Lakes Region and
SADC. We hope that meeting, organized under the
auspices of the African Union with the participation
of the United Nations, will improve the coordination
among subregional bodies to address the crisis in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are encouraged by the significant reduction in
anti-MONUSCO sentiment on social networks. The
Mission’s efforts are certainly playing a part in that, but
other factors may be at play, such as the M-23 ceasefire
and the perception of society that MONUSCO has
played an important role in the protection of civilians
against the increasing violence by other armed groups.
It is a reminder that strategic communications continue
to be an important tool for increasing the Mission’s
effectiveness in fulfilling its mandate.
During the past three decades in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO — and its
predecessor, the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo — has played
an invaluable role in ensuring peace and security in that
country. Yet we are fully aware that the Mission cannot
and should not last forever. In that regard, we take note
of the request of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that the Mission accelerate its
departure. We also take note of the continuing dialogue
between MONUSCO and representatives of the
Government in the joint working group on the transition,
as well Under-Secretary-General Lacroix’s recent visit
to Kinshasa to discuss the issue. If the Mission were to
depart without meeting the benchmarks of the transition
plan it would inflict even more hardship on people in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
transition must be well coordinated with the national
and local authorities, as well as with the regional and
other external forces present in the country, and the
role of the United Nations country team in that regard
should be enhanced.
We take note of the efforts being made to prepare
for the December elections. It is very important that
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
feel represented by their political institutions. We hope
that the elections take place in an orderly and timely
manner. May they establish a new milestone on the path
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
towards a more stable and prosperous future.
The President: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.

S/PV.9358

I would like to join others in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee for her informative briefing,
and I also welcome the participation of the representatives
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
in today’s meeting. Ms. Pobee’s insights depict everevolving security and humanitarian challenges on the
ground, and there is clearly no straightforward solution
to those problems. But today we have acknowledged the
urgency of the situation and the need to work towards
creating the conditions for long-term stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like to make
two points to that effect.
First, the protection of civilians must remain at the
centre of all peace efforts. It is essential to remember
that international humanitarian law is unequivocal on
the obligations of all the parties to a conflict regarding
the protection of civilians. The United Arab Emirates
reiterates its condemnation of the actions of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and other armed groups.
We are particularly appalled by the recent heinous attack
on a school in Uganda by the Allied Democratic Forces
that left 41 dead. The armed groups, including the M-23,
must lay down their weapons and cease their hostilities
permanently and unconditionally. Efforts to ensure their
withdrawal must be redoubled.
We also condemn all forms of hate speech that fuel
hostility and discrimination and divide communities.
In resolution 2686 (2023), the Council recognized that
hate speech and related forms of intolerance can help
to drive conflict, and that eradicating them requires a
whole-of-society and whole-of-Government approach.
Putting an end to violence at the intercommunal level,
before it escalates, demands resources and effective
mediation initiatives. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and other international partners
have a critical role to play in supporting those efforts
and ensuring that they have local buy-in. MONUSCO, in
particular, should regularly consult civilian populations
and civil society about their protection needs and
incorporate their input into its protection activities. We
also encourage it to empower local actors to condemn
hate speech and the stigmatization of communities.
It will also be important to include a strategy for
the protection of civilians in the upcoming plan for the
drawdown of MONUSCO, with a particular emphasis
on the protection of sites for internally displaced
persons (IDPs). We strongly condemn the recent
attacks by the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo on IDP camps. The camps are often the only safe

23-1836817/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

haven for civilians in a vulnerable situation and must
be protected with the full force of the international
community’s ability.
Secondly, we cannot turn a blind eye to the
suffering of the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, particularly those in the east of the country.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing a
triple crisis — dramatic increases in sexual violence,
food insecurity and health and climate risks. Each of
them aggravates an already dire humanitarian context
and has even prompted a United Nations system-wide
humanitarian scale-up. Last month in North Kivu,
Médecins Sans Frontières reported that nearly 50
people per day were seeking medical treatment in just
one clinic following a sexual assault. Sexual violence
in IDP camps around Goma renders daily activities a
constant risk for women and girls. Meanwhile, food
insecurity is rapidly increasing. In some localities,
up to 65 per cent of the population are going hungry.
Humanitarian support must be scaled up significantly,
as the plan remains underfunded. The work being done
by Congolese and international humanitarian workers
on behalf of the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is essential and should be supported.
Despite the current security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, peace is not only
possible but attainable. Dialogue and diplomacy are
the foundation of a secure, stable and prosperous
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For that to happen,
inclusive dialogue will be key to better addressing
issues such as the instrumentalization of inter-ethnic
incitement and conflict at the community level. That
is particularly timely as the country prepares to hold
national elections later this year.
Regional diplomatic efforts are paramount. The
United Arab Emirates supports all initiatives aimed at
ending the conflict in the east, including the Nairobi
process, the Luanda process and other regional efforts,
including the outcomes of the quadripartite process
that is happening this week. All of those key processes
seek to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in its quest for peace and stability, but coordination and
unity of purpose among them will also be essential.
The United Arab Emirates is unwavering in its support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reaffirm our
commitment to aiding it on its path towards peace
and stability.
18/22

26/06/2023

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your country’s
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June, and to thank you for convening today’s meeting
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo. I
also thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
commitment to the cause of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. And I want to warmly greet all the Council
members here today, including the three representatives
of the African continent in this organ.
My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), about which we were just briefed
by Ms. Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa in the Departments of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations. I would
like to make some comments on the issues mentioned
in the report and the various concerns raised by the
members of the Council.
The political situation in my country, as the
report highlights, has been mainly preoccupied with
the continuation of the electoral process and the
regional and international efforts to resolve the crisis
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to the elections, it should be noted that
on 15 June His Excellency President Félix-Antoine
Tshisekedi Tshilombo put into effect legislation on the
distribution of seats for the elections. Furthermore, the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI),
which completed the voter registration process on
25 April, will deploy from 26 June to 10 July to places
such as Kwamouth to register people who had not been
registered because of the conflict. We also hope that
people in the territories of Masisi and Rutshuru will
be registered in the coming months. As I said, those
areas had not been put on the electoral rolls because
of insecurity. CENI will continue its untiring work in
accordance with my Government’s expressed desire for
transparent, inclusive and credible elections.
With regard to the security situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation
would again like to draw the Council’s attention to
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the activism and growing threats from the Rwanda
proxy Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)/Rwanda Defence
Force (RDF), the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
terrorists affiliated to Da’esh and the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo (CODECO). In addition to
the massacres and multiple violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law that they inflict
on civilians on a daily basis, those terrorist groups are
increasingly targeting camps for displaced persons.
That is unacceptable. Violating the integrity of those
camps is a crime against humanity.
Moreover, terrorist groups are operating in the
forests and protected areas of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which they exploit and scour. In doing
so, they are playing an active role in deforestation and
therefore in reducing the capacity of the Congolese
forests, which are essential to the survival of humankind
in the face of the challenges of climate change. Lastly,
it is possible that in their quest for funding, the
terrorist groups that are illegally exploiting our mineral
resources may one day gain access to the abundant
strategic and dangerous materials such as uranium that
are found in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
For those three reasons, we ask the Council to join
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in condemning
and unequivocally sanctioning these hostile armed and
terrorist groups with a firmer hand. Suggesting that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo negotiate with such
entities is almost indecent.
Our partners should stop thinking that what is
happening in our country is merely a Congolese issue.
In one way or another, if we do not act collectively to
eliminate those groups and address the root causes of
the conflict directly, we will all pay the price of the
developments in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Council should not forget that the
conflict that has ravaged the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo for more than 25 years and has
led to more than 10 million deaths did not originate in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It was exported
and subsequently transplanted into Congolese soil.
Returning to the subject of the M-23/RDF movement,
it is fickle. It has never respected agreements. Regarding
the Luanda agreement of November 2022, which some
speakers have mentioned, it has so far not been abided
by. The M-23 continues to occupy vast swathes of
territory in the Congo and to kill people without any
response from the forces capable of preventing them
from doing so.

S/PV.9358

At the regional level, political, security and
diplomatic efforts continue to solidify around the
Nairobi and Luanda processes and the announcement of
the deployment of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). The tenth Extraordinary Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), held
on 3 June, reaffirmed the importance of implementing
the Luanda joint road map, adopted in November
2022 and modified in Addis Ababa in February
2023. The Summit specifically reminded the M-23
of its obligation to withdraw from the areas under its
occupation in the lead-up to its preliminary cantonment
in Rumangabo before its relocation to Maniema. Two
other major meetings are planned. Preparations began
last Friday, 23 June, for the African Union quadripartite
summit of the East African Community, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the ICGLR and
SADC, scheduled for 27 June in Luanda, on the security
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The meeting will cover coordination among all
the forces deployed there to prevent any overlap of their
peacekeeping efforts in the eastern part of the country.
The Nairobi meeting on discussions on the cantonment
of the M-23 is scheduled for 30 June.
In that context, the operationalization of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme warrants support, as it
is one of the pillars of the peacebuilding process. We
would like to take this opportunity to call on partners
to step up funding for the Programme.
Before concluding this part of our statement on
regional dynamics, we would like to set the record
straight with regard to some recent allegations.
First, as my delegation has repeatedly said and
demonstrated, the simple truth is that the Forces
démocratiques de libération de Rwanda (FDLR) pose
no real military or security threat to Rwanda. No one
can tell me of a single incident in which the FDLR has
attacked Rwanda over the past five or 10 years. We
have no evidence of that. To this day no one can cite
any serious operation carried out by the remnants of
that organization against Rwanda. It continues to serve
as a pretext for justifying a predatory agenda aimed
at exploiting the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and realizing Mr. Paul Kagame’s
dreams of territorial expansion. The Council will recall
his recent speech in Benin, during which he spoke of
retaking the territories that the Kingdom of Rwanda

23-1836819/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

had allegedly lost to the Congo, which is entirely false,
as I said in my most recent statement to the Council
(see S/PV.9307). Stop dreaming. Congolese land is
sacrosanct. As President Tshisekedi has said, with the
backing of his people, our country will not give up an
inch of its national territory.
Secondly, the actual sabotage of the Nairobi and
Luanda processes is being jointly orchestrated by the
M-23/RDF dyad. It is they that have not been respecting
the Luanda agreement — not us. They are the ones that
have not respected it. And no one can say that it is we
who are sabotaging the negotiations process, because it
is not true. It is they that are doing it, as the facts clearly
demonstrate. The message and the final communiqué
of the 3 June ICGLR meeting, which I just mentioned,
revealed that reality.
Thirdly, the statistics concerning the massacres
committed and incited by the aggressors and their
proxies in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, with 10 million people killed, provide ample
and painful evidence of the threat of the erasure of
the civilian Congolese population there. Killing,
raping, terrorizing and traumatizing the indigenous
populations of the east and driving them off their land
into insanitary camps for displaced persons in order to
ensure their subsequent slow extermination — that is
the sad reality on the ground in the east. It is not some
fiction about an imaginary threat of the ethnic cleansing
of the members of a particular group in the Congo.
Fourthly, my Government demands a minimum of
respect for the civilian populations of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the brave Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and
their leadership, fighting with their lives to free my
country from the aggression.
The humanitarian situation is extremely worrisome.
The $2.25 billion emergency humanitarian aid plan
launched in Kinshasa to deal with the crisis has so
far received very little funding. As for the partnership
with MONUSCO and its withdrawal strategy, my
Government is continuing a constructive dialogue with
the Mission to reconfigure the transition plan. While we
wait for the definitive outcome of those efforts and the
Government’s official pronouncement on the matter, we
must keep in mind on the one hand that MONUSCO’s
exit is irreversible, and on the other that we must focus
on the benchmarks for creating the minimum security
conditions necessary for a successful withdrawal.
20/22

26/06/2023

Before concluding my statement, on behalf of my
delegation I would like to make a number of requests
of the Council.
First, we ask it to reaffirm the inviolability of the
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
second, to support both the Nairobi and Luanda
processes and the deployment of SADC; third, to
sanction the ADF, the M-23, CODECO and all the
other terrorist movements more robustly; fourth, to
demand the acceleration of the withdrawal of the
RDF troops covered by the M-23 from the areas under
their occupation so that they can return to their real
country of origin; fifth, to prevent impunity for the
repeated attacks on camps for displaced persons and
the massacres in Kishishe and Lala in Ituri and other
places; sixth, to support the financing campaign for the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme; and seventh, to adopt
sanctions targeting the M-23, the RDF officers who
have crossed the border, the Rwandan authorities
concerned, the ADF, CODECO and their leaders.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank you for giving me the
floor, Madam President, and I would also like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Ms. Martha
Pobee, for her briefing and the members of the Security
Council for their statements.
We would like to express our gratitude for the
regional endeavours that have led to a cessation of
hostilities in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We particularly acknowledge the support
of the Member States in the Great Lakes region
that have contributed to the implementation of the
regional mechanisms involved, as well as the daily
efforts of the East African Community regional force
on the ground. In view of the positive progress we
have seen, we urge the international community to
provide support and enhance regional initiatives in
order to ensure the complete implementation of those
mechanisms. However, we are deeply disappointed by
the lack of an official statement from the Council or
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
condemning the ongoing acts of genocide targeting
Congolese Tutsi and Rwandophones on a daily basis.
We thank those Member States that have condemned
hate speech.
23-18368

26/06/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

As we have heard and as has been reported, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has given financial support, weapons and political
cover to a number of illegal armed groups, including
the genocidal group of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), which is under United
Nations sanctions. It is therefore not surprising that
there has been a dramatic surge in violence against
civilians. What is surprising is that the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo finds himself able to state categorically before
the members of the Security Council that the FDLR has
never attacked Rwanda in the past 10 years, when last
year we all witnessed it carry out three attacks together
with Democratic Republic of the Congo forces.
In the province of Ituri alone, in the space of less
than three months, 643 civilians were killed by armed
groups such as the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo and the Allied Democratic Forces. That
is a level of violence not seen since 2017. What is
particularly concerning is that those grave human rights
violations occurred quite close to the MONUSCO base
and to Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) positions. We are also concerned
about the apparent silence of MONUSCO and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
about the genocidal nature of those atrocities.
Last week, on 18 June, the United Nations commemorated the International Day for Countering Hate Speech.
During her moving speech, Under-Secretary-General
Alice Nderitu, the United Nations Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide, reminded us that genocide
does not start with bullets or machetes but with hate
speech. The ways in which the authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have given licence to poisonous anti-Rwandophone and anti-Tutsi hate speech,
public incitement, mob killings and targeted violence
have been detailed in a number of reports of the United
Nations and other regional and international organizations. Anti-Rwandophone slogans and hate speech are
openly propagated in schools and saturate Congolese
social-media platforms on a daily basis. What is even
more concerning is that high-level Congolese officials
propagate anti-Rwanda sentiment as an expression of patriotism or civic duty to score political points. We call on
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
to investigate those crimes and take appropriate action.
Additionally, efforts should be made to strengthen the
legal frameworks that address hate speech and ensure
accountability for those who engage in such behaviour.

S/PV.9358

The latest report of the Secretary-General highlights
the key active armed groups perpetrating atrocities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but inexplicably
omits the FDLR, despite the fact that it is the main
orchestrator of the instability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The FDLR militia stands out
from the more than 120 armed groups operating in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo on three
counts — its military expertise, an extensive economic
network and the unwavering support it enjoys fighting
alongside the Congolese army, the FARDC.
The proliferation of hate speech and anti-Tutsi
genocide ideology widely observed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo today reveals the extent of the
FDLR’s reach. Given the imposition of a number of
sanctions and the establishment of various regional
agreements, it was expected that members of the FDLR
would be disarmed and repatriated to Rwanda to face
justice for their role in the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi. Instead, both the FARDC and the FDLR have
consistently violated Rwanda’s territorial integrity,
including through a number of cross-border rocketfiring incidents, incursions into Rwanda by soldiers
of the Congolese armed forces and several airspace
violations by Congolese fighter jets. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s choice to integrate the FDLR
into Government forces rather than repatriating its
members sends a strong and clear message to Rwanda,
the region and the international community that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is not interested
in peace.
Despite being fully aware of the collaboration of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with the FDLR, neither MONUSCO nor the
Security Council have taken any substantive action.
Instead, Rwanda has been made a scapegoat for the
insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That unfortunately reflects an unwillingness on
the part of the international community to face up to
the root causes of the conflict there and to demand true
accountability from the Congolese Government, which
is responsible for that legacy of failure.
Rwanda remains committed to working within
regional mechanisms, particularly the Nairobi and
Luanda processes. It is common knowledge that
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has stalled the implementation of those efforts,
including by frustrating the East African Community
regional force’s ability to execute its mandate.

23-1836821/22

S/PV.9358

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Nonetheless, the implementation of the Nairobi and
Luanda peace processes has been progressing, the East
African Community regional force has fully deployed,
a ceasefire has been secured and the Mouvement du
23 mars has withdrawn from its previously occupied
positions, as agreed. Ideally, those achievements should
be followed by the Government’s political process aimed
at bringing the region close to its peace objectives.
However, and not surprisingly, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has not taken a single piece of action in
line with the regional peace agreements.
To conclude, the security challenges in our region
are complex, but they are soluble. Amplifying the
false allegations of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo while never holding it
accountable for allying itself with armed groups that
together with the FARDC commit serious human
rights abuses against civilians cannot lead to solutions.

22/22

26/06/2023

Treating the Government as a perpetual victim despite
the evidence to the contrary is symbolic of how the
dysfunction in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been encouraged and sustained for decades. As
long as Kinshasa backs the genocidal FDLR and
other anti-Rwanda elements, Rwanda’s defensive and
preventive mechanisms will remain in place to guard
against violations of our borders and airspace and to
counter any spillover into Rwanda to ensure total
security for our territory. Rwanda will never allow the
FDLR and its backers to cause any harm, directly or
indirectly, to Rwanda or its people.
We call on the international community to support
the ongoing Luanda and Nairobi peace processes,
which constitute our region’s best chance for peace
and stability.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-18368
