S/2016/902

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 October 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 26 October 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The present letter describes the events surrounding the plebiscite of 2 October
2016 in Colombia, the decisions taken since by the Government of Colombia and
the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army (FARC-EP) and my
recommendations with regard to the United Nations Mission in Colombia,
consistent with resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016). I plan to present my first
progress report on the activities of the Mission by 26 December 2016, at the
conclusion of the initial 90 days of its 12-month mandate.
Recent developments
On 26 September 2016, following four years of peace talks in Havana, the
President of Colombia and the leader of FARC-EP signed, in Cartagena, Colombia,
the Final Agreement for the Termination of the Conflict and the Construction of a
Stable and Lasting Peace. One of the provisions of the Final Agreement was that its
entry into force would be subject to a plebiscite to be conducted in accordance with
modalities decided by the Constitutional Court of Colombia.
The plebiscite was held one week later, on 2 October 2016, following a
one-month campaign, which, although fiercely disputed, was one of the most peaceful
in the country’s history. The rate of participation was very low, at 37 per cent. The
“no” vote prevailed by a very small margin of 54,000 votes, or 0.15 per cent of
registered voters. While the “yes” vote prevailed in many rural areas where the
conflict had been most intense, the “no” vote carried the day in many cities, with the
exception of Bogota, Barranquilla and Cali.
In accordance with the decision of the Constitutional Court, the outcome of the
plebiscite made it legally impossible for the President to i mplement the Final
Agreement. The Final Agreement included the Agreement on the Bilateral and
Definitive Ceasefire and Cessation of Hostilities and the Laying Down of Arms,
which was concluded on 23 June 2016 and whose provisions were described in my
letter to the Security Council of 22 July 2016 (S/2016/643) and, in greater detail, in
my report of 18 August 2016 (S/2016/729). At the same time, the Court reaffirmed
the President’s constitutional responsibility regarding the maintenance of public
order, including negotiations with armed groups.

16-18772 (E)

311016

*1618772*

S/2016/902

Acting under his constitutional authority, on 29 August 2016, the President
declared, simultaneously with FARC-EP, a definitive bilateral ceasefire and
cessation of hostilities. The bilateral ceasefire and the preceding unilateral ceasefire
by FARC-EP, in place since 2015, continued to hold with a very low number of
incidents during the previous months as both sides and the Missi on were preparing
for the implementation of the provisions of the Agreement on the Ceasefire and the
Laying Down of Arms. As I informed the Council in my report of 18 August, those
preparations included the drafting of a number of protocols concerning the rules of
the ceasefire, the functioning of a tripartite mechanism to verify the ceasefire, and
the security of the members of the mechanism. The preparations also included
working with the Government on the deployment of the tripartite mechanism at the
national and regional levels, visiting prospective local sites, and outreach by the
Mission to local communities to explain the ceasefire and the Mission’s mandate.
On the afternoon of 2 October 2016, as the results of the plebiscite emerged and
concerns mounted that the “no” vote could lead to a resumption of hostilities, the
President of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, and the leader of FARC -EP,
Timoleón Jiménez, reiterated the full commitment of both parties to the definitive
bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities in force since 29 August 2016.
Joint communiqué of 7 October 2016
On 3 October 2016, the heads of the peace negotiating teams of the
Government and FARC-EP met in Havana to discuss the way forward. Their
discussions resulted in a joint communiqué issued on 7 October in which the
following actions were outlined: a government-led political dialogue with “no”
supporters and the citizenry at large that could lead the parties to make adjustments
to the Final Agreement; the design of a temporary protocol aimed at consolidating
the ceasefire by establishing a clear separation of forces, rules of behaviour and the
application of the tripartite mechanism referred to in resolution 2261 (2016) to
consolidate the definitive bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and
guarantee the security of both sides and the protection of communities in the
conflict areas; and the continuation of a series of confidence -building measures that
had been put in place in the course of the past year, such as humanitarian demining,
crop substitution, the separation of minors from the FARC-EP ranks and the search
for disappeared persons, among others.
In the same communiqué, the two parties requested the Secretary -General, and
through him, the Security Council, to authorize the Mission to verify th e future
ceasefire protocol, as the coordinator of the tripartite mechanism. The functions
fulfilled by the Mission in relation to the ceasefire protocol would be identical in
nature to the functions conferred upon the Mission by resolution 2261 (2016),
except for the verification of the laying down of arms by FARC -EP, which would be
postponed until the successful conclusion of the political dialogue and the adoption
of a new Final Agreement.
In the wake of the plebiscite, the leaders of the opposition to the Final
Agreement stressed their own commitment to the achievement of peace, the
paramount need to preserve the ceasefire and their support for its international
verification by the Mission. President Santos initiated dialogue with groups and
individuals who supported the Final Agreement and those who opposed it, including

2/6

16-18772

S/2016/902

the former President and current Senator Álvaro Uribe. At the same time, numerous
peaceful demonstrations, in particular by students and young people, took place in
several cities and towns in Colombia, at which participants called for the
termination of the conflict and the immediate conclusion of a peace agreement. At
the time of writing, most of the proposals from the leaders of the o pposition had
been formally tabled, and the Government had taken to Havana a package of
reforms for discussion with FARC-EP. It should be noted that, while opposition
leaders have directed their criticism at many of the provisions of the Final
Agreement, they have not challenged the Agreement on the Ceasefire and the
Laying Down of Arms or its verification by a tripartite monitoring and verification
mechanism with the participation of government and FARC -EP observers and
coordinated by the Mission.
Ceasefire protocol of 13 October 2016
On 13 October 2016, the two parties finalized the ceasefire protocol, with the
participation of the Mission, and signed it. On 20 October, a presidential decree was
issued to facilitate implementation of the protocol. What follows is a brief
description of its main features and the tasks that its verification by the tripartite
mechanism would entail. Those tasks are very similar to the recommended tasks
described in paragraph 10 of my report of 18 August, which the Securi ty Council
authorized in its resolution 2307 (2016).
The protocol of 13 October 2016 defines a transitional separation of forces
that is to serve as a bridge between the current situation, in which the de ployment of
FARC-EP structures is too dispersed throughout the country for the ceasefire to be
reliably verified, and the separation of forces foreseen in the Agreement on the
Ceasefire and the Laying Down of Arms. That Agreement provides for the eventual
establishment of 27 local zones and points at which FARC -EP will ultimately gather
its fighters and militias and the Mission will receive their weapons. Under that
Agreement, the laying down of weapons is due to last 180 days.
The concept of separation of forces in the protocol of 13 October 2016
provides for the move by FARC-EP of its fighters and militias to between 50 and
60 temporary pre-grouping points that have yet to be finalized. The Army will
redeploy its units so that there will be a minimum distance of 3 km between them
and FARC-EP camps established at each temporary pre-grouping point. I should add
that, under the protocol, the Government is responsible for providing logistical
support to the temporary pre-grouping points. That will be a major factor in
ensuring the sustainability of the ceasefire. During the first 30 days after the signing
of the protocol, that responsibility will rest with FARC -EP.
Under the protocol, the two parties will observe the rules agreed upon on
5 August 2016 and referred to in paragraph 3 of my report of 18 August, including
commitments to refrain from a series of acts that could lead to armed confrontation
and to refrain from any violence or threat of violence that may put the civilian
population at risk, in particular acts motivated by gender, and a commitment to the
security of all members of the tripartite mechanism who will verify the agreement,
including the Mission’s observers.

16-18772

3/6

S/2016/902

The verification of the protocol will also follow along the lines indicated in
my report of 18 August 2016. The Mission will be part of and coordinate the
tripartite mechanism, with the participation of Government and FARC -EP observers.
Since the issuance of my report, the mechanism has been established in Bogota and
in six of its eight regional headquarters. Over the coming weeks, it will deploy to
the remaining two regional headquarters and will initiate deployment to the 27 local
headquarters.
The difference between the verification of the protocol of 13 October 2016 and
the modalities for verification described in my report of 18 August lies in the fact
that the temporary pre-grouping points and the Army units deployed in their vicinity
are not adjacent to the 27 local headquarters of the monitoring and verification
mechanism. Verification of the separation of forces and compliance with the
ceasefire rules will therefore entail periodic visits from those local headquarters to
areas whose size, including the temporary pre-grouping points, the 3 km-wide
security zone and the areas of military unit operations, will be larger than initially
envisaged.
The basic tasks of the Mission will be identical to those described in paragraph 10
of my report of 18 August 2016, namely: (a) organizing the operations of the
mechanism, taking into account the coordination of tasks, threat analysis and
logistical requirements; (b) monitoring the local sites and visiting the FARC -EP
camps; (c) monitoring the security zones and visiting redeployed army units; and
(d) visiting neighbouring population centres in order to interact with the local
population and authorities. The last task is one of the key functions of the civilian
component of the Mission at the local level.
The security of the members of the Mission will continue to be the
responsibility of the Government of Colombia. The commitment of both the
Government and FARC-EP to the security of the members of the Mission was
reiterated in the joint communiqué of 7 October 2016, along with an invitation to
countries that have contributed observers to continue deploying their men and
women under the United Nations flag. The National Police of Colombia will
continue to assume responsibility for the security of the monitoring and verification
mechanism and the Mission at large. A special unit has been esta blished for that
purpose. The Department of Safety and Security will continue to provide operational
support and advice relating to the Mission’s security management system, policies
and procedures, in close cooperation with the Colombian authorities.
To fulfil the tasks required for the verification of the protocol of 13 October
2016, the structure of the Mission will remain as described in paragraphs 16 to 32 of
my report of 18 August and approved by the Security Council in its resolution 2307
(2016). Pending the entry into force of provisions regarding the laying down of
arms by FARC-EP, about 400 observers will be required, which is less than the 450
initially foreseen, on the understanding that the additional 50 will be needed when
the laying down of arms begins. The 400 observers will require increased logistical
efforts as they will be covering a larger number of sites. Expenses relating to the
laying down of arms will be deferred until that process b egins. Overall, there is no
anticipated increase in the resources required to implement activities under the
protocol.

4/6

16-18772

S/2016/902

In addition, since the structure, composition and deployment of the tripartite
mechanism remain the same, the recommendation in paragra ph 36 of my report of
18 August 2016 relating to sharing the cost of activating and operating the
mechanism, endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2307 (2016), stands.
The support referred to in paragraph 2 of that resolution will be provided when the
preparation of the zones and points for the laying down of arms by FARC -EP takes
place.
Observations
The verification of the transitional separation of forces is viable from a
technical standpoint. It is also viable because both sides are genuinely committed to
it. It may come as a surprise that, in the middle of the political crisis that challenged
the validity of the Final Agreement, the two parties, particularly FARC -EP, were
able to agree so quickly to a separation of forces, which reflects a clear intention to
bring the conflict to a definitive end. It also reflects the high level of confidence that
has been built over the years of negotiations in Havana and the positive interaction
in the field between the Armed Forces and FARC-EP. It also stems from a
conviction shared by both sides that a return to conflict would be a worst -case
outcome.
The determination not to return to conflict is not exclusive to the two sides. It
has permeated the statements made by both opponents and supporters of the
Agreement and the slogans of those who have marched peacefully through the
streets of Colombia. If anything, the commitment to peace across the country has
emerged stronger and more vocal from the plebiscite, thus strengthening the
consensus around the presence of the Mission.
From that perspective, it is significant and promising that, following two years
of exploratory talks, the Government and another armed group, the National
Liberation Army (ELN), announced in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on
10 October 2016 the formal start of their negotiations, with the public phase to
begin in Quito on 27 October. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Brazil,
Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, Norway and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) on assuming
the responsibility to support this very important new process.
The parties have agreed that verification of the new separation of forces will
begin in early November 2016, after the FARC-EP members of the monitoring and
verification mechanism have completed their training as observers. At the time of
writing, the Mission had deployed 152 observers in the capital, Bogota, and in eight
regions. Given the level of logistical preparation, it can accommodate immediate ly
another 68 observers. That will allow the Mission to initiate verification activities
with six observers and civilian staff at each local headquarters. It will be important
to quickly ramp up the Mission’s capacity. I take this opportunity to reiterate my
gratitude to the members of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and other countries that have made observers available to the Mission. Their
continued support in the coming weeks will be critical.
As indicated earlier, the protocol of 13 October 2016 is meant to consolidate,
including through international verification, the bilateral ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities declared on 29 August by the Government of Colombia and FARC -EP. It

16-18772

5/6

S/2016/902

will apply pending the entry into force of the Agreement on the Ceasefire and the
Laying Down of Arms, together with the Final Agreement, which both parties are
committed to modifying, through political dialogue, to reflect the outcome of the
2 October plebiscite.
That political dialogue began in the wake of the plebiscite and is ongoing at
the time of writing. The Government of Colombia and FARC -EP have stressed that
their goal is a dynamic process leading to adjustments, clarifications or
rectifications to the Final Agreement, followed by the entry i nto force of a new
Agreement under modalities that maximize its legitimacy.
In discussions with the Government, FARC-EP and groups in Colombia that
support or oppose the Final Agreement, the Mission has insisted on the need for the
ceasefire to be underpinned by a robust political process leading to a broad -based
agreement as soon as possible. I have emphasized to key leaders, both publicly and
privately, the need to compromise to ensure that the peace accords gain support and
that the peace process does not lose momentum, with the attendant risk that what
has been patiently built over the years could unravel.
I recognize the challenges inherent in reaching consensus. Political wisdom on
all sides will be required to overcome the divisions that have been brought into
relief by the plebiscite.
Let me emphasize that, in the current context, the relevance of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia has, if anything, increased. Its presence helps to foster
popular confidence that, however complex the ongoing political dialogue may be, a
point of no return has been reached in the search for peace in Colombia.
The Security Council has been unanimously and steadfastly supportive of the
Colombia peace process. I recommend that it grant the request of the Government of
Colombia and FARC-EP that the Mission be authorized to verify implementation of
the ceasefire protocol signed on 13 October 2016. As I described in the preceding
paragraphs, that request is fully consistent with the mandate defined in resolution
2261 (2016) and my recommendations on the Mission’s structure, tasks and size
approved in resolution 2307 (2016).
I should be grateful if the authorization would be granted as soon as possible
so as to enable the Mission to obtain from the General Assembly without delay the
resources it requires to meet the high expectations of Colombian society today.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

6/6

16-18772
