S/2021/332

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2021
Original: English

Na,

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested the Secretary-General to report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of
UNMIK, and developments related thereto, from 16 September 2020 to 15 March
2021.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities in
Kosovo, and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force continue to perform their roles
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo continues its presence in Kosovo, in line with the statement by the
President of the Security Council of 26 November 2008 ( S/PRST/2008/44) and the
report of the Secretary-General of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
The main political developments centred on early legislative elections held on
14 February 2021, following several months of political turbulence compounded by
the public confirmation, in November 2020, by the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, of
an indictment against several prominent political figures, inclu ding the President of
Kosovo at the time, Hashim Thaçi, for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Mr. Thaçi subsequently resigned and the President of the Assembly of Kosovo, Vjosa
Osmani, assumed the duties of Acting President of Kosovo on 5 November. A mid the
ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its deepening socioeconomic
repercussions, the February elections resulted in a victory for the Movement for Self Determination (Vetёvendosje), while most other major parties suffered losses. Talk s
to form a new government and elect the next President of Kosovo followed. The
developments slowed the pace of discussions in the framework of the European
Union-facilitated Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. In early March, the European Union
Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and other Western Balkan

21-04162 (E)

070421

*2104162*

S/2021/332

regional issues held a series of high-level meetings in Pristina and Belgrade to
establish modalities for the continuation of the dialogue once a new government is
formed in Pristina.
4.
The stage was set for the February polls by a ruling of the Constitutional Court
of Kosovo, issued on 6 January 2021, that the formation in June 2020 of the
government led by the Prime Minister, Avdullah Hoti, had not been in compliance
with the Constitution owing to an invalid vote cast by a member of the Assembly who
had previously been convicted of a criminal offence. The Court ruled that no person
convicted of a criminal offence in the final instance during the preceding three years
can either be a candidate for or hold a valid seat in the Assembly. Pursuant to the
ruling, Ms. Osmani dissolved the legislature on the same day and set 14 February
2021 as the date for early legislative elections.
5.
On 2 February, the Central Election Commission certified 1,0 52 candidates (697
men and 355 women), representing 28 political entities, to compete for the 120
legislative seats. All major Kosovo Albanian parties chose to compete individually
rather than in pre-election coalitions, while the Kosovo Serb community was
represented by the Serbian List party and two other civic initiatives. The candidate
certification process witnessed the non-certification of candidates with recent
criminal convictions. After a review and appeals process involving, at different
stages, the Central Election Commission, the Election Complaints and Appeals Panel,
and the Supreme Court of Kosovo, 27 candidates from five political entities were
barred from contesting the election. They included the leader of Vet ёvendosje, Albin
Kurti, who was convicted by a final judgment in September 2018 of a charge related
to the release of tear gas into the chamber of the Assembly of Kosovo in 2015.
Vetёvendosje and Ms. Osmani, whose newly established civic initiative ran on a joint
ticket with Vetëvendosje, protested the decision. Regardless of his non-certification
as a candidate, Mr. Kurti was put forward as his party’s nominee for Prime Minister.
6.
Given that the term of the Acting President expires on 5 May, the legislative
elections should be followed by the election of the next President of Kosovo to avoid
another institutional crisis. So far, Ms. Osmani, as part of her alliance with
Vetëvendosje, and the leader of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, Ramush
Haradinaj, have publicly expressed interest in the post of President.
7.
The elections were conducted peacefully in all 38 municipalities of Kosovo. For
the first time, neither the European Union nor OSCE deployed observation missions
for elections in Kosovo. The European Union dispatched a thre e-person electoral
expert mission to follow the entire election process and prepare a report and
recommendations intended to strengthen that process. The elections were monitored
by non-governmental organizations, political parties and representatives of t he
diplomatic community. The voter turnout was reported to be 48.78 per cent (903,386
votes), slightly higher than in the previous elections in October 2019 (44.56 per cent
or 826,916 votes). Out-of-Kosovo voting was significantly higher, with 57,065 ballo ts
cast by mail, compared with 19,789 in 2019.
8.
The Central Election Commission announced the certified results on 13 March,
following the conclusion of the complaints and appeals process. Vet ёvendosje, which
had campaigned on a platform centred on the rule of law and the fight against
corruption, obtained 50.28 per cent of the votes, which translates into 58 seats in the
Assembly. The margin of victory is the widest obtained by any single party in Kosovo
since 2001. Among other Kosovo Albanian political entities, the Democratic Party of
Kosovo came second, with 17.0 per cent of the votes and 19 seats, followed by the
Democratic League of Kosovo, with 12.73 per cent and 15 seats, and the Alliance for
the Future of Kosovo, with 7.12 per cent and 8 seats. The Social Democratic Party of
Kosovo failed to reach the 5 per cent electoral threshold. Out of 20 seats guaranteed
2/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

for non-majority communities, the Serbian List secured all 10 seats earmarked for the
Kosovo Serb community, while the remaining 10 seats we re distributed as follows: 3
for the Kosovo Bosniak community, 1 each for the Kosovo Ashkali, Kosovo Egyptian
and Kosovo Gorani communities, and 2 each for the Kosovo Roma and Kosovo
Turkish communities.
9.
Partial recounts and nullification of votes during the complaints and appeals
process led to a few changes in mandate distribution, most notably affecting the
non-majority communities. In particular, allegations that recently formed political
entities representing the Kosovo Bosniak and Kosovo Roma commu nities had
wrongfully secured seats through a disproportionally high number of votes received
from Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities were upheld by the Election Complaints
and Appeals Panel on 8 March and subsequently the Supreme Court on 12 March.
The decisions recalibrated the winning entities among the Kosovo Bosniak and
Kosovo Roma communities. The three seats reserved for the Kosovo Bosniak
community were filled by Coalition Vakat, the New Democratic Party and the Social
Democratic Union, while United Community – Adrijana Hodžić, a new civic
initiative, lost a seat. Although the Kosovo Roma community retained two seats, the
new Roma Initiative lost one seat to the Kosovo Roma Progressive Movement.
10. The elections also saw women secure 43 of the 120 seats in the legislature, or
35.83 per cent, exceeding the 30 per cent gender quota. Vetёvendosje fielded the
highest proportion of successful female candidates (23 of 58) and a woman,
Ms. Osmani, garnered the most votes ever for a candidate in Kosovo ele ctions
(300,788 votes).
11. As of the end of the reporting period, Vetёvendosje was continuing
consultations, in particular with the parties representing the non -majority
communities, to form a governing coalition. On 15 March, it initiated talks with all
political parties to discuss modalities for the election of the next President. The
constitutive session of the Assembly of Kosovo was held on 22 March and the deputy
leader of Vetёvendosje, Glauk Konjufca, was elected President of the Assembly.
Meanwhile, the Democratic League of Kosovo and the Democratic Party of Kosovo,
turned their focus to internal party reforms in preparation for the forthcoming
municipal elections slated for October 2021.
12. The confirmation, on 26 October, by a pretrial judge of the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers, of the indictment filed by the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office against highprofile defendants had profound repercussions on the political scene. The indictment
for war crimes and crimes against humanity was confirmed agains t Mr. Thaçi; the
leader of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, Kadri Veseli; the leader of the
Vetёvendosje caucus, Rexhep Selimi; and a former Acting President of Kosovo, Jakup
Krasniqi. Mr. Thaçi, who resigned from office, and the other defendants submitted
voluntarily to pretrial detention in The Hague. All the defendants pleaded not guilty
at their initial hearings.
13. On 26 November, the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court of Kosovo
rejected a 24 August proposal by Mr. Thaçi to alter the manda te of the Kosovo
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office by means of a constitutional
amendment. The Court ruled that the proposed amendments would diminish the rights
and freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution, in particular the rights of persons
involved in the proceedings, including victims and protected witnesses. It
reconfirmed the mandate of the Chambers and the Office until an appropriate
notification by the Council of the European Union.
14. On 6 October, the European Commission released its annual report on Kosovo,
which provided a mixed assessment of progress, including in combating corruption
and ensuring the independence of the judiciary. The report attributed slower progress
21-04162

3/23

S/2021/332

to continued political instability and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Developments during the reporting period further highlighted these shortcomings. On
9 October, the United States of America and the European Union, citing continued
political interference and lack of transparency, withdrew from mo nitoring the process
of appointments to the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council and of chief prosecutors. The
Council subsequently requested the Ministry of Justice to amend the legal frameworks
for such appointments to address those concerns. On 19 October, the government
abolished the anti-corruption department of the Kosovo Police, a step that drew
further international criticism.
15. The overall security situation in Kosovo remained stable, with a few incidents
reported affecting non-majority communities. On 17 November, in Gračanica/
Graçanicë municipality, a billboard in support of the defendants before the Specialist
Chambers was burned by unknown perpetrators. The incident sparked further tensions
among the Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb communities, prom pting Mr. Hoti to
call for calm. The Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government of Serbia
condemned the incident. In November, two incidents of defacement of Serbian
language road signs, an attempt to set fire to a Serbian flag, and a verbal and phys ical
attack on a Kosovo Serb resident of the ethnically mixed village of Kišnica/Kishnicë
were also reported.

III. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) impact and response
16. The reporting period saw the largest spike of infections in Kosovo since the
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, with the highest single-day total of 1,047 new
cases reported on 13 November. With little bed capacity remaining in Pristina ’s
central hospital, additional COVID-19 units were established in seven regional
hospitals across Kosovo. After a period of decline, the number of active cases climbed
again from mid-January. Following the tightening of restrictions in November, the
Kosovo authorities eased measures on 15 January and 11 February. General
compliance with restrictions, including on public gatherings, was problematic,
especially during the election campaign. On 8 February, the Ombudsperson
Institution of Kosovo expressed concern about low public compliance and called on
relevant institutions to ensure stricter adherence to the measures in order to prevent
the further spread of the virus. One year into the pandemic, the assessment of United
Nations agencies was that the socioeconomic impact of COVID -19 had continued to
take its toll on Kosovo, marked by growing unemployment, con tinued loss of income,
setbacks to education and an increase in domestic violence. By the end of the
reporting period, some 82,550 cases of COVID-19 and more than 1,824 deaths had
been reported in Kosovo.
17. Although the government’s legislative efforts were hindered by the lack of a
parliamentary quorum throughout the reporting period, the Assembly of Kosovo
adopted, on 12 October, the Draft Law on Economic Recovery – COVID-19, which
had been pending since June 2020. On 16 October, the Assembly also rati fied, with
the Council of Europe Development Bank, a Loan Framework Agreement worth
35 million euros to support the public health response to the pandemic. The Kosovo
government and the European Union Office in Kosovo also signed, on 20 November,
a 26.5 million euro contract on budget support assistance related to the COVID -19
response. On 29 December, one week prior to its dissolution, the Assembly adopted
the Law on Budget Appropriations for 2021.
18. The reporting period was also characterized by frictions resulting from the
activities of the Government of Serbia-supported public health institutions in the
Kosovo Serb-majority areas. On 26 December, the start of vaccinations in northern

4/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

Kosovo with Government of Serbia-provided vaccines provoked a strong reaction
from political actors in Pristina. The Kosovo government launched an investigation
into the delivery of vaccines to northern Kosovo and the compliance of that delivery
with Kosovo public health protocols. In protest, health-care workers from the
Belgrade-supported system held a rally in North Mitrovica on 25 January. The
Belgrade-supported institutions, meanwhile, discontinued vaccinations in northern
Kosovo, offering Kosovo residents vaccination in locations in Serbia.
19. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, UNMIK and the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes remained operational, while implementing risk reduction measures for staff, including telecommuting, and coordinating efforts to
ensure staff welfare, continuity of operations, and sup port to the local authorities and
communities. UNMIK put in place the necessary equipment, facilities and specialized
personnel to treat United Nations staff and their dependants, except for the most
critical cases, which would require medical evacuation. The Mission continued to
operate two forward medical teams to provide assistance to personnel and eligible
dependants. An in-house laboratory to conduct reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction tests became operational, with the support of additiona l temporary staff. As
at the end of the reporting period, there had been a total of 141 confirmed cases of
COVID-19 among United Nations staff and their dependants in Kosovo, including
117 cases among UNMIK staff and dependants (with 24 cases still active) and 24
among United Nations Kosovo team staff and dependants (with 4 active cases).
20. In responding to COVID-19, UNMIK, in close coordination with the United
Nations Kosovo team, continued to support public health institutions and the people
of Kosovo, in particular those from vulnerable communities. With most of its
programmatic activities adapted to focus on the needs arising from the pandemic, the
Mission distributed food and hygiene packages to vulnerable communities, and
continued to mobilize and support women and youth volunteers to produce personal
protective equipment. UNMIK also supported the Office of the Language
Commissioner, within the Prime Minister’s Office, in translating COVID-19 public
information materials into the languages of non-majority communities, such as
Serbian and Turkish. The Mission and the United Nations Kosovo team led the
dissemination, including on social media, of verified public health information to
counter misinformation. A series of multilingual public awareness campa igns was
also conducted in cooperation with the authorities, using social media, outdoor
installations, and public service announcements, to promote compliance with
containment measures.
21. The World Health Organization (WHO) and other agencies continued to support
public health institutions, including through the deployment of technical missions and
the provision of experts, the reinforcement of surveillance, infection control and
testing capacities, and the procurement of essential equipment. An innovat ive field
data collection tool for public health emergencies, known as Go.Data, was introduced.
Procedures in domestic violence shelters across Kosovo were reinforced with
guidelines on addressing public health emergencies. A COVID -19 vaccination
committee established by the Ministry of Health, WHO and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) supported the development of a vaccination deployment
plan and assisted the government in liaising with the Global Alliance for Vaccines
and Immunization, and in securing access to the Advanced Market Commitment of
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility. COVAX, which is co-led
by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, the Global Alliance and
WHO alongside the key delivery partner UNICEF, has allocated a total of 100,800
doses to Kosovo in the first round of allotments, to be delivered through May.
UNICEF will continue to work with the Global Alliance on the allocation of
remaining doses until 20 per cent of the population has been reached (3 60,200 people
21-04162

5/23

S/2021/332

and 720,000 doses). During the reporting period, the United Nations Kosovo team,
led by the Development Coordinator, has continued to implement its socioeconomic
response plan, mobilizing more than $20 million in bilateral and multilateral
assistance, including $2.5 million through the United Nations COVID -19 Response
and Recovery Multi-Partner Trust Fund.

IV. Northern Kosovo
22. Political developments in northern Kosovo centred on special municipal
elections in North Mitrovica and the 14 February parliamentary elections. After a
five-month delay owing to COVID-19, special municipal elections were held in North
Mitrovica on 29 November. The Serbian List won over 90 per cent of the vote, with
Vetёvendosje, the Democratic Party of Kosovo and an independent Kosovo Serb
candidate splitting the remainder of the vote. The Serbian List also secured a landslide
victory in the 14 February general elections, winning over 78 per cent of the vote in
all four municipalities in northern Kosovo.
23. Both the municipal and general elections were conducted without major security
incidents. Notwithstanding, Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb politicians competing
against the Serbian List continue to experience challenges in campaigning freely in
the north. On 30 January, ahead of the official start of the campaign for the
14 February elections, a visit by Ms. Osmani and Mr. Kurti to the ethnically mixed
neighbourhood of Kodra e Minatorëve/Mikronaselje in North Mitrovica, was
interrupted by a group of Kosovo Serb residents chanting “this is Serbia”. The visit,
in particular by Ms. Osmani, was criticized by some Kosovo Albanian parties as
aimed at election campaigning, as well as by Kosovo Serb politicians, with the leader
of the Serbian List, Goran Rakić, describing it as a provocation. The President of
Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, denounced the visit and underscored the need to “preserve
peace”.
24. On 16 January, the third anniversary of the murder of Oliver Ivanović, a Kosovo
Serb politician, was commemorated peacefully in North Mitrovica. The related court
proceedings continued, with the Special Prosecution filing a new indictment against
six defendants on 11 November, after the Court of Appeals returned a previous
indictment based on defence counsel appeals. The six defendants are charged with the
criminal offence of aggravated murder. At a 5 February initial hearing on the new
indictment, the six defendants pleaded not guilty to the murder charge, while two of
them pleaded guilty to weapon possession charges. At the request of the Special
Prosecution, on 23 February a pretrial judge withdrew a 2019 arrest warrant against
one of two defendants who remain at large.

V. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
25. The Belgrade and Pristina delegations, led by their chief negotiators, held three
rounds of expert-level talks on issues related to financial claims and property, under
the auspices of the European Union Special Representative for the Belgrade -Pristina
Dialogue and other Western Balkan regional issues, Miroslav Lajčák. Despite the
parties’ willingness to meet and discuss unresolved issues, Belgrade and Pristina are
yet to reconcile their positions, including on the establishment of the Association/
Community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo. In their separate addresses to
the media after the first and second rounds of talks, on 17 September and 29 October,
the parties acknowledged that they held opposing views on how to resolve financial
claims and property issues, with Belgrade insisting that the Association/Community
be part of the discussions. Tensions escalated in November, over violations of the
6/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

agreement on freedom of movement and the arrangement on official visits, when both
Belgrade and Pristina refused to allow each other’s officials to visit areas in Serbia
and Kosovo at a time when human remains were being excavated in sites near Raška,
Serbia. The events led to appeals by the European Union to Kosovo authorities to
respect commitments under the dialogue.
26. Following their last meeting on 10 December, in view of the opposing positions
and the upcoming early elections in Kosovo, the parties agreed to continue
discussions in 2021. After the elections, Mr. Lajčák travelled to Pristina and Belgrade
from 1 to 3 March to discuss modalities for the next round of talks. In Pristina,
Mr. Kurti indicated that, once in office, the main focus of his government would be
addressing pressing socioeconomic and rule of law issues. Nevertheless, he
acknowledged the importance of the dialogue and the need for it to be “principled and
well prepared”. In Belgrade, the Serbian leadership reiterated its readiness to continue
the dialogue, while stressing the importance of the full implementation of the signed
agreements. During the reporting period, Belgrade also opposed the notion of “mutual
recognition”, advocated by Pristina as the main outcome of any comprehensive
agreement.
27. On 14 December, the Kosovo Electricity Transmission System and Market
Operator assumed responsibility from the Electric Network of Serbia for the
transmission system in northern Kosovo. This was a significant step forward in the
implementation of the 2013 European Union-facilitated agreement on energy, and the
establishment of Kosovo as an independent regulatory zone following the entry of the
Operator into the European Network of Transmission System Operators for
Electricity on 30 June 2020.
28. Within the scope of commitments agreed by Belgrade and Pristina under the
auspices of the United States on 4 September 2020, the Serbian authorities, on
7 October, moved police and customs officers to the integrated facility built with
support from the European Union at the Merdarë/Merdare (Gate 3) crossing. The
move also represented an important step in the implementatio n of the European
Union-facilitated IBM Technical Protocol on the joint management of crossing points.
In addition, and in line with the 4 September commitments, the then Minister for
Foreign Affairs and the Diaspora of Kosovo, Meliza Haradinaj-Stublla, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Israel, Gabi Ashkenazi, signed an
agreement establishing diplomatic relations during a virtual ceremony on 1 February.
The Spokesperson of the European External Action Service, referring to the
establishment, under the agreement, of the representation of Kosovo in Jerusalem,
recalled the commitment of Kosovo to European Union integration and called for
Kosovo to act in accordance with that commitment. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, Nikola Selaković, expressed dissatisfaction with the agreement. On
14 March, Kosovo opened its official representation in Jerusalem. Within Kosovo, a
major Kosovo Turkish party also expressed concern that the decision violated relevant
Security Council resolutions.
29. On 30 October, the President of Serbia and the Prime Ministers of Albania and
North Macedonia held a teleconference to discuss regional cooperation in the
framework of the “mini-Schengen” initiative promoted by the three countries to
facilitate freedom of movement. Kosovo authorities were invited but did not attend
the event.

21-04162

7/23

S/2021/332

VI. Returns, reconciliation and cultural heritage and
community relations
30. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded 273 voluntary returns by members
of the non-majority communities who had been displaced within and outside Kosovo.
The returnees included 133 women and 140 men (223 Kosovo Serbs, 36 Kosovo
Ashkali, 10 Kosovo Roma and 4 Kosovo Albanians). This brings the total number of
displaced persons of the non-majority communities who have found durable solutions
in Kosovo since 2000 to 28,819, including 14,153 women and 14,666 men (12,429
Kosovo Serbs, 7,706 Kosovo Egyptians and Ashkali, 4,000 Kosovo Roma, 1,878
Kosovo Bosniaks, 1,464 Kosovo Gorani, 1,298 Kosovo Albanians, 21 Kosovo
Montenegrins, 19 Kosovo Turks and 4 Kosovo Croats). There remain 15,781
displaced persons within Kosovo (7,268 women and 8,513 men), as well as 69,627
persons with displacement-related needs across the Western Balkans, out of the
approximately 200,000 displaced persons from Kosovo residing in the region, most
of them in Serbia.
31. As part of the “Skopje process”, a regional initiative facilitated by UNHCR and
OSCE, the technical working group on durable solutions, composed of representatives
from Belgrade, Podgorica, Pristina and Skopje, met on 13 November to assess the
progress and challenges in the areas of security, property issues, data management,
civil status documents and solutions planning. The participants discussed the way
forward in the implementation of the concept note on solutions planning, on durable
solutions for displaced persons from and within Kosovo, adopted in November 2019,
taking into account the regional experience of the so-called “Sarajevo process”. They
also called for additional efforts to address incidents affecting returnees, resolve
outstanding property issues, and expedite land allocation and other practical solutions
for the displaced, and stressed the importance of regional cooperation to achieve
further progress.
32. Internally displaced persons, returnees, persons at risk of statelessness, and
survivors of domestic and gender-based violence continued to be supported through
a United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Multi-Partner Trust Fund
project. Under the project, jointly implemented by UNHCR, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), beneficiaries were provided with
psychological, legal and income-generation support to recover from the effects of the
pandemic.
33. Efforts to promote sustainable voluntary returns and reintegration also
continued. On 12 January, 87 Kosovo Serb displaced families, who had been residing
in four collective centres in the Štrpce/Shtërpcë municipality, moved to newly
constructed apartments in the same municipality, facilitated by a social housing
project funded by the European Union and implemented by the Danish Refugee
Council and the Ministry for Communities and Return. Concurrently, IOM supported
the social and economic reintegration of 42 families in six municipali ties. In
November 2020, UNMIK liaised with the Ministry to facilitate the resumption of
humanitarian transports for Kosovo Serb returnees in Bablak/Babljak village, Ferizaj/
Uroševac municipality, to Gračanica/Gracanicë and Štrpce/Shtërpcë municipalities.
34. Mixed migration into Kosovo continued to increase, with a total of 1,087 new
registered arrivals, of whom 448 lodged asylum claims. UNHCR ensured that all
asylum-seekers received free legal and psychosocial assistance and supported the
Kosovo authorities in ensuring appropriate reception conditions. With support from

8/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

IOM, Kosovo authorities are also establishing a temporary accommodation and
registration centre in Vranidoll/Vrani Do for migrants.
35. The Implementation and Monitoring Council, which over sees the special
protective zones surrounding religious sites, met on 9 November to discuss the
contentious issue of the construction of a transit road to Montenegro through the
special protective zone of the Visoki Dečani monastery. The Council reached an
arrangement under which a bypass road and an alternate local road that would pass
through the special protective zone would be constructed simultaneously. The
arrangement, which was facilitated by the representative of Italy, is intended to
promote intercommunal relations and economic development in the municipality, and
its implementation will be monitored by the Council with the support of the Kosovo
Force. The representatives of the monastery and both the municipal and central
authorities welcomed the arrangement.
36. Kosovo authorities and international organizations continued to support the
Kosovo Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian communities in obtaining
personal documentation and resolving civil status issues to enable their access to
public services. UNHCR provided legal aid to 103 individuals (61 women and 42
men) to facilitate their civil registration, enabled 125 voluntary returnees and
displaced persons from non-majority communities (56 women and 69 men) to benefit
from education, social assistance, property and pension rights, and provided
psychosocial support to 59 identified survivors of gender-based violence (53 women
and 6 men). The Kosovo Ministry of Education and Science awarded 585 scholarships
of 300 euros each to Kosovo Roma, Kosovo Ashkali, and Kosovo Egyptian secondary
school students for the current academic year. During the period under review, no
contributions were made to the United Nations trust fund in support of the Kosovo
Ashkali, Kosovo Egyptian and Kosovo Roma communities affected by lead poisoning
in Kosovo, leaving the fund with few resources to support their urgent needs.

VII. Rule of law and human rights
37. Kosovo courts issued judgments in several corruption and war crimes cases. On
7 October, an indictment was filed against the former Mayor of Kaçanik/Kačanik,
Xhabir Zharku, accusing him of abusing his official position or authority by allegedly
allowing illegal construction on socially owned cadastral parcels. In November, the
Supreme Court of Kosovo upheld the suspended imprisonment sentences imposed by
the Court of Appeals against all accused individuals in the so -called “Pronto case”,
which involved high-ranking officials of the Democratic Party of Kosovo. Similarly,
in January, the Court of Appeals confirmed the indictment against the former Minister
of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development, Nenad Rikalo, and other staff of the
Ministry, for abusing their official position or authority. On 24 February, the Kosovo
Prosecution and Kosovo Police conducted an operation at the Ministry in Pristina and
four other locations around Kosovo; as a result, 12 people, including 10 ministerial
officials, were arrested on corruption and other charges. The Special Prosecution of
Kosovo also filed an indictment for abuse of official position or authority against the
former head of the Kosovo Intelligence Agency, the head of the Department for
Citizenship, Asylum and Immigration in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and the head
of the Directorate for Migration and Foreigners in the Kosovo Border Police, in
relation to the expulsion of six Turkish nationals in March 2018. The government
adopted a new anti-corruption strategy and action plan 2021–2025, which is pending
approval by the Assembly of Kosovo. Similarly, draft amendments to the Law on the
Financing of Political Entities were introduced in the Assembly and are pending
adoption.

21-04162

9/23

S/2021/332

38. Concurrently, several high-profile defendants were acquitted of charges related
to abuse of official position or authority, such as 12 defendants in the so -called
“veterans case”, including the former Prime Minister, Agim Çeku, the former Mi nister
of Defence, Rustem Berisha, and an Assembly member, Shkumbin Demaliaj. Local
civil society organizations continued to express concern over “politicized justice” and
the lenient sentences imposed by courts in high-profile cases. In two separate reports,
the Kosovo Law Institute pointed to challenges in prosecuting high -level corruption,
the small number of indictments filed by the prosecution and the high number of
unsolved cases.
39. Trial hearings were held in four ongoing cases involving war crime s, including
rape, allegedly committed against the civilian population during the conflict in
Kosovo. On 6 November, the Special Department of the Court of Appeals overturned
the guilty verdict against Sami Lushtaku, the former mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica, i n
relation to his escape from detention during his trial in the so -called “Drenica” case,
because of the expiration of the statutory limitation on criminal prosecution. On
1 December, the Department confirmed the war crime conviction of a former member
of the Yugoslav reserve police but reduced his sentence from 22 to 11 years of
imprisonment, triggering protests by residents of Krushe e Madhe/Velika Kruša. On
23 December, Kosovo police arrested an individual suspected of having committed
war crimes against the civilian population in 1999 in Pejë/Peć. On 24 December,
another former member of the Yugoslav police was sentenced to six years of
imprisonment and, on 11 February, a former reserve police officer of the Serbian
forces was sentenced to 12 years of imprisonment, both for having committed war
crimes against the civilian population.
40. Kosovo continued to prosecute individuals suspected of participation in foreign
conflicts and terrorism. On 18 December, the Basic Court in Pristina sentenced a man
to 18 months of imprisonment on terrorism charges for threatening the Kosovo
representative to France, after the latter retweeted a French newspaper article
containing a caricature of the Prophet Muhammad. On 20 December, two men were
charged with attempting to travel to the Syrian Arab Republic to participate in foreign
wars, while, on 11 February, two other defendants were acquitted by a first instance
judgment for having allegedly travelled to the Syrian Arab Republic for the purpose
of terrorism. On 24 December, the Special Prosecution filed an indictment against an
individual for attempting to organize or participate in a terrorist group. In order to
address terrorist threats, the Kosovo government adopted a money -laundering and
terrorist financing national risk assessment prepared with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme, with analysis of related risks, threats and
vulnerabilities.
41. UNMIK continued to monitor closely and report on the human rights
implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, focusing on its disproportionate impact on
non-majority communities and persons in vulnerable situations. The pandemic and
related containment measures continued to affect the realization of human rights
related to the freedom of movement, peaceful assembly and religion; the rights to life
and health; and economic and social rights. The Ministry of Health and the Kosovo
Institute for Public Health continued to publish updates on the COVID -19 situation
primarily in Albanian, hampering access to information by non-majority communities
and thereby violating their language rights. Marking Human Rights Day on
10 December, the Special Representative reaffirmed the commitment of the United
Nations to supporting Kosovo authorities and other stakeholders in their e fforts to
promote and protect human rights for all people in Kosovo, and called on all actors
to place human rights at the heart of the pandemic response and recovery efforts to
ensure that communities and persons in vulnerable situations are not left behi nd.

10/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

42. On 30 September, the government of Kosovo approved a draft amendment to
the Law on the Freedom of Religion, which, once adopted by the Kosovo Assembly,
would strengthen religious freedom in Kosovo by allowing religious communities to
obtain the status of a legal entity. On 26 November, pursuant to the new Juvenile
Justice Code, the Ministry of Justice promulgated three sublegal acts to further
enhance the protection, rehabilitation and reintegration of juveniles deprived of
liberty. The acts were drafted with the assistance of UNMIK in partnership with
UNICEF, in line with international standards and the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules).
43. In February, an investigative journalist was brutally attacked in Pristina, and
Belgrade-based television crews were prevented from visiting northern Kosovo
during the elections. In response to the incidents, the Special Representative stressed
the importance of ensuring a safe and conducive environment for journalists from all
communities and called for renewed efforts to ensure the unrestricted exercise of the
freedom of the media and the right to information in Kosovo.
44. UNMIK continued to support efforts to determine the fate of 1,640 person s still
missing since the Kosovo conflict. On 16 September, UNMIK participated in a
meeting of the Pristina-Belgrade working group on persons who are unaccounted for
in connection with events in Kosovo. The meeting focused on identifying a potential
mass grave in Kiževak, Serbia, which UNMIK subsequently visited on 4 December.
UNMIK also supported the Missing Persons Resource Centre in the distribution of
food and hygiene packages to family members of missing persons from all
communities across Kosovo.

VIII. Women and peace and security
45. The Kosovo governmental commission responsible for the verification and
recognition of the status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence received 111
applications, bringing the total number of applications received since its
establishment in February 2018 to 1,414. To date, 912 applicants (880 women and 32
men) have been granted survivor status, while 210 (180 women and 30 men) have
been rejected. In February, the Basic Court in Pristina directe d the commission to
review, for the first time, its decision to deny an application for survivor status,
opening the way for survivors to challenge the commission’s decisions and realize
their right to effective remedies. In September, UNMIK launched an in itiative to
support the economic empowerment and rights of survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence, as well as sexual and gender-based violence, from all communities in
Kosovo, including their right to effective remedy and compensation. The initiativ e
provides some 150 survivors with access to vocational training, psychosocial
counselling, legal assistance and medical care.
46. On 17 November, UNMIK, in partnership with UN-Women and the European
Union, brought together 24 women leaders from all communities and international
representatives in an online event during which the women leaders called for equal
and full participation of women in power structures and peace processes, including
the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Similarly,
UN-Women supported the Regional Women’s Lobby for Peace, Security and Justice
in Southeast Europe in organizing a conference on 15 December that brought together
45 women leaders from the Western Balkans, including Belgrade and Pristina, in a
constructive and forward-looking dialogue on women’s meaningful participation in
peace processes.
47. To mark the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, UNMIK, together with representatives of other
21-04162

11/23

S/2021/332

international presences in Kosovo, undertook a series of strategic communication and
social media campaigns to raise awareness of the role of women at the United Nations,
and to promote the women and peace and security agenda. Under the auspices of the
multi-stakeholder Security and Gender Group, which is chaired by UN -Women and
includes UNMIK, activities were carried out in support of the global 16 Days of
Activism against Gender-based Violence campaign. The UNMIK-produced
documentary “Not Your Property” was screened in both Albanian- and Serbianlanguage television programmes, followed by debates on the link between genderbased violence, property rights, and the impact of the pandemic on women a nd girls.
On 8 March, on the occasion of International Women ’s Day, the Special
Representative underscored the significant contribution of women to the COVID -19
pandemic response and recovery efforts, and emphasized the importance of women ’s
meaningful participation and leadership in decision-making, policy design and
implementation at all levels.
48. Kosovo institutions continued to take important steps to protect the rights of
women. On 25 September, the Assembly of Kosovo passed legislation incorporatin g
provisions of the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (the Istanbul Convention) into the
Constitution. The Special Representative welcomed the legislation as an important
step in advancing women’s rights and achieving a just and peaceful society. The
government also adopted, on 25 November, a policy aimed at preventing and
penalizing sexual harassment in public administration institutions in Kosovo.

IX. Trust-building, partnerships and cooperation
49. UNMIK, in close collaboration with the United Nations Kosovo team, continued
to support the advancement of mutual trust between Kosovo communities and efforts
to achieve key Sustainable Development Goals. In September, UNMIK, in
cooperation with IOM, launched the third phase of a trust-building initiative to
promote the learning of both official languages in Kosovo by expanding online
Albanian-Serbian and Serbian-Albanian dictionaries, developing an online language
course and promoting the learning of terms related to the COVID-19 pandemic via
social media. The United Nations, OSCE and other partners, together with the Kosovo
Ministry of Education, also supported the accreditation of a university programme on
the teaching of official languages. In January, with the assistance of the United
Nations, all 73 translators employed by the judicial system started online courses as
part of the effort to ensure equal access to services and information in both the
Albanian and Serbian languages.
50. The UNMIK-supported Legal Aid Centre of the Kosovo Law Institute, which,
during the reporting period, provided free legal assistance to 754 vulnerable
individuals (275 women and 479 men) on issues related to property, labour and
pensioner rights, and domestic violence, extended its support to the municipalities of
northern Kosovo with the opening of a Mitrovica branch in November. As part of an
UNMIK-funded project, the Initiative for Justice and Equality, a Kosovo
non-governmental organization, launched a study on women’s access to justice in the
Western Balkans.
51. In December, UNMIK participated in the first meeting of the Kosovo
Interministerial Coordinating Group on Human Rights to discuss issues related to
upholding human rights during the pandemic and to review a draft programme and
action plan for the protection and promotion of human rights. The Mission also
organized virtual workshops and training activities for local civil society
organizations to support the drafting of their second joint report on the human rights

12/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

situation in Kosovo, with a focus on the impact of COVID -19 on economic, social,
cultural and other rights.
52. The Mission continued to provide support to a drop-in centre in Pristina to
provide street children and their families with integrated online psychosocial,
educational and counselling services, as well as food, disinfectants, and face masks.
UNMIK has tailored its human rights education activities to raise awareness about
the impact of the pandemic on the realization of economic and social rights.
53. Through its programmatic activities, UNMIK also supported Kosovo central
and local authorities, multi-ethnic youth groups, women living in shelters for
domestic violence, and members of non-majority communities in responding to the
COVID-19 crisis. In December, UNMIK, in collaboration with United Nations
agencies and other international organizations, conducted a joint needs assessment
which led to the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the vulnerable Kosovo Roma
community in South Mitrovica. The Mission also supported a multi-ethnic youth
non-governmental organization and the Danish Refugee Council in engaging youth
from Kosovo Ashkali, Kosovo Egyptian and Kosovo Roma communities in producing
personal protective equipment. In addition, UNMIK funded a project to produce and
distribute reusable face masks to support the economic empowerment of women
living in shelters for domestic violence.
54. Under its youth, peace and security programme, UNMIK partnered with
UNICEF to support six multi-ethnic youth initiatives on access to education, inclusion
of young people with disabilities, language rights and digital media literacy. To mark
the fifth anniversary of Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and
security, the Mission organized online activities connecting Kosovo students with
youth peace movements in the region and in Colombia, India and the Russian
Federation, to exchange best practices related to youth parti cipation in building
peaceful and inclusive communities. Under a programme supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund, efforts continued to overcome conflict narratives and prejudice
by engaging youth from divided communities on issues of shared interest. In
December, as part of the programme, a series of mentorship workshops for young
female future leaders in social entrepreneurship, communication, leadership and
women in the workforce were launched.
55. In December, the United Nations Kosovo team finalized the U nited Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 2021–2025. The Cooperation
Framework represents the collective vision of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes to address, jointly with government partners, development challenges in
Kosovo. It incorporates the plan for socioeconomic response to COVID -19, which is
being implemented by the team.
56. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services, with over 2,154
documents processed in relation to pensions and civil status. UNMIK facilitated the
issuance of 34 Red Notices, 1 Yellow Notice and 4 extradition requests from members
of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) to Kosovo. It also
opened 816 cases for investigation within the INTERPOL database. Considerin g the
number of cases processed and closed, this leaves a total number of 743 open cases
related to the territory or people of Kosovo.

X. Observations
57. I commend Kosovo institutions, political entities and voters for the orderly
conduct of the early legislative elections in February. Despite the challenges posed
by the pandemic, the elections witnessed higher voter turnout than the October 2019

21-04162

13/23

S/2021/332

elections. I urge the leaders of Kosovo to capitalize on this momentum by working
towards constituting the new Assembly and government, and electing the President
of Kosovo, within the prescribed deadlines. I also call on the next Kosovo government
and the opposition to work constructively to address the impact of the pandemic on
the population and economy of Kosovo, continue efforts to consolidate the rule of
law, combat corruption, uphold human rights frameworks and principles, and engage
fully in important high-level political processes such as the European Unionfacilitated dialogue.
58. I welcome the high level of participation of women and youth in the elections
and the increased proportion of women deputies elected, in numbers that exceed the
established 30 per cent quota. Women’s leadership and participation in all spheres is
critical to building a more peaceful, inclusive, and stable society. As the ongoing
global health crisis has shown, although disproportionality affected, women continue
to be at the forefront of the COVID-19 response and recovery planning. The
contribution and impact of elected and appointed women leaders in decision -making
at all levels will be essential in that regard.
59. Lasting peace, stability and socioeconomic development in Kosovo and the
region are contingent on sustainable progress in the dialogue aimed at the
normalization of relations with Belgrade. While I welcome the clear statements issued
by both parties about the importance of advancing the dialogue, I underline the
importance of genuine commitment to continuing high-level talks within the
framework of the European Union-facilitated Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, in the very
near future. As confirmed by the European Union, progress in the dialogue also
remains central to the parties’ respective European Union aspirations.
60. Important steps were also made to advance the investigative and judicial
processes of the Kosovo Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office and Kosovo Specialist
Chambers. These rule of law institutions must receive full cooperation from all parties
so that they can effectively discharge their duties.
61. As everywhere in the world, Kosovo continues to grapple with the COVID -19
crisis. The Mission and the United Nations Kosovo team are committed to sustaining
their efforts to support public health institutions and the people of Kosovo in the
management of the pandemic. As vaccines are rolled out, the United Nations will
continue to mobilize international support to make sure that they are available for all.
The Organization remains equally engaged in bolstering public information
campaigns, empowering women and youth to participate in preventive action, and
providing assistance to vulnerable communities across Kosovo. Now is the time for
solidarity and international cooperation, and the United Nations will stand by the
people of Kosovo to identify a path out of the crisis and support progress along it.
62. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the Ashkali, Egyptian and
Roma communities affected by lead poisoning in Kosovo. Regretting the lack of
voluntary contributions to the United Nations trust fund established to provide these
communities with the assistance they need, I once again call on Member States, other
actors and organizations to honour our shared responsibility and contribute to the
fund.
63. I thank my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, for his leadership, and all
Mission staff for their dedicated support for Kosovo, including for meeting the
challenges of the pandemic. I reiterate my gratitude to the United Nations
Development Coordinator in Kosovo and United Nations agencies, fund s and
programmes for their invaluable contribution and collaboration with UNMIK, and to
long-standing partners of the United Nations in Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force,
the European Union and OSCE.

14/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

Annex I
Report of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy to the Secretary-General on the activities of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo from
16 September 2020–15 March 2021
1.

Summary
More than two years after the end of the executive mandate of t he European
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo in the justice area, the robust monitoring of high profile cases on corruption, organized crime and war crimes, including former
Mission cases, has proven to be a successful and effective way to build on the
Mission’s executive legacy and offer Kosovo counterparts tailored advice on systemic
and case-specific issues. Moreover, the robust monitoring offers a unique insight into
the inner workings of the Kosovo judiciary.
In October 2020, the Mission launched its first public justice monitoring report
together with its main Kosovo partners in the judiciary. Given the importance of the
rule of law, in particular with regard to the European path of Kosovo, it was time to
make the results of the Mission’s monitoring work available to the wider public,
including rule of law civil society organizations that are themselves engaged in
monitoring the judiciary, lawyers and other legal practitioners, as well as interested
citizens. The report was well received and Kosovo counterparts have endorsed and
followed up on several of the Mission’s findings and recommendations.
The Mission continued to provide operational and logistical support to the
Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office. Supported by the
Mission and the Kosovo police, on 4 and 5 November 2020, the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office conducted operations leading to the arrest of former President
Hashim Thaçi and several other prominent political leaders.
During the extraordinary parliamentary elections on 14 February 2021, the
Mission deployed staff at the main common crossing points between Kosovo and
Serbia to monitor the anticipated influx of voters from Serbia, and, in its capacity as
second security responder, the Mission put its formed police unit on alert to be able
to react quickly in case of need.

2.

Monitoring
The Mission continued its case-monitoring activities. Physical presence in
courts and meetings with police, prosecutors and judges was conducted whenever
feasible and in line with the applicable coronavirus disease (COVID-19) restrictions.
Long-established relations of trust with all local counterparts ensured that the Mission
monitors were well informed about all developments at all times, even when contacts
were restricted to telephone and video calls.
In particular, the Mission closely monitored the impact of a provision of the
Criminal Procedure Code that stipulates that trials have to recommence if no hearings
have taken place for three consecutive months. In view of th e COVID-19 restrictions
and the overall reduction in the number of court hearings, the effect of this rule caused
a number of trials to restart. While this rule has so far been circumvented in many
cases by having both parties agree to consider previous te stimonies as read and to
continue the procedure, this approach is not in line with the law and may constitute
possible grounds for appeal at a later stage of a trial, with obvious negative effects in
terms of the timely delivery of justice.

21-04162

15/23

S/2021/332

Since its inception, the Case Monitoring Unit has drafted four systemic and
thematic reports with specific recommendations for the Kosovo judiciary. The first
three of these reports were shared and discussed only with local counterparts and
relevant international partners. However, the fourth report, finalized in October 2020,
was presented to the general public, receiving widespread and favourable media and
expert attention. 1 Several trends and patterns identified in that report have been
addressed by local counterparts, for instance the high percentage of unproductive
hearings and the practice of assigning high-profile cases to the same panel of judges.
One of the recommendations contained in the report was to strengthen the
anti-corruption task force of the Kosovo police, which the government decided to
dismantle on the very day the Mission’s report was presented. The specific assessment
in the report and the Mission’s in-depth knowledge of the anti-corruption task force
played a major role in the successful joint intervention by the European Union family
and the wider international community to reverse this decision.
The Mission is increasingly being perceived by local partners as a buffer against
undue influence and political interference in the judiciary, which is still common in
Kosovo. On some occasions, police officers, prosecutors and judges have reached out
to the Mission, requesting it to monitor cases and also, at ti mes, investigations.
Over the past year, the Mission has assisted the Kosovo police War Crimes
Investigation Unit in the successful establishment of an electronic war crimes
database. The database is a significant tool for administering complex criminal cases
and is also enabling qualitative case analysis. The establishment of the database has
resulted in increased cooperation between the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office and the
War Crimes Investigation Unit, while also helping to preserve the Mission ’s legacy
on war crimes cases dealt with during its executive justice mandate. The
establishment of the database was assessed positively by other international actors in
Kosovo, resulting in further support for the War Crimes Investigation Unit.
In addition, the Mission provided comments on several rule of law-related draft
laws and strategies through the legislative review mechanism led by the European
Union Special Representative.
The Mission adapted its monitoring activities in the Kosovo Correctional
Service facilities to the pandemic-related restrictions while maintaining regular
contacts with the management of the Kosovo Correctional Service and all 11
correctional facilities in order to assess the way the Kosovo Correctional Service was
managing the new challenges posed by COVID-19. Special attention was given to
ensuring that pandemic-related restrictive measures in correctional facilities were in
line with international and European guidelines on respect for human rights and the
treatment of specific categories of inmates, such as high-profile or radicalized
prisoners. In-person visits to all facilities were resumed as soon as was feasible.
Mission experts shared their observations and recommendations on how to best deal
with pandemic-related restrictions with the Kosovo Correctional Service management
and the directors of all 11 facilities on a regular basis.
The Mission continued to promote and support the establishment of a risk and
needs assessment mechanism for convicted prisoners in the Kosovo Co rrectional
Service. In line with best European practice, according to which significant
importance is given to the rehabilitation of inmates and the prevention of reoffending,
this mechanism provides the basis for a systemic sentence-planning practice. Within
this framework, the Mission advocated, supported and provided expertise for the
establishment of a prisoners’ assessment and classification unit for convicted
prisoners. The Mission organized several training measures on risk and needs
__________________
1

16/23

See www.eulex-kosovo.eu/?page=2,11,1250.
21-04162

S/2021/332

assessment for the unit’s staff based on the risk-need-responsivity model and
conducted study visits to Finland and Sweden. In addition, the Mission identified the
lack of a comprehensive database as a serious handicap for the functioning of the
assessment system. The Mission subsequently purchased a service for updating the
prisoners’ database, which is being successfully used to generate the necessary data
and reports. As a result, a prisoner ’s information, assessment and individual sentence
plan can now be easily shared, implemented and followed.
With the aim of enhancing awareness of the need to increase the number of
women in the Kosovo Correctional Service, including in management positions, the
Mission supported the work of the Kosovo Correctional Service Women’s Association
by providing online training courses and facilitating the Association ’s contacts with
relevant local and international actors and similar associations worldwide.
The Mission identified several important shortcomings in the level of
professional skills and capacities within the Kosovo Correctional Service, as well as
in respect of procedures in place. Several training workshops were conducted in order
to address some of the gaps, such as on security and safety risk assessment principles.
Two major concerns were addressed: (a) procedures for dealing with prisoners with
mental health issues; and (b) actions to be taken in cases of suicide and self -harm.
Mission experts provided advice for the drafting of a contingency plan for cases of
suicide and self-harm at all Kosovo Correctional Service facilities and conducted
training sessions for Kosovo Correctional Service staff identified as future trainers,
who in turn provided training to wider Kosovo Correctional Service staff on how to
deal with such cases in line with the contingency plan. Mission staff are attending all
training sessions in order to provide further assistance or clarification. This activity
is still ongoing.
In support of the European Union Special Representative for the Belgrade Pristina Dialogue and other Western Balkan regional issues, Mission experts
continued to facilitate the implementation of the IBM technical protocol reached as
part of the European Union-facilitated Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue. With no formal
communication in place between the two parties at the six common crossing points,
the Mission provided a substantial and regular channel of communication on the
technical level through its regular visits to the common crossing points and contacts
with both sets of authorities. In October, the Mission facilitated and coordinated the
technical negotiations on preparing the move of the Belgrade party staff to their
dedicated new premises at the main common crossing point at Merdarë/Merdare,
similar to their Pristina counterparts, who are already fully using their premises.
During the pandemic, the Mission’s role in acquiring precise and real-time
information on all given situations at the common crossing points became essential
in order to counter disinformation. This was possible thanks to the Mission’s longstanding and trust-based network of contacts with both parties and its in-depth
knowledge of specific circumstances at all common crossing points. The information
was also regularly shared with relevant European Union actors as well with as other
international organizations in Kosovo.
Moreover, the facilitation undertaken by the Mission and its expertise was
fundamental in pushing forward several important developments related to IBM.
These included the full functionalization of a state-of-the-art National Centre for
Border Management – a model for the entire region that is in line with the relevant
flagship initiative included in the 2018 Western Balkans strategy developed by the
European Commission – and a call for the creation of similar centres in all Western
Balkan countries in order to create a regional network for information exchange. The
Mission also played a central role in the drafting of the new National IBM Strategy
and Action Plan (2020–2024) and the agreement reached that the Strategy and Action
21-04162

17/23

S/2021/332

Plan will be a standalone document with a dedicated budget. Both documents were
finally approved by the caretaker Prime Minister in February 2021. The Mission also
assisted in facilitating the exchange of information between the customs
administrations of both parties following complaints communicated by the secretariat
of the Central European Free Trade Agreement on pending requests. This was done
through a mechanism established within the framework of the European Uni onfacilitated Dialogue.
The Mission continued to engage with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the
Civil Registration Agency in the process of meeting the requirements agreed in the
European Union-facilitated freedom of movement agreements and their
implementation. This has been a slow and cumbersome process given the complexity
of these agreements, as well as the difficulties and delays resulting from frequent
government changes in Kosovo over the past year. The Mission assisted and advised
the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Civil Registration Agency in drafting
administrative instructions and extending ministerial decisions aimed at facilitating
the recognition of documents and ensuring tax exemption for vehicle registration for
Kosovo Serbs. The recognition by Kosovo authorities of documents issued by the
Serbian authorities (birth, marriage and death certificates, driving licences) and
facilitating the registration of vehicles with “KS” or “RKS” plates for owners of
vehicles with “FRY” or similar plates remain of paramount importance for ensuring
real freedom of movement, primarily but not exclusively for the Kosovo Serb
population.
The Mission also provided assessments upon request to the team of the
European Union Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and other
Western Balkan regional issues on the situation at the common crossing points
between Kosovo and Serbia with regard to the use of relevant documents (passports,
ID cards, driving licences, vehicle registration certificates, entry/exit documents).
The Mission continued to advise and mentor the President of the Basic Court of
Mitrovica and the Head of the Court of Appeals Division in Mitrovica, as well as
other judicial authorities, in order to provide support in the implementation of the
First Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations and the
Justice Agreement, and in order to ensure full establishment of the rule of law
mechanisms in the northern municipalities in Kosovo. In addition, the Miss ion closely
followed developments at the Kosovo Judicial Council, the Kosovo Prosecutorial
Council, the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals and the Ministry of Justice, which
had an influence on the successful implementation of the aforementioned agreement s.
At the request of the Minister for Justice, the Mission provided advice on
options to overcome the stalemate on the composition of Kosovo Serb majority panels
in the special department of the Court of Appeals, which deals with high-profile cases.
The Mission also provided expertise on the agreement aimed at ensuring the
recognition of Serbian parallel courts’ legal documents by the Kosovo legal system
up to a certain cut-off date.
3.

Operations
Operational functions are undertaken by the Mission’s operations pillar, which
maintains a limited residual capability as a second security responder and provides
continued support to the Kosovo police crowd and riot control capability through
advice and joint training sessions. The three-tier security-responder mechanism in
Kosovo consists of the Kosovo police as first, the Mission as second and the Kosovo
Force as the third security responder.
The Mission deployed monitors at the main common crossing points on election
day (14 February) to follow up on the reports of an expected increase in traffic, with

18/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

Kosovo Serb voters coming from Serbia. The day passed without incident. An
operations liaison officer was deployed at the Kosovo police operational headquarters
to follow the security-related developments on election day and to ensure a smooth
flow of information.
The Mission supported the Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine in exhuming
human remains from graves in the municipalities of Pejë/Peć and Mitrovica, where
complete remains of potential conflict-related victims were recovered, including two
sets of remains found in a Mitrovica cemetery.
The Mission provided support to the core activities of the Kosovo Institute of
Forensic Medicine in its work on missing persons. On 16 November 2020, e xperts
from the Mission, the Serbian Government Commission on Missing Persons and the
Kosovo Institute of Forensic Medicine discovered human remains in Kiževak, a large
quarry site in Serbia. The Mission has worked since 2015 in Kiževak in search of
human remains and its forensic experts finally identified the exact area by comparing
aerial photos, narrowing down the search to specific coordinates, which led to the
discovery of human remains. Mission experts will continue providing assistance, as
exhumation works are expected to resume in the second quarter of 2021.
The Mission continued its support to the Kosovo police in the field of
international police cooperation. Since Kosovo is not a member of the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the Mission facilitates information
exchange between the Kosovo police International Law Enforcement Coordination
Unit and the National Central Bureaus of INTERPOL under the umbrella of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. The Mission also
continued to facilitate information exchange between Europol and the Kosovo police
on serious crime investigations through its Swedish Europol liaison desk as well as
between the Kosovo police and the Serbian authorities, in accordance with the
relevant protocol between the Mission and the Serbian Ministry of Interior. During
the reporting period, the volume of requests for information exchange facilitated by
the Mission under this protocol increased markedly.
The Mission continued to support the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the
Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office in line with relevant Kosovo legislation. On 24 and
25 September, the Mission provided operational and logistical support to the
Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office in conducting the arrests of three persons and search
operations on the premises of the Kosovo Liberation Army War Veterans Association
in Pristina. Supported by the Mission and the Kosovo police, the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office, on 4 and 5 November, conducted further operations leading to
the arrests of former President Thaçi and three other prominent political figures. The
arrests were made by the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office, pursuant to arrest warrants,
transfer orders and confirmed indictments issued by a pretrial judge of the Kosovo
Specialist Chamber.

21-04162

19/23

S/2021/332

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
During the reporting period, public judicial activity increased significantly with
the arrest and transfer to the Specialist Chambers detention facilities of seven accused
in September and November 2020. Notwithstanding the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the Specialist Chambers held 18 hearings during the
reporting period, which were attended by the parties, both in -person and by way of
videoconference. The public judicial proceedings, involving three ca ses at the pretrial
phase, saw the engagement of the Pretrial Judge, who issued more than 120 decisions
and orders during the reporting period, as well as a panel of the Court of Appeals. A
panel of the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court was al so engaged during
the reporting period.
On 17 September, the appointing authority, upon recommendation of the
independent selection panel, appointed six new judges to the roster of international
judges in accordance with article 28 (4) of the Law on Spec ialist Chambers and
Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office.
On 23 September, the Registrar, in consultation with the President of the
Specialist Chambers, adopted the rules of detention and related practice directions,
which regulate detainee visits and communications between detainees and their
counsel and their families, and include a disciplinary regime and a complaints
procedure.
On 24 September, Mr. Salih Mustafa, who is charged with four counts of war
crimes, was arrested in Kosovo and transferred to the S pecialist Chambers detention
facilities. On 28 September, Mr. Mustafa attended his initial appearance before the
Pretrial Judge and on 28 October, Mr. Mustafa pleaded not guilty to all charges against
him in the indictment.
Mr. Hysni Gucati and Mr. Nasim Haradinaj were arrested on 25 September, and
were transferred to the Specialist Chambers detention facilities in The Hague on 25
and 26 September, respectively. Mr. Gucati and Mr. Haradinaj are charged with two
counts of criminal offences against the public order and four counts of criminal
offences against the administration of justice and public administration. On
18 December, Mr. Gucati and Mr. Haradinaj attended their initial appearance before
the Pretrial Judge, during which Mr. Gucati pleaded not guil ty to all the charges
against him in the indictment. On 8 January 2021, the Pretrial Judge entered a not guilty plea on behalf of Mr. Haradinaj in accordance with the rules of procedure and
evidence, after Mr. Haradinaj failed to enter a plea.
On 29 September, the President of the Specialist Chambers appeared in person
before the Political and Security Committee of the Council of the European Union in
Brussels, during which she briefed the member States on the judicial activities of the
Specialist Chambers, responded to questions posed by States and discussed some of
the challenges currently facing the Specialist Chambers.
On 26 October, the Pretrial Judge confirmed the indictment against Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, Mr. Kadri Veseli, Mr. Rexhep Selimi and Mr. Jakup Krasniqi, which charges
them with 10 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Messrs. Thaçi,
Veseli, Selimi and Krasniqi were arrested and transferred to the Specialist Chambers
detention facilities on 4 and 5 November. During their initial appear ances before the
Pretrial Judge on 9, 10 and 11 November, the accused pleaded not guilty to all the
charges against them in the indictment. The Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office effected
the arrests and related searches in each case with significant assistanc e and support

20/23

21-04162

S/2021/332

from the European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo as well as operational support
from the Kosovo police.
On 30 October, the appointing authority reappointed Judge Ekaterina
Trendafilova as President of the Specialist Chambers for a term of fou r years in
accordance with article 30 (4) of the Law on Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office, effective 15 December.
In November, the Registrar issued the Specialist Chambers Anti -Fraud Strategy,
which reaffirmed the strong commitment of the Specialist Chambers to detect and
prevent fraud through abiding by strict ethical standards, fostering a recrimination free culture for whistle-blowing and maintaining a clear definition and allocation of
implementation responsibilities.
On 26 November, a panel of the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court
found that amendments to the Constitution, proposed by then President Hashim Thaçi
in relation to the mandate of the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor ’s
Office and referred to the Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court by the
Assembly of Kosovo, diminished the fundamental rights and freedoms guaranteed by
chapter II of the Constitution. The panel of the Specialist Chamber of the
Constitutional Court further held that an amendment to the legal framework of the
Specialist Chambers can only be undertaken following consultations with the
European Union, as provided for in the 2014 exchange of letters and article 162 (13)
and (14) of the Constitution.
On 9 December, a panel of the Court of Appeals dismissed an appeal by
Mr. Gucati regarding his continued detention. On 9 February, a panel of the Court of
Appeals denied an appeal by Mr. Haradinaj of the Pretrial Judge ’s decision on his
continued detention. At the time of reporting, a panel of the Court of Appeals is
considering the appeals by the four accused in the Hashim Thaçi et al. case of the
decisions by the Pretrial Judge denying their interim release.
The Specialist Prosecutor’s Office continued to interview suspects, victims and
witnesses during the reporting period, as well as collect and review other evidence.
In order to fulfil its mandate, the Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office continues to require
the engagement and support of the international community, in ternational
organizations and individual States.
During the reporting period, the outreach team conducted over a dozen events
engaging young people, civil society, law students, journalists and minority
representatives throughout Kosovo.
The list of Specialist Counsel eligible to practise before the Specialist Chambers
currently contains 203 people, of whom 95 are qualified to represent victims. The
application process remains open.
The number of media queries received by the Specialist Chambers has continued
to increase since the commencement of public proceedings, and accurate media
reporting has increased.
The President, Registrar and Specialist Prosecutor continued their engagement
with the host State, European Union member States, contributing States and others.
Over the course of two days in December, the Principals hosted online briefings for
the Deputy Secretary-General of the European Union, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the ambassadors of the European Union member States
and contributing third States in Kosovo, and for the ambassadors of the European
Union member States and contributing third States in The Hague. The President
further updated European Union member States in The Hague on 11 February.

21-04162

21/23

S/2021/332

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 March 2021)
Country

Women

Men

Total

Austria

1

–

1

Bulgaria

1

–

1

Czechia

–

1

1

Germany

–

1

1

Russian Federation

1

2

3

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

–

1

1

Total

3

6

9

Composition and strength of the military liaison component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 March 2021)

22/23

Country

Women

Men

Total

Czechia

–

2

2

Poland

–

1

1

Republic of Moldova

–

1

1

Romania

–

1

1

Turkey

–

1

1

Ukraine

1

1

2

Total

1

7

8

21-04162

S/2021/332

Map

21-04162

23/23
