A/70/924–S/2016/532

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
10 June 2016
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 37
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-first year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2274 (2016), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my report of 7 March 2016 ( A/70/775-S/2016/218). It
also provides a summary of key political and security developments and regional
and international events relating to Afghanistan.

II. Relevant developments
3.
The Government continued to face significant security, political and economic
challenges. The initial momentum for a possible peace process with the Taliban
through the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace and
Reconciliation Process was lost, but progress was made towards a peace agreement
with the Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin. The National Assembly confirmed essential
appointees, while the Government filled additional key posts. There was limited
progress in advancing electoral reform and preparations for parliamentary and
district council elections. The security situation was characterized by continued
and intense armed clashes, which were at their highest number recorded since 2001
and had a corresponding negative impact on civilians, with ris ing casualties and
displacement rates. The Government continued preparations for the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) summit in Warsaw and the conference on Afghanistan
in Brussels and made some gains in its reform agenda, including anti -corruption

16-09162 (E)

140616

*1609162*

A/70/924
S/2016/532

measures and identifying future development priorities. Nevertheless, economic
growth remained low and emigration continued at high levels.

A.

Political developments
4.
Efforts to reinvigorate the peace process with the Taliban struggled to maintain
momentum after four meetings of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, comprising
Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the United States of America, which were covered
in my previous report. On 5 March, the Taliban issued a statement in which it
reiterated that it would not participate in peace talks unless its preconditions,
including the withdrawal of foreign troops, its removal from international sanctions
lists and the release of Taliban prisoners, were met. On 12 April, the Taliban
launched its annual spring offensive. Following a major attack in Kabul a week
later, on 19 April, in which 56 civilians were killed and 337 injured, the President of
Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, convened an extraordinary joint session of the National
Assembly on 25 April. In his address, he questioned the readiness of Pakistan to
bring the Taliban to the negotiation table, recommitted himself to weakening the
insurgency through combat operations and called for the enforcement of the death
penalty for prisoners convicted of crimes of national security. After he had
authorized the execution of six detainees on 8 May, the Taliban hanged two Afghan
National Police officers in Paktika Province two days later in retaliation. The
Quadrilateral Coordination Group held its fifth meeting on 1 8 May in Islamabad, at
which members reiterated their commitment to the peace process. No date for a
future meeting was set.
5.
While efforts towards a peace process with the Taliban stalled, progress was
made towards finalizing a peace agreement between the Government and the
Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin. On 17 March, a delegation from the group held its first
direct peace talks in Kabul with the High Peace Council. Additional envoys arrived
in Kabul on 23 April, at the invitation of the President, for talks wi th senior
government officials, later meeting the President on 30 April. The Chair of the
Council, Syed Ahmad Gilani, approved the final draft peace agreement on 19 May
before its submission to the President and the Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin leadership
for signature, which remains pending. Previously, on 1 April, the Council had
sought to address concerns about its effectiveness by developing a new strategy for
activities and terminating most of its provincial presence, maintaining only the
Chairs of provincial peace councils and the heads of provincial joint secretariat
teams.
6.
Uncertainty over the prospect for direct talks between the Government and the
Taliban increased with the killing on 21 May of the Taliban leader, Mullah Mansoor,
in a drone strike by the United States in the Balochistan province of Pakistan and
the announcement on 25 May by the Taliban of his successor, Haibatullah
Akhundzada. In the same announcement, the son of the late Mullah Omar, Mullah
Yaqoob, who had accepted an appointment on 4 April to the Taliban leadership
council and the military commission, was selected as his deputy, alongside
Sirajuddin Haqqani, who retained Akhundzada’s deputy position. On 25 May, the
faction led by Mullah Rasool, which had engaged in armed clashes with Taliban
elements loyal to the late Mullah Mansoor, stated that it would not accept the
appointment of Akhundzada.

2/15

16-09162

A/70/924
S/2016/532

7.
The Government made progress on senior appointments. On 9 April, the lower
house of the National Assembly endorsed the President’s nominat ion of Taj
Mohammad Jahid as Minister of the Interior and Mohammad Farid Hamidi as
Attorney General. On 5 May, the President named Masoom Stanekzai, previously
the acting Minister of Defence, as the acting Director of the National Directorate of
Security with General Abdullah Khan becoming the new acting Minister of
Defence. Their appointments require confirmation by the lower house. Several new
provincial governors were also appointed, including in Badghis, Helmand, Wardak
and Zabul provinces, leaving only 2 of 34 governors serving in an acting capacity.
Notwithstanding these positive steps, some important positions have yet to be filled.
These include the head of the Independent Directorate of Local Governance, the
head of the Civil Service Commission, the Minister of Mines and Petroleum and the
Governors of Balkh and Nuristan provinces.
8.
Meanwhile, political opposition groups continued to call for the
implementation of the political agreement of 21 September 2014 that forms the
basis of the National Unity Government. Some of the groups demanded the holding
of parliamentary and district council elections in the third quarter of 2016, while
others insisted that the term of the National Unity Government expired after two
years and must be replaced, through either early presidential elections or a loya
jirga. While visiting Kabul on 9 April, the Secretary of State of the United States,
John Kerry, a witness to the agreement of September 2014, expressed the view that
the agreement would be valid for five years. That position was criticized strongly by
several figures and major factions of the political opposition, including the former
President, Hamid Karzai, the head of the Afghanistan Protection and Stability
Council, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, and the head of the Ne w National Front, Anwar
ul-Haq Ahady. Overall, the political opposition remained divided, reflecting a
general fragmentation of the political elite. In a further indication of political
divisions, the Cabinet’s decision of 30 April to reroute the Turkmenis tanUzbekistan-Tajikistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan electricity corridor through the Salang
Pass rather than through Bamyan Province sparked large-scale, country-wide
protests by members of the Hazara ethnic minority. The dissent reached its apex
when several thousand protestors gathered in the city of Kabul on 16 May. Smaller scale counterprotests were held throughout the country in support of the decision.
9.
The President reiterated the Government’s commitment to holding
parliamentary and district council elections and, in a letter dated 9 April, requested
United Nations electoral assistance for the vote, which had been announced in
January for 15 October 2016. From 10 to 19 May, the United Nations conducted an
initial needs assessment mission in the city of Kabul. On 28 February, the President
issued two new decrees on the election law and the law on structures, duties and
authorities of the Independent Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. Those decrees followed the rejectio n of earlier decrees by
the lower house of the National Assembly. Whereas the recommendations of the
Special Electoral Reform Commission were reflected in the new decree, such as
the definition of electoral offences, campaign financing and voter registrat ion, the
second decree departed from some proposals, including the composition of
the selection committee and the electoral bodies. The committee, which is tasked
with nominating election commissioners, met on 5 April, but has yet to resume its
work, given that the decree is pending in the National Assembly. As a result, the
leadership of the electoral management bodies remains unclear, especially after

16-09162

3/15

A/70/924
S/2016/532

the resignation on 26 March of the Chair of the Independent Election Commission,
Mohammad Yousuf Nuristani. The post remains vacant, on top of an overall
vacancy rate of 40 per cent in the Commission.
10. The difficult security situation prompted some leading politicians associated
with militia groups both inside and outside of the Government to call for a more
direct role in military efforts. The First Vice-President, Abdul Rashid Dostum, and
militia groups associated with his Junbish-i-Milli political party launched counterinsurgency operations in Jawzjan Province on 20 April. The acting Governor of
Balkh Province, Atta Muhammad Nur, also led operations in the north. Previously,
on 8 March, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf had publicly stated that former mujahideen could
join the fight against the insurgency without the approval of the Government. The
National Security Council has criticized these tendencies and, on 5 April, issued a
directive requiring that security officials take the lead in security operations.
11. On 20 March, the removal of a poster of the First Vice -President in Mazar-eSharif sparked days of demonstrations and counterdemonstrations in several
northern provinces before escalating to an exchange of fire between members of
Junbish-i Milli and Jamiat-e-Islami on 24 March in Maymana, Faryab Province, that
left one civilian dead and four injured. Calm wa s restored after an intervention by
party leaders, provincial officials and a presidential delegation. Fighting resumed
between groups associated with the two parties in the Almar district of Faryab
Province on 17 and 18 May, leaving 15 people dead, includ ing 1 civilian, and
18 injuried, including 1 civilian.

B.

Security
12. The security situation in Afghanistan deteriorated, with Taliban operations at
an unprecedented high rate since the beginning of 2016. Armed clashes increased by
14 per cent in the first four months of the year compared with the same period in
2015 and were higher for each month compared with previous years. In April 2016,
the highest number of armed clashes was reported since June 2014, a period that
coincided with the presidential elections.
13. Notwithstanding the increase in armed clashes, overall security incidents
decreased. Between 16 February and 19 May, the United Nations recorded 6,122
security incidents, representing a decrease of 3 per cent compared with the same
period in 2015, attributed primarily to a reduction in incidents involving improvised
explosive devices. The southern, south-eastern and eastern regions continued to
account for the majority of incidents (68.5 per cent). Consistent with previous
trends, armed clashes accounted for the majority of security incidents (64 per cent),
followed by improvised explosive devices (17.4 per cent). Targeted killings
decreased: from 16 February to 19 May, 163 assassinations, including failed
attempts, were recorded, representing a decrease of 37 per cent compared with the
same period in 2015. A total of 15 suicide attacks were reported, compared with 29
in the same period in 2015, as well as several high-profile incidents. The latter
included a complex attack against the consulate of India in Jalalabad on 2 March, an
attack against the residence of the acting Director of the National Directorate of
Security in the city of Kabul on 21 March and the targeted killing of two high ranking army commanders on 24 and 27 March in Kandahar and Logar provinces,
respectively. The Taliban claimed responsibility for those two attacks.

4/15

16-09162

A/70/924
S/2016/532

14. Insurgent attacks increased notably after the beginning of the Taliban spring
offensive, Operation Omari. In its declaration of 12 April launching the annual
campaign, the Taliban pledged large-scale attacks against “enemy positions”
alongside tactical attacks and targeted killings of military commanders. Unlike in
previous years, the movement did not threaten civilian government officials
specifically. In the first two weeks of the offensive, the number of Taliban -initiated
attacks almost doubled compared with the previous two weeks, resulting in the
highest number of armed clashes recorded for the month of April since 2001. Since
the beginning of the offensive, the Taliban has launched 36 attacks on district
administrative centres, including a concerted push on the city of Kunduz. The
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces repelled the vast majority of those
attacks. The offensive gained further momentum with the completion of the
seasonal poppy harvest in Helmand Province early in May, resulting in increased
clashes in the southern region. The Taliban also concentrated efforts to seize
strategically important parts of Uruzgan Province along the Kandahar -Tirin Kot
highway and retook control of strategic areas of Baghlan Province, where security
forces had conducted a clearance operation in January.
15. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces remained under pressure, in
particular in Baghlan, Faryab, Helmand, Kunar, Kunduz, Nangahar and Uruzgan
provinces, and were reinforced by Afghan special forces and international military
assets. Notwithstanding intensified efforts to strengthen army units, in particular in
Helmand Province, significant shortcomings remained in the areas of command and
control, leadership, logistics and overall coordination. In the first four months of
2016, reports indicated rising casualties among the security forces. The
sustainability of the forces remains a challenge in the light of high attrition rates.
Even though recruitment was on target, re-enlistment rates remained particularly
low and needed to be increased to compensate for other losses. In April 2016, army
troop levels and Afghan National Police numbers reached 87 per cent and 74 per
cent respectively, of the levels projected for August 2016. Some progress was made
in increasing air capacity, and the air force carried out a limited number of air
missions.
16. Discussions on the presence of the Resolute Support Mission of NATO beyond
2016 and future funding arrangements for the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces continued ahead of the NATO summit in July. The Secretary General of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg, visited the city of Kabul on 15 and 16 March,
during which he met with the President and the Chief Executive of Afghanistan,
Abdullah Abdullah, and reaffirmed the commitment of NATO to Afghanistan. On
11 May, NATO members and donor representatives discuss financial support for the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces up to 2020 in a meeting in Brussels
of the board of the Afghan National Army Trust Fund. On 20 May in Brussels,
ministers for foreign affairs of participating countries agreed on the extension of the
Mission beyond 2016.
17. Other armed groups maintained small presences on Afghan territory, including
the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan in northern Afghanistan and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) in the east. Since my previous
report, operations by the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, supported
by international military air strikes, further reduced the presence of ISIL -KP in
Nangarhar Province, where the group also faced pressure from the Taliban. This

16-09162

5/15

A/70/924
S/2016/532

contributed to ISIL-KP establishing a small, secondary presence in neighbouring
Kunar and Nuristan provinces in search of safe havens and recruitment.
18. A total of 25 recorded incidents had an impact on the United Nations,
including 6 cases of intimidation, 3 incidents relating to an improvised explosive
device and 6 criminal-related incidents. On 20 May, a guard contracted by the
United Nations was killed in the city of Kabul and another guard and a United
Nations staff member were injured in a shooting incident, the circumstances of
which are under investigation.

C.

Regional cooperation
19. Since my previous report, efforts by Afghanistan and Pakistan to strengthen
relations were affected by the lack of progress made in the peace process with the
Taliban, in addition to border tensions and mutual allegations of indirect crossborder
fire. The decision of Pakistan to normalize border -crossing procedures, which
resulted in tighter and lengthier checks by border officials, triggered demonstrations
on 2 and 5 May in Jalalabad and the Mohmand Dara district of Nangarhar Province.
Border tensions further escalated early in May, culminating in the temporary closure
of the Torkham border crossing from 10 to 13 May. The border reopened on 13 May
following negotiations in Islamabad between the Ambassador of Afgha nistan to
Pakistan and the Chief of Army Staff of Pakistan.
20. Afghanistan continued its regional engagement, with an emphasis on the
economy and security. On 23 May, the President, the President of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, and the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi,
signed a trilateral transport and transit agreement in Tehran to facilitate trade among
the three countries and potentially those of Central Asia, in particular with the
provision of sea access through the development of the Iranian port of Chabahar.
During a conference on the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline
project on 25 April, the deputy ministers for foreign affairs of Turkmenistan and
Afghanistan highlighted its importance to regional confidence -building. The
ground-breaking ceremony for the electricity transmission and trade project for
Central Asia and South Asia connecting Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan and
Tajikistan was held in Tajikistan on 12 May, with the attendance of the President of
Tajikistan, Emomali Rahmon, the Prime Minister of Kyrgystan, Sooronbai
Jeenbekov, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, and Chief Executive
Abdullah. From 15 to 18 May, the Chief Executive visited China, where the two
countries signed six bilateral cooperation documents addressing technical,
infrastructure and humanitarian assistance and economic cooperation. On 21 and
22 May, the President conducted an official visit to Qatar, where he met the Emir,
Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, and the Prime Minister, Abdullah bin Nasser bin
Khalifa Al-Thani.
21. The region demonstrated continued commitment to the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process as a platform for regional cooperation, including on counter -terrorism and
regional connectivity. On 26 April, senior officials of the countries participating in
the Process met in New Delhi, where they stressed the need for collective efforts to
combat terrorism and extremism. Participating countries held three regional
technical group meetings: on trade, commerce and investment o pportunities, in
India, on 4 March; on education, in the Islamic Republic of Iran, on 10 March; and

6/15

16-09162

A/70/924
S/2016/532

on counter-terrorism, in the city of Kabul, on 3 April. At those meetings,
participants approved the holding of a series of expert meetings in preparation f or
the meeting of senior officials on security issues and counter -terrorism measures
outlined in the Islamabad Declaration of December 2015. From 15 to 20 May, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force undertook consultations in the city of
Kabul with government officials on their plans to develop a framework for a
regional counter-terrorism strategy within the Process.
22. Central Asian countries and the Russian Federation continued to express
concern about the cross-border impact of insecurity in Afghanistan and pledged
increased cooperation with Kabul. On 27 and 28 April, at the fifth Moscow
conference on international security, participants agreed that terrorism was a threat
that could not be fought independently. From 29 to 31 March, at a United N ations
seminar in Almaty, Kazakhstan, participants supported a proposal for the inclusion
of Afghanistan in regional counterradicalization approaches. The Chief Executive
represented Afghanistan at the summit of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
in Istanbul, Turkey, on 14 and 15 April, the final communiqué of which included a
call for unity in countering extremism.

III. Human rights
23. On 17 April, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
released its report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan
covering the first quarter of 2016. Between 1 January and 31 March, the Mission
documented 1,943 civilian casualties (600 deaths and 1,343 injured), representing
an increase of 2 per cent compared with the same period in 2015. The Mission
attributed 60 per cent of civilian casualties to anti-government elements, 19 per cent
to pro-government forces and 16 per cent to unattributed crossfire between
pro-government forces and anti-government elements. A total of 6 per cent of
civilian casualties could not be attributed. Ground engagements remained the
leading cause of civilian casualties, causing 38 per cent of civilian deaths and
injuries, followed by improvised explosive devices, accounting for 20 per cent of
civilian casualties, and complex and suicide attacks, which caused 18 per cent of
civilian casualties. On 25 May, UNAMA facilitated a high -level dialogue on civilian
protection with senior officials of the Government, Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and the
Resolute Support Mission of NATO. The security forces reaffirmed the
Government’s commitment to the prevention and mitigation of civilian casualties.
On 28 May, the Commission signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Ministry of National Defence, the Ministry of the Interior and the National
Directorate of Security intended to strengthen accountability and transparency in the
functions and practices of defence and security organs.
24. Large-scale attacks by Taliban and anti-government elements in civilianpopulated areas continued. On 5 April, anti-government elements detonated a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device against an unknown target in a market
area in the Sia Gird district of Parwan Province, killing 8 civilians and injuring
35 others, including 4 children. Between 15 and 30 April, UNAMA documented a
preliminary figure of 90 civilian casualties (15 dead and 75 injured) caused by
armed clashes near the city of Kunduz. The Taliban claimed responsibility for an
attack in the city of Kabul on 19 April against the directorate of security for

16-09162

7/15

A/70/924
S/2016/532

dignitaries, which left 56 civilians dead and 337 injured. On 25 May, the Taliban
claimed responsibility for a suicide attack targeting a vehicle transporting court
employees outside of the city of Kabul, which left 12 passengers dead and
9 civilians injured, including 6 children.
25. The Taliban continued to threaten media organizations and journalists,
accusing them of engaging in propaganda. On 28 February, the Government
established a committee consisting of representatives of the Ministry of the Interior
and the Ministry of Information and Culture, the office of the Attorney General, the
National Directorate of Security and journalist unions to investigate cases involving
the killing of journalists. On 3 May, the President appointed a human rights activist
as Ambassador for Freedom of Expression in Afghanistan. In addition to the
6 prisoners executed on 8 May, 600 others, including 100 convicted of crimes of
national security, have been sentenced to death. UNAMA continued to advocate a
moratorium on the death penalty, respect for fair trial guarantees and the expediting
of legal reforms to commute death sentences to life imprisonment.
26. There are continuing concerns about the detention of children on national
security-related charges, including for alleged association with armed groups. As at
31 March, 227 boys were detained in juvenile rehabilitation centres on such
charges. In addition, in February 2016, 166 detainees who had been arrested as
minors, including 53 who were still children, were being held with adults in a high security facility in Parwan Province.
27. Between 1 January and 31 March, the task force on monitoring and reporting
verified 343 incidents resulting in 161 children killed, including 43 girls, and
449 others (336 boys and 113 girls) injured. Ground engagements remained the
leading cause of child casualties, followed by explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices. There were 208 child casualties attributed to
anti-government elements, including 149 to the Taliban. Pro -government forces
were responsible for 154 child casualties. The United Nations received 18 reports of
child recruitment and use involving at least 40 boys and verified the recruitment of
9 boys, comprising 7 by the Taliban, 1 by anti-government elements and 1 by the
Afghan National Police. On 6 April, the Ministry of the Interior opened a new child
protection unit in the Afghan National Police recruitment centre in the city of
Kabul, bringing the total number of such units to seven across the country. In the
first quarter of 2016, the United Nations received reports of eight incidents of
abduction and verified four incidents involving five boys. The abduction of four
boys was attributed to the Taliban and the abduction and rape of one boy to the
Afghan Local Police.
28. Conflict-related violence continued to have an impact on health and education
facilities, affecting schooling and the provision of health services for children. The
task force on monitoring and reporting verified 17 incidents affecting access to
education and 29 incidents affecting health-care services. On 18 April, the United
Nations released a report, entitled “Education and health care at risk”, covering the
period from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2015. Documented therein were
132 conflict-related incidents against schools in 2015 alone, representing an
increase of 86 per cent compared with 2014. Also documented therein were
125 incidents affecting access to health care in 2015, compared with 59 in 2014 and
33 in 2013.

8/15

16-09162

A/70/924
S/2016/532

29. The Government continued to take steps to address violence against women
and implement the national action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
the funding of which was under discussion. On 24 April, the Government submitted
information in follow-up to the concluding observations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW/C/AFG/CO/1-2/Add.1).
30. The United Nations continued to facilitate policy dialogue aimed at ending
violence against women and supporting protection services for women. A total of
11 women protection centres in nine provinces and 5 family guidance centres for
survivors of domestic violence were supported by the United Nations, of a total of
23 such centres operating throughout the country. To streamline the provision of
services and ensure adherence to policies and protocols in women protection
centres, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and the United Nations organized a
workshop on the topic from 24 to 26 April, with the participation of 67 Ministry
staff, women protection centre managers and implementing partners. The United
Nations trained a total of 322 people in Farah and Khost provinces, including
134 women, comprising students, civil society representatives, provincial officials
and local leaders, on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). A total
of 133 provincial council members, including 27 women from nine northern and
north-eastern provinces, received training on human rights and on gender
mainstreaming in monitoring and evaluation.
31. The Government continued its work on revising the Penal Code, with the aim
of submitting the entire revised law to the National Assembly by December 2016,
one of its short-term commitments under the Self-reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework. On 1 May, the criminal law reform working group,
chaired by the Ministry of Justice and consisting of representatives of justice sector
institutions and the United Nations, submitted the first half of the revised Code to
the Minister of Justice for consideration. The revisions ensure compliance with
international criminal justice and human rights norms.
32. On 11 May, the lower house of the National Assembly rejected the presidential
decree of 2 September 2015 on preventive detention on the grounds that it violated
key provisions of the Constitution relating to due process and the right to liberty.
UNAMA continued its advocacy to ensure that any proposed revised law on
preventive detention reflected prevailing international standards. Previously, on
2 April, Afghanistan had submitted its second periodic report to the Committee
against Torture (see CAT/C/AFG/2).
33. On 18 April, UNAMA published its report assessing prison health services in
31 of 34 provinces against the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners. It was found that most prisoners had access to medical care,
but that services were not available equally to vulnerable groups, including women
and accompanying children. UNAMA shared its report with the Director General of
the Central Prison Directorate on 26 April and provided assistance in coordinating
donor support to address shortcomings.

16-09162

9/15

A/70/924
S/2016/532

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and the coordination
of development assistance
34. Afghanistan continued to face economic challenges. The Afghanistan
Development Update, published by the World Bank on 18 April, included a
downward revised growth estimate, from 1.9 to 1.5 per cent. Growth in 2016 is
projected at 1.9 per cent according to the Bank, while the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), in its report of 13 May, projected growth at 2.0 per cent, indicating
slow rates of recovery. Both institutions stressed the importance of continuing and
predictable progress on reforms, as well as security improvemen ts, to bolster
economic confidence. An indication of the limited confidence in the business
environment was documented by the Afghan Investment Support Agency, which
reported a decrease of 30 per cent in net investments in 2015 compared with 2014.
Investments declined particularly sharply in the construction, mining and
manufacturing sectors.
35. The Government, IMF and donor representatives continued discussions on the
future IMF programme for Afghanistan. Following the successful completion of the
staff-monitored programme on 13 April, the Government formally requested
funding support for three years under the IMF Extended Credit Facility at the
meetings of IMF and the World Bank Group, held in Washington, D.C., from 15 to
17 April. Negotiations on the new programme, which focused on public finance
management, financial sector reform and reforms supporting private sector
development, were held in New Delhi from 18 to 26 May and are expected to
inform preparations for the conference on Afghanistan in Brussel s in October.
36. The status of progress in reforms continued to dominate the aid policy
dialogue in the lead-up to the NATO summit and the Brussels conference. On
4 April, the Minister of Finance, Eklil Hakimi, and my Special Representative,
Nicholas Haysom, co-chaired a special meeting of the Joint Coordination
Monitoring Board in the city of Kabul, at which the Government reported that
90 per cent of the commitments for the period 2015 -2016 in the Self-reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework had been completed or were on track.
The Government continued its work on the Afghan National Peace and
Development Framework and shared a draft with development partners on 9 May.
The Government also reported that progress had been made in drafting 3 of 22 of its
national priority programmes, including the citizens’ charter, the urban development
and women’s economic empowerment plans and the justice reform plan.
37. The linkages between security and development spending gained new
attention, given that security sector spending exerted continued fiscal pressure on
the Government’s budget. Notwithstanding an increase of 22 per cent in 2015,
government revenue is 10.4 per cent of the gross domestic product, lower than total
on-budget security costs, which account for 12.2 per cent. The development of a
sustainable model for economic growth and prioritized spending remains a key
priority, given the subdued national demand, rising poverty and continuing low
growth rates, as discussed at the spring meetings of IMF and the World Bank Group
on 16 April and at the annual meeting of the Asian Development Bank on 2 May.
38. The Government reported on its efforts to advance its anti -corruption agenda.
On 19 March, it created a high council on governance, justice and anti -corruption by
presidential decree to oversee the drafting and implementation of a national

10/15

16-09162

A/70/924
S/2016/532

anti-corruption strategy. The council, once operational, will be chaired by the
President and include the Chief Executive, the two Vice -Presidents, the Chief
Justice, the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General. On 5 May, during a
conference on combating corruption hosted by the European Union in the city of
Kabul, the President announced both the establishment of a specialized
anti-corruption court, to be functional by the NATO summit, and plans to strengthen
the existing major crimes task force to support anti-corruption investigations. He
repeated the commitments at a summit on combating -corruption, held in London on
12 May, and issued a statement in which he outlined measures, including
establishing high-level anti-corruption institutions, strengthening international law
enforcement cooperation, facilitating information -sharing on corrupt bidders and
enforcing tax collection standards.
39. The Government also took steps to tackle corruption in the justice sector and
at the subnational level. To strengthen his office, on 28 May, the new Attorney
General appointed or transferred 40 key officials, including 19 of 34 new chief
provincial prosecutors, and new directors for three internal units relating to
countering corruption, internal audit and the elimination of violence against women.
Between March 2015 and March 2016, the Judicial Surveillance Department of the
Supreme Court arrested, investigated and referred for prosecution 85 individuals,
including 6 judges and 14 administrative staff of the judiciary and defence counsel
suspected of involvement in judicial corruption. This represents an increase of more
than 100 per cent compared with the same period in 2015. The Government also
reassigned 602 trial and appellate judges, representing one quarter of the judiciary,
including all Chief Appeals Court judges in 33 of 34 provinces, to new positions in
order to promote judicial independence by reducing the risk of local influence. On
1 May, the head of appeal prosecutions in Helmand Province publicized the names
of 25 government officials suspected of corruption and land grabbing, and opened
investigations.
40. The Government implemented reforms at the subnatio nal level in an effort to
improve governance and service delivery. The President appointed 12 new
municipal mayors through a competitive process, bringing the total number so
appointed mayors to 15 of a total of 154. To further strengthen service delivery and
urban development for municipalities, on 4 February, the Government upgraded the
position of Director General of Municipalities within the Independent Directorate of
Local Governance to Deputy Minister.
41. Efforts also continued to professionalize the Afghan National Police and
strengthen community-oriented policing. The Ministry of the Interior, with support
from the United Nations, held a national conference on community policing on
1 and 2 March, with the participation of 300 individuals, including government and
civil society representatives. The participants adopted a resolution calling for the
expansion of the community policing concept throughout the country. On 7 April,
the Ministry established a support team to strengthen training, education a nd
leadership.

V. Humanitarian assistance
42. The humanitarian situation remained precarious, with significant new conflict induced internal displacements, continuing access challenges and persistent

16-09162

11/15

A/70/924
S/2016/532

vulnerabilities for rural communities. As at 15 May, the United Nations had
recorded more than 118,000 newly internally displaced persons since the beginning
of 2016 in 24 of the 34 provinces, representing an increase of 10 per cent compared
with the same period in 2015. At least 15,000 people have been newly displaced
since the beginning of the Taliban’s spring offensive. The highest numbers of new
displacements were reported in Kunduz and Baghlan provinces (45,000) and in the
Dehrawud district of Uruzgan Province (12,700). Access constraints continued to
hinder needs assessments and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
43. The number of refugees returning through the United Nations voluntary
repatriation programme decreased significantly, reflecting uncertainties associated
with the economic, political and security environment. As at 14 May, 4,643 refugees
had been repatriated in 2016, including 3,901 from Pakistan and 688 from the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Returnee figures are comparable to 2014, the year with the
lowest recorded returnee rate since the establishment of the voluntary return
programme in 2002. Many of the returnees chose not to return to their areas of
origin, including many who settled in urban centres. The United Nations continues
to support the Government in developing a comprehensive voluntary repatriation
and reintegration strategy to address the challenges faced by the returnees.
Meanwhile, 75,858 undocumented Afghans spontaneously returned: 67,619 from the
Islamic Republic of Iran and 8,239 from Pakistan. An additional 62,425 Af ghans
were deported from the Islamic Republic of Iran and 7,259 from Pakistan. While the
numbers remain high, spontaneous returns from Pakistan are 44 per cent lower than
the early 2015 spike in returns following military operations in the North Waziristan
Agency. Afghanistan also continues to host a high number of refugees from the
North Waziristan Agency in Khost and Paktika provinces.
44. The migration of Afghans to Europe continued at high levels. Since the
beginning of 2016, 39,465 Afghans have arrived in Europe by sea, accounting for
21 per cent of total arrivals and representing the second -largest population group
after Syrians. In the context of the increasing numbers of Afghan migrants, several
European countries increased efforts to return rejected Afghan asylum seekers.
Between 1 January and 31 April, the International Organization for Migration
assisted 1,851 voluntary returnees from Europe, compared with 450 in the same
period in 2015. Almost half of the returnees originated from Germany. Discus sions
continue between the Government and partners on measures to alter migration
patterns and create incentives for citizens to remain in Afghanistan.
45. Afghanistan continued to be affected by natural disasters and extreme weather
conditions, which resulted in flooding and displacement. Between March and April,
there were 79 recorded national disaster incidents affecting 36,945 individuals,
including 1,043 who were displaced in Helmand Province as a result of flooding and
who received assistance from humanitarian partners. The normal to above-normal
rains in March and April in key crop-growing areas of Afghanistan are expected to
result in an average wheat harvest and improved food security for the majority of
poor households throughout the country in the coming three months.
46. Efforts to eradicate polio, which remains endemic in Afghanistan, continued to
face access and security challenges. Five new cases have been identified since the
beginning of 2016: three in Kunar Province and one each in Helmand a nd Kandahar
provinces. The Ministry of Health, supported by the United Nations, conducted
supplementary immunization activities, including two nationwide campaigns. Some

12/15

16-09162

A/70/924
S/2016/532

200,000 children are estimated not to have been vaccinated, comprising 147,000
children in the north-eastern region and 30,555 children in the eastern region, where
anti-government elements prevented access, and 22,445 children in the southern
region, where active fighting was under way. Monitoring of the campaigns in
Helmand and Farah provinces remained limited because of insecurity.
47. Mine action partners, coordinated by the United Nations, cleared 42 minefields
and three battlefields in the first quarter of 2016, with the result that
15 communities in five districts were declared mine -free. At the end of the quarter,
it was estimated that 4,334 minefields and battlefields remained, affecting 1,584
communities across 255 districts. The transfer of mine action coordination to the
Government was on schedule and expected to be completed in 2017.
48. Humanitarian access constraints continue to be recorded under the United
Nations global monitoring frameworks. In total, 75 incidents against
non-governmental organizations, the United Nations and other international
organizations were registered in the first four months of 2016. Five aid workers
were killed and eight injured. Abductions have risen significantly, with 81 aid
workers abducted, compared with 59 during the same period in 2015. Most
abduction incidents affected demining agencies. Access to Badakhshan Province
was improved through new flights by the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service.
49. As at 16 May, overall humanitarian funding for Afghanistan had reached
$169 million, of which $65 million was designated for activities envisage d in the
Humanitarian Response Plan and $104 million for the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement. The Response Plan was 16 per cent funded. Funding for
food, nutrition, health care and refugee and returnee programmes remains
particularly low. The Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund has received $25 million to
date in 2016, with funding focused on emergency health care, assistance to
displaced families and humanitarian assessments.

VI. Counter-narcotics
50. On 16 March, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime released the
socioeconomic analysis portion of its report entitled “Afghanistan opium survey
2015”, in which it evaluated the opiate economy and the factors driving opium
poppy cultivation. The report’s authors found that the estimated gross value of
opiates in Afghanistan had decreased by 45 per cent to $1.56 billion from 2014, but
still represented 7 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product, compared with
13 per cent in 2014. The significant shrinking of the opiate economy is a reflection
of both substantial reductions in opium cultivation and production and a decrease in
the average farm-gate price of dry opium in 2015. The low value of the 2015 harvest
resulted in significant income reductions for rural households engaged in o pium
cultivation, given that the sale of poppy and its derivatives accounted for 40 per
cent of their annual income, and further increased the socioeconomic vulnerability
of rural communities. For the first time, the report included a section on the role o f
Afghan women in opium poppy cultivation, with its authors concluding that, while
women were motivated by the additional cash income, they had only a limited
influence on whether to grow poppy or opt for alternative crops.
51. No significant drug crop eradication was reported because of security
challenges in key poppy-growing areas and funding constraints. Between

16-09162

13/15

A/70/924
S/2016/532

10 February and 23 May, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted
694 counter-narcotics operations, resulting in the seizure of 1,329 kg o f heroin,
3,058 kg of opium, 860 kg of morphine, 29 kg of methamphetamine and 7,688 kg of
hashish, and the seizure of 1,406 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 1,442 litres of
liquid precursor chemicals. In addition, five laboratories were dismantled,
851 suspects arrested and 143 vehicles, 84 weapons and 95 mobile phones seized.
Three members of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces were killed and
five wounded in the course of those operations.

VII. Mission support
52. UNAMA continued the construction of its new premises in the city of Kunduz
to ensure full compliance with minimum operating security standards. To enhance
medical services provided to United Nations personnel in field locations, medical
emergency response teams deployed in April to eight locations in Bamyan,
Faizabad, Gardez, Herat, Jalalabad, Kabul and Kandahar.

VIII. Observations
53. Interrelated economic, political and security challenges continue to test the
Government and people of Afghanistan. Low economic growth, high unemployment
and an intensifying insurgency have led to new levels of internal displacement and
migration and fuelled a vocal political opposition. While these circumstances are
not of the Government’s making, they require its determined response. The
Government has clearly articulated a path towards greater stability, accountability
and self-reliance, the realization of which remains a work in progress. While the
international community considers, at meetings in Brussels and Warsaw in 2016, the
assistance that it will provide to Afghanistan, I would underscore that the country’s
path to stability is fragile and relies on a clear and long -term commitment of
international support.
54. I commend the commitment of Afghanistan, with China, Pakistan and the
United States, in the context of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process. Only through a negotiated political agreement
will Afghans attain the sustainable peace that they deserve and need. Direct talks
between the Government and the Taliban remain essential in this regard, and I call
upon Member States to contribute to the achievement of such an outcome.
55. I take note of the draft peace agreement between the Government and the
Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin and, once ratified, would welcome the commitments made
therein to renounce violence and links with terrorists groups and to support human
rights. While hoping that the implementation of such an agreement may lead to a
reduction in the levels of conflict-related violence, I underline the importance for
Afghanistan of abiding by its international obligations to hold perpetrators to
account for the commission of war crimes, crimes against humanity and gross
violations of human rights.
56. The increase in the number of civilian casualties owing to conflict is
unacceptable. The casualties documented in the first quarter of 2016 are the highest
on record since 2009. Conflict-related violence continued to have a devastating

14/15

16-09162

A/70/924
S/2016/532

impact on children, who accounted for almost one third of all casualties during the
first quarter. An increase in the number of displacements can be expected because of
continuing conflict. The Government’s commitment to reducing civilian casualties
will be demonstrated in the finalization and implementation of a national civilian
casualty prevention and mitigation policy.
57. The decision by the lower house of the National Assembly to reject the decree
of 2 September 2015 on preventive detention, the provisions of which run counter to
the Constitution and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to
which Afghanistan is a party, is testament to the desire of the people of Afghanistan
to advance the observance of the rule of law and of human rights. It is hoped that
the Government will also move to apply a moratorium on the use of the death
penalty and to expedite legal reforms that will allow death sentences to be
commuted to life imprisonment.
58. The progress made in appointments to senior positions in the Government
needs to be strengthened and the remaining key Cabinet positions filled. Likewise,
appointments to and the staffing of the electoral management bodies, as well as
consensus on reforms, are urgently required so that preparations for the elections
can be secured if they are to be credible and be held in 2016.
59. The President’s commitment to adopting more stringent policies and practices
to combat corruption must translate into action. To do so will require the firm
support of the National Assembly in safeguarding and upholding th e public trust.
The Government’s implementation of the access to information law of November
2014 would be an important contribution to improving transparency and enabling
scrutiny by civil society, which would aid anti-corruption efforts.
60. The summit in Warsaw and the conference in Brussels on Afghanistan can
represent an essential pivot in the trajectory of the country and the region and
promote crucial efforts to strengthen connectivity and cross -border cooperation. At
the same time, it will require sustained attention to ensure an approach that
recognizes the difficult task for the Government in shouldering the financing of
security forces while also funding development initiatives. The Government must
play its role and demonstrate that it is committed to implementing the reforms
necessary to ensure the tangible impact of international assistance on the lives of
Afghans. I would underscore that the expectations of Member States of the Afghan
reform agenda must be realistic, taking into account the formidable challenges
facing the country.
61. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my outgoing
Special Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for their continued dedication, under
challenging conditions, to fulfilling our commitments in suppor t of the people of
Afghanistan and welcome my incoming Special Representative, Tadamichi
Yamamoto.

16-09162

15/15
