United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/58/71
Distr.: General
19 December 2003

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December 2003
[on the report of the First Committee (A/58/468)]

58/71. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the cessation of nuclear-weapon test explosions or any other
nuclear explosions constitutes an effective nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation measure,
Recalling that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, adopted by its
resolution 50/245 of 10 September 1996, was opened for signature on 24 September
1996,
Stressing that a universal and effectively verifiable Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty constitutes a fundamental instrument in the field of disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation,
Encouraged by the signing of the Treaty by one hundred and sixty-nine States,
including forty-one of the forty-four needed for its entry into force, and welcoming
the ratification of one hundred and seven States, including thirty-two of the fortyfour needed for its entry into force, among which there are three nuclear-weapon
States,
Recalling its resolution 57/100 of 22 November 2002,
Welcoming the Final Declaration of the third Conference on Facilitating the
Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, held at Vienna
from 3 to 5 September 2003, 1 pursuant to article XIV of the Treaty,
1.
Stresses the importance and urgency of signature and ratification, without
delay and without conditions and in accordance with constitutional processes, to
achieve the earliest entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;
Welcomes the contributions by the States signatories to the work of the
2.
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization, in particular to its efforts to ensure that the Treaty’s verification
regime will be capable of meeting the verification requirements of the Treaty upon
its entry into force, in accordance with article IV of the Treaty;

_______________
1

03 45717

CTBT–Art. XIV/2003/5, annex I.

A/RES/58/71

3.
Urges States to maintain their moratoria on nuclear-weapons test
explosions or any other nuclear explosions, pending the entry into force of the
Treaty;
Urges all States that have not yet signed the Treaty to sign and ratify it as
4.
soon as possible and to refrain from acts that would defeat its object and purpose in
the meanwhile;
Urges all States that have signed but not yet ratified the Treaty, in
5.
particular those whose ratification is needed for its entry into force, to accelerate
their ratification processes with a view to their earliest successful conclusion;
6.
level;

Urges all States to remain seized of the issue at the highest political

7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session the
item entitled “Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty”.
71st plenary meeting
8 December 2003

2
