S/PV.7699

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7699th meeting

Thursday, 26 May 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Challenges in the Sahel region

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-14853 (E)
*1614853*

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Challenges in the Sahel region
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel; Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and Assistant Secretary-General; Ms. Monique Barbut,
Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification; and Ms. Hindou Oumarou
Ibrahim, Coordinator of the Association des femmes
peules autochtones du Tchad.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Ibn Chambas,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Niamey.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Pierre Buyoya,
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, and Mr. Angel Losada, European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ibn Chambas.
Mr. Ibn Chambas: I thank the Security Council
for once again giving me the opportunity to brief
it on challenges to peace, security and stability in
West Africa, particularly in the Sahel region. I speak
from Niamey, where I have just met with President
Mahamadou Issoufou as part of a tour of the five Sahel
countries that are on the front line of humankind’s
struggle with climate change. I will be travelling to
Ouagadougou right after this briefing, and will be
sure to bring my hopes and the Council’s concern for
the impact of climate change on peace and security in
that region.
West Africa and the Sahel have for some time now
been faced with multifaceted challenges. From Dakar to
2/31

26/05/2016

Djibouti, climate change is one of the most important of
those challenges through its impact on societies and their
livelihoods, as it directly affects security, development
and stability. In that context, climate change becomes a
fundamental threat to human security. In the maritime
domain, natural resources are underregulated and
overexploited, and criminal activities and piracy are
threatening security and economic activities. Erosion
and rising sea levels constitute another serious threat.
Both regions experience various unresolved
conflicts, ranging from the renewed insurgency in
the Niger delta and deadly clashes between farmers
and herders over scarce and dwindling agricultural
resources, to terrorist activities in northern Mali and
north-eastern Nigeria, which have spilled over to the
neighbouring countries of Cameroon, Chad and the
Niger. These threats go hand in hand with organized
crime, trafficking and violent extremism, and are
exacerbated, by recurring drought that climate change,
by all accounts, has rendered more frequent and
hazardous. The landlocked character of the area and
poor transport links are yet another strain preventing
regional trade that could provide employment and
stimulate economies.
On the positive side, the fight against terrorist
activities is beginning to yield tangible and encouraging
results owing to strengthened cooperation between
the concerned countries and the significant support
of partners. In the short run, however, more effort is
still needed to back the military campaign against
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin area in terms of
financial and operational support for the Multinational
Joint Task Force, and to provide assistance to meet the
immediate humanitarian needs of displaced persons
and refugees, facilitating their return to safe areas and
assisting them to rebuild their livelihoods.
Further west, strengthened regional cooperation
and sustained international support are also required
to help the countries of the Sahel address the threat
of terrorism that continues to spread beyond northern
Mali and into West Africa and the Sahel. The United
Nations remains committed to playing its part within
the parametres of its mandate to help the region face
these security challenges. In the long run, there is a
growing awareness of the need to address the underlying
causes of the crisis, which are underdevelopment, poor
governance and attendant poverty, all of which are, at
least in part, linked to climate change.
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

The theme of the second Regional Security Summit,
held in Abuja on 14 May, “Consolidating collective
efforts for regional peace and development”, testified
to the willingness of stakeholders to focus on the
economic potential of Lake Chad to alleviate poverty
and bring development to the region.
In the Sahel region, the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel guides the United Nations
system’s multidimensional engagement to address the
root causes of instability in the region. Mitigating the
impact of climate change, which features prominently
under the resilience pillar of the Strategy, is the major
objective of the Strategy. That has been achieved in
close partnership with such actors as the Permanent
Inter-State Committee for Drought Control in the
Sahel, which supports environmental monitoring and
the governance of natural resources.
The Boko Haram onslaught has galvanized
attention to the devastating affects of climate change
impacting the Lake Chad Basin area. To mention just
one, the surface area of Lake Chad shrank from 22,000
square kilometres in 1960 to 1,700 square kilometres
in 1985. Since then, it has rebounded to about 8,000
square kilometres, showing the unpredictability of
external shocks and severely straining people’s coping
mechanisms. Lake Chad, despite its vulnerability, is
blessed with a rich biodiversity that offers opportunities
for fishing, agriculture and livestock farming. It directly
provides livelihoods to about 2 million people, while at
the same time constituting a food-exporting hub that
supplies nearly 13 million people, including inhabitants
of the Chadian capital, N’Djamena, and the capital of
Borno state in Nigeria, Maiduguri.
The economic opportunities of the Lake led to
significant migration movements in the past, the
consequences of which prove challenging today. As of
2015, the Lake Chad Basin was home to up to 50 million
people, whereas its resources have decreased sharply.
It is anticipated that the population will again double
by 2030. The importance and urgency of restoring the
productive capacities of Lake Chad in order to prevent
crises in the future cannot be overemphasized.
Another important area of note is the Niger River
Basin area. It is an enormous resource for sustaining
and improving livelihoods, as well as economic growth
in the Sahel, but is now quickly dwindling as a result
of the impact of extreme climate change and rainfall
variability along the Niger River, a mainstay of the

S/PV.7699

Niger River Basin. The Basin covers nine countries:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Côte D’Ivoire,
Guinea, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. Seven of those
nine countries are among the 20 poorest countries in
the world. Up to 70 per cent of the 130 million people
in the Basin area live in rural communities amid food
insecurity — a situation that can only get worse, as
the population is expected to double between now and
2050. Without real concerted and tangible efforts for
those countries, with international support to address
the acute challenges confronting the inhabitants of
the Basin, the consequences in the future could be
horrific when the Niger River, along its 4,200 kilometre
course, begins to dry up, as can be visible in some
sections already.
I would also like to mention the Great Wall initiative
to combat desertification, which was conceived in 2005
by the former President of Nigeria, Chief Olusegun
Obasanjo, adopted by the African Union in 2007 and
signed by participating countries in N’Djamena in
2010. The Great Green wall is another example of a
long-term approach to attack the root causes of poverty
and marginalization. In fact, the ongoing security
deterioration due to deadly confrontations between
farmers and cattle breeders in some regions of Nigeria
is just another reminder of the devastating effects
of desertification.
Faced with those challenges, West African
and Sahel countries are at a crossroads. While the
responsibility for the implementation of those plans
rests with the Governments concerned, national budgets
are already being put under additional strain for higher
security spending, such as is the case in the Niger,
where I am today. External factors like insecurity in
Libya and North Africa and jihadists returning from
the Middle East are challenges beyond the scope
of individual Governments and require collective
international action. Thankfully, support is starting
to be forthcoming. The European Union has already
announced that €120 million from the Trust Fund for
Africa has been earmarked for security — a point that I
believe Ambassador Angel Losada may confirm.
However, humanitarian needs in the Lake Chad
Basin area continue to grow, with approximately
9.2 million people in need of assistance. More than
2.4 million people have been driven out of their homes
due to terrorist activities, of whom 1.5 million are
children. Up to 90 per cent of the displaced have found
refuge with host communities, placing a heavy strain on

16-148533/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

their resources and weakening their ability to withstand
shock. Despite that dire humanitarian situation, of the
$535 million requested for humanitarian assistance in
the region, only 10 per cent has been received.
Two days ago, world leaders gathered around the
Secretary-General in Istanbul to consider ways and
means to jointly make the world hospitable for all. Among
the five core responsibilities defined by the SecretaryGeneral in his report entitled “One humanity: shared
responsibility” (A/70/709), I would like in particular to
highlight responsibility one — “political responsibility
to prevent and end conflicts” — an responsibility
four — change people’s lives, from delivering aid to
ending need”, which very much apply to the situation in
the Lake Chad Basin areas and the Sahel.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the issues
I have cited here have been thoroughly reviewed over
the years. The problems have been identified, as have
the set of actions to be taken to address them. A number
of sound initiatives exist, and yet there is a feeling of
frustration because results are not as tangible as one
would wish them to be. Pooling efforts to rationalize
the implementation of existing plans would go a long
way in achieving our common goals.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ibn
Chambas for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Laborde.
Mr. Laborde (spoke in French): We are meeting
here today to discuss the links between security and
climate change in the Sahel. Is that a perception or a
reality? Given that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate is in charge of the fight against
terrorism, I will frame my intervention from the
perspective of the potential impact of climate change
and global warming on it.
In the absence of concrete data or studies to
establish such a correlation, it is difficult to say with
confidence that such an impact exists. However, we can
venture to say that climate change can be an aggravating
factor leading to human insecurity and more conflicts,
as recalled by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel. We
also know that terrorism feeds on conflict. We have
an illustration in the Sahel, which is experiencing a
proliferation of terrorist groups. For years, Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and
Jihad in Western Africa, Ansar Eddine — in Mali, the
4/31

26/05/2016

Niger and Libya — and Boko Haram — in the Niger,
Cameroon, Chad and Nigeria — have recruited from
what I would call a bottomless pool of candidates for
terrorism. It is therefore essential to prevent conflicts
and address their causes in order to stem terrorism.
However, climate change cannot alone contribute
to insecurity. It must be accompanied by other sociopolitical variables, such as poor governance, local
conflicts over ownership of natural resources, economic
instability and youth unemployment. A lack of training
and jobs for young people leads them to find a solution
to their alienation in crime, which allows them a way
out, even temporarily, of poverty. Such disillusionment
can lead to radicalization via actions by terrorist groups
aimed primarily at young people — not just in Africa
and the Sahel, but throughout the world.
In a recent study by the United Nations Development
Programme study initiated by the Executive Directorate
and conducted in 2015 among border populations of
eight Sahel countries on their perceptions of the factors
of insecurity and violent extremism, it was found that
continued desertification and ecosysment degradation
were seen as a form of human insecurity that pushed
young people into violent extremism. I would add, “and
who knows, to acts of terrorism?” The plundering of
natural resources, such as the smuggling of rare woods
in West Africa, leads not only to a degradation of
ecosystems but may in the long term have significant
consequences on the socioeconomic balance of the
region by increasing the vulnerability of populations,
thereby creating fertile ground for the recruitment of
young people who may then be doomed to destitution
by organized criminal groups and terrorist groups.
That brings me to the links between transnational
organized crime and terrorism. The Security Council
has addressed that issue on several occasions, in
particular in resolution 1373 (2001), which establishes
the foundation for the Committee’s action against
terrorism — our Chair is also its Chair — and that of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) on the links between transnational organized
crime and terrorism. The position of the Council was
very clear when it stated that it:
“Notes with concern the close connection
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime, illicit drugs, money-laundering,
illegal arms trafficking, and illegal movement of
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

nuclear, chemical, biological and other potentially
deadly materials” (resolution 1373 (2001), para. 4).
Those links are indeed a challenge and a source
of concern to the national authorities of the Sahel, the
region that is our focus today. We counted the cases
that have been brought before the courts in the Sahel,
and despite the low number of cases that establish those
facts, the zones of convergence, from straightforward
taxation of activities of criminal groups that operate in
the territory under the control of terrorist groups — by
which we mean taxation by terrorist groups that control
territories and engage in organized crime — in all
likelihood they directly implicate terrorist groups in
activities arising from organized crime.
Organized criminal groups and terrorist groups
may have different objectives, including those that
affect the environment. Nevertheless, the pooling of
their criminal techniques or networks can be mutually
beneficial. That is the important point. In total, between
2013 and 2014 trafficking in drugs, weapons and tobacco
reportedly yielded nearly $3.5 billion, according to the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
Given that fact, we have to underscore here that we do
not know the exact percentage of that funds that go
directly to terrorist groups.
The very porous borders of a region that is already
unstable, the large size of the informal economy,
the low amount of banking and corruption are all
additional factors that, with climate change, facilitate
the entrenchment of trafficking routes through the
Sahel to North Africa or Europe, in particular the route
of cocaine from South America, that of cannabis resin
from North Africa, the trafficking of migrants towards
Europe or Asia, or arms trafficking from Libya or
East Africa. In the Sahel, mass migration, which is
also one of the consequences of global warming, has
put a lot of pressure on the border control agencies and
reduced their ability to monitor the use of different
forms of trafficking by those terrorist and organized
crime groups.
The recent terrorist attacks in Bamako, Ouagadougou
and Grand-Bassam are illustrations of the capacity
for action of terrorist groups thriving in the region,
especially Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
Al-Mourabitoun, which have claimed those attacks.
This violence has also demonstrated that those terrorist
groups can strike below the Sahel region, which is under
stricter control because of the presence of the United

S/PV.7699

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Barkhane.
Their ability to bypass secure zones demonstrates
once again, if it were necessary, the extreme adaptility
and flexibility of these terrorist organizations, which
operate on the principle of attacking where they are
not expected — in the Sahel but also beyond. In other
words, it must be strongly emphasized that no single
country in the region is safe from the terrorist threat.
Certainly, in the area of Lake
​​
Chad, Boko Haram
has suffered serious setbacks due to the mobilization
of Nigerian security forces and the concerted action of
countries of the region through the Multinational Joint
Task Force. However, that terrorist group continues to
hit civilian populations hard through the mass use of
improvised bombs and suicide bombers, half of whom
are women and at least 20 per cent are minors.
The situation in Libya is also a source of concern
for peace and security in the Sahel. CTED is very
closely following the evolution of the terrorist threat
in that country, especially the rise of Da’esh and its
affiliates there. I underscore, among other things,
the opening of training camps of that terrorist group
on Libyan territory, where some foreign terrorist
fighters might be trained before returning eventually
to their countries of origin to carry out terrorist acts.
We also need to carefully monitor the very aggressive
recruiting methods used by Da’esh with nationals of the
Maghreb and Sahel countries and their possible haven
in Libya. Due to underdevelopment, lack of solid State
institutions and climate change, these recruits are easy
pickings for Da’esh.
Libya, in which Da’esh is present in the coastal
city of Sirte, could therefore serve as an expansionist
platform since it is, for now, a hotbed of destabilization
for the Sahel, and even for Europe, and remains the
source of the proliferation of all types of weapons in the
region. In that regard, many weapons convoys have been
intercepted in northern Niger, near the Salvador Pass,
a historical crossroads for trafficking between Libya
and northern Niger. A United Nations report on arms
trafficking in Libya, conducted by a Panel of Experts,
stresses the alarming rate of Libyan arms proliferation
in more than 12 countries, including Mali. The report
underscores the presence of not only small arms and
heavy weapons, but also mines and anti-aircraft defence
systems. Apart from terrorist groups, that influx of
weapons also promotes all types of crime in the Sahel.

16-148535/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

Those terrorist groups are a complex threat that is
constantly changing in form, scope and methods. The
transnational operational capacity of these terrorist
groups lies in their flexibility to adapt, innovate and
quickly reorganize, while keeping their harmful power
intact despite the efforts of countries of the region and
the international community. The attack in Bamako on
7 March — the first since the terrorists made northern
Mali their outpost some 15 years ago — was a painful
reminder for us. Despite the actions of the Blue Helmets
and the forces hunting them down, terrorist groups still
enjoy fertile ground in the Sahel.
Since the threat is flexible, innovative and adaptable,
the United Nations and its Member States must also put
in place rapid, fluid and flexibility responses to find
effective solutions to the threat, while making full use
of international cooperation mechanisms, in accordance
with the rule of law and human rights. That is why the
consideration of those elements by the Council and its
subsidiary bodies — CTED; the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities;
MINUSMA, the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations — is so
important. As also underscored in his briefing, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa pointed out the urgent need to find political
solutions to the current problems in the Sahel because
terrorist groups and organized crime are slipping
quietly into the lawless areas, to the greatest detriment
of everyone.
Given the facts that I have just mentioned, it is
essential that the countries of the region put in place a
number of different measures to prevent terrorist attacks
on their territory, or at least to diminish their impact so
as to ensure that innocent lives are lost and no act of
terrorism goes unpunished. That is the message that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
transmitted through a series of scheduled visits to the
region since April 2016.
It is clear that the United Nations system as a whole
is intensifying its cooperation and assistance to address
climate change and support sustainable economic
and social development in order to effectively fight
against terrorism and armed conflict. But those efforts
to promote sustainable development cannot succeed
without improving security in areas beset by conflict
and terrorism, and the Sahel is one such area. That is
6/31

26/05/2016

why I outlined the preceding facts. That is also why the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which
combines the security and development approaches,
seems to us to be the framework through which those
problems must be addressed and, if possible, solved.
The dual approach of security and development
was — very opportunely — taken up at the regional
level with the establishment of the Group of Five (G-5)
Sahel. The Executive Directorate has spared no effort
in promoting the regional cooperation necessary in the
fight against terrorism was determined to support the
initiative, whereby the G-5 Sahel countries decided to
work together to fight desertification, poor governance,
terrorism and organized time. Moreover, my team is
preparing to work with UNODC in operationalizing the
security cooperation framework just established by the
G-5 Sahel.
I believe more than ever that improved coordination
in that area requires a decisive response to terrorism. It
is also important to highlight the significant progress
made in the Sahel region to address legislative and
judicial matters involving terrorism, particularly
the establishment of specialized training centres for
magistrates. Nevertheless, the number of terrorism
cases prosecuted remains low, leading to a lack of
citizen confidence, which tends to exacerbate the
effects of climate change. A high number of suspects
remain in detention. Impunity engenders terrorism and
must be ended.
I cannot reiterate enough that cooperation among
countries in the region is crucial, but international
cooperation, especially in criminal matters is critical,
because terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters are, by definition, criminal phenomena
that are transnational par excellence. They also have
an impact on natural resources. To ensure effective
international cooperation, information-sharing must
be strengthened among the various services involved
in the combat against terrorism, and police cooperation
must be strengthened in the Sahel through the G-5 by
pooling resources in the area of criminal investigations,
strengthening cooperation between public prosecutors
and making magistrates aware of what is at stake in
terms of such cooperation. To that end, I will be in
Cotonou next week for a meeting with the leaders of
the judicial bodies of the region and its surroundings.
With French in common, we will meet on those issues,
with the Sahel first and foremost in mind.
16-14853

26/05/2016

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

However, we must not forget the key role played by
the international counter-terrorism instruments. They
have precisely defined the vast majority of terrorism acts
at the international level, thanks to our 19 conventions
and protocols and the Council’s resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2178 (2014). It is critical for
States to reform their legislation as soon as possible in
order to criminalize the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters and participation in terrorist acts abroad,
strengthen investigations and legal tools and the system
for gathering evidence.
Concerning dialogue, we have talked about its
criminal aspects, but I think that dialogue is also
important for States of the region. Dialogue and
partnerships need in particular to be bolstered within
all segments of civil society so as to make it clear that
terrorism must be distinguished from all other areas of
society and that terrorists must be clearly distinguished
from everybody else. Tribal and religious leaders must
play a significant role in that particular context.
Additionally, it is necessary to strengthen
cooperation in the region to allow those countries to
fully shoulder their responsibility in protecting the
people in emerging conflicts. They need to know how
to settle emerging conflicts, render justice, provide
basic services such as education and health care
throughout the entire territory, and promote a culture of
peace and tolerance. There is an urgent need to develop
communications and awareness-raising strategies to
address the threat among those worst off and in the
rural areas. That is the only way to successfully combat
the ideology of terrorist groups and put an end to their
recruitment activities.
Along with security stratgies. the States of the
region must therefore establish prevention strategies
aimed at tackling the root causes of terrorism.
Climate change and mitigation measures should be
considered in terms of such strategies. The support of
the international community is crucial in that sense,
including United Nations European Union programmes
and, as the Special Representative so eloquently noted,
global leadership.
I would like to state that the Executive Directorate
stands ready to assist the Council and the CounterTerrorism Committee in providing necessary assistance
to the countries of the Sahel with a view to establishing
an integrated counter-terrorism strategy. On that solid
basis, we can work with other United Nations agencies,

in particular the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF), which I recall is made up of 38
United Nations bodies and is therefore an important
technical cooperation entity. It is headed by UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Feltman. Of
course we work closely together, I am pleased to say,
and with the Office that supports the work of the
CTITF. We will inform it as soon as possible of those
efforts and possible joint tasks if the Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee deem it useful.
The Executive Directorate is also ready, if
the Council deems it necessary, to further explore
cause-and-effect links between climate change and
terrorism and, in line with resolution 2129 (2013), to
study in greater depth and with the help of more than
30 research institutes and universities the possible
correlation between terrorism and climate change. I
would also be pleased to include that topic as part of
our programme of work.
Finally, allow me to quote Albert Camus, whose
reflection in his acceptance speech for the Nobel Prize
in Literature in 1957 seems especially relevant and
topical in the context of our work today:
“Each generation undoubtedly considers that
it is destined to change the world. My generation
knows, nonetheless, that it will not do so. But
perhaps its task is greater; it must prevent the world
from falling apart.”
I thank Council members for their attention and for
their confidence in me reflected in their request that I
brief them on this matter today.
The President (spoke
Mr. Laborde for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I give the floor to Ms. Monique Barbut.
Ms. Barbut (spoke in French): I am grateful to
you, Ambassador Aboulatta, President of the Security
Council, and your Spanish counterpart, Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi, for taking the important initiative
and inviting me to participate in the discussion on the
Sahel region.
The Scottish-born inventor, Alexander Graham
Bell, said with respect to trying to crack a difficult
problem, “Sometimes we stare so long at a door that
is closing that we see too late the one that is open” .
Likewise, it is true that the opportunity for coordinated
action in the Sahel appears to be closing quickly.

16-148537/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

The enormous and pressing challenges make future
security scenarios seem bleak. With annual population
growth rates of up to nearly 4 per cent, the population
is increasing beyond the region’s capacity to handle it,
which will have massive consequences on the region’s
socioeconomic development and political stability. How
will we provide enough food, energy, water, income and
economic opportunity for the ballooning populations?
The region’s gross domestic product per capita is
already very low; over 40 per cent of the population lives
on less than $1.25 a day. For the bulk of the population,
life is tough and will get tougher. It is a breeding ground
for broken dreams, crime, radicalization and conflict.
Most of the people — up to 80 per cent — currently
rely on the natural resource base for survival. They
eke out a living on land that provides them with
everything — food, employment and medicine. Climate
change will promote increased desertification, with
potentially devastating consequences.
According to some predictions, today poor land
management coupled with climate change could reduce
agricultural production by 13 per cent in Burkina Faso
and by almost 50 per cent in the Sudan. In the Sahel,
85 per cent of the land is already degraded to a certain
extent. It is a vicious circle. Today, just when more
land is needed, less land and consequently less water
will be available.
Land is closely linked to community identity,
history and culture, of course. Today, the geopolitics
of the Sahel are influenced by tensions over land and
water shortages that can be easily manipulated in the
service of political interests and can quickly spiral out
of control. Thanks to bad governance, poverty and easy
access to firearms, situations can quickly turn violent,
as in the case of Darfur, where it is estimated that
almost 300,000 people have died since 2003. That is
clearly happening again in areas around Lake Chad and
the Niger, where migration is increasing the pressure
on transit and target regions. As has been noted, Lake
Chad is a lifeline for at least 25 million people in four
countries — Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger.
Tensions around natural resources, especially access to
land and water, are increasing. For example, the waters
of Lake Chad, which support more than 300 ethnic
groups, have shrunk by 90 per cent since the 1960s. It
is therefore no coincidence that the Lake Chad region
is the cradle of Boko Haram and the home base for
Al-Qaida in the Maghreb.
8/31

26/05/2016

In April, I travelled to Agadez and Dirkou, two cities
in the North of the Niger. Until recently, they were major
tourist attractions and centres of commerce. They are
now the principal transit points for migrants, through
which between 150,000 and 200,000 people pass every
year. There is little infrastructure to speak of. The
illegal trafficking of migrants and migration-related
activities are the towns’ only viable economic activity.
People returning from Libya tell terrible stories of their
experiences farther along the route. But there are few
alternatives. The question is, how can we all tolerate
so much misery and despair concentrated in one place?
Land desertification and degradation are pulling
the rug out from under millions of people. Those who
cannot leave have a deep feeling of despair. This is
creating conditions of desperation for a population that
is unemployed, poor and vulnerable, including as many
as 41 million young people in the Sahel region alone.
More generally, and according to a recent study by the
British Ministry of Defence, by 2035, almost 60 million
people will have migrated to North Africa and Europe
as a result of the desertification of sub-Saharan Africa.
In that regard, I should point out that according to an
International Organization for Migration census, 100 per
cent of the illegal migrants entering Europe come from
arid areas. That should make us ask ourselves some
questions. All the evidence points to the fact that in the
past few years we have crossed a watershed on the path
towards political instability, economic migration and
inter-ethnic conflict.
But to return to Alexander Graham Bell, there are
open doors if we focus on the fundamentals. Given the
major importance of agriculture and productive land for
generating jobs and income in sub-Saharan Africa, our
efforts to achieve stability and peace must focus more
on land management. Natural resources cannot be a lastminute afterthought tacked on to our security strategy.
We know that rural migrants generally prefer to live
close to their homes. Before they get as far as leaving
their own countries, more than half of all migrants move
within their countries or to other neighbours. Migration
to other continents is often a last resort. It means a long,
hard journey under desperate conditions. Many would
stay or return home if they could. Those now being
repatriated from Mediterranean shores will have to cope
once again with various challenges — a lack of social
support networks, constant droughts and competition
for access to resources between nomadic and settled
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

peoples. They need better and more proactive support
if we are to avoid creating more instability.
All the dividends of a lasting peace in the region
should involve the sustainable use of land and water.
Where aid is concerned, priority should be given
to developing employment and income-producing
economic opportunities in rural areas. The
implementation of initiatives such as the Great Green
Wall and the Lake Chad Initiative is expanding, but it
should be happening more quickly. In order to scale
them up, we must help to get the young men and women
of the Sahel working again. We should invest in decent
jobs based on rehabilitation of the land in every village
and community on the front lines of desertification. We
estimate that an average of 5,000 villages per country
is needed to kick-start a new economy and a virtuous
circle. In the Sahel region, rehabilitation and sustainable
management of one hectare of land costs about $250
and requires nothing apart from labour. That comes to
less than $3,000 per job, per year, compared with, for
example, the cost associated with paying for a migrant
to stay in a camp in Italy, which is about $15,000 a year.
That land management-based approach has multiple
advantages. It would be hugely beneficial to economic
growth and income generation and would strengthen
the resilience of communities that are vulnerable to
climate change, improve food and water security and
stabilize much of the region. We are not claiming that it
is a magic bullet, but it would definitely be cheaper and
more effective than investing in walls, wars and relief. It
could at least begin to mitigate the political grievances,
poverty and marginalization that are driving frustrated
young Africans to take radical action. It should at the
very least be part of our efforts to prevent conflict and
consolidate peace. It is an open door, and it is up to us
to walk through it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Barbut
for her statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ibrahim.
Ms. Ibrahim (spoke in French): I am honoured to
speak to the Security Council today. I come from the
Mbororo community, a nomadic and semi-nomadic
people who live around Lake Chad, where I grew
up. Climate change and desertification have become
everyday issues for us, affecting stability and insecurity
in the Sahel, because their impact is socioeconomic as
well as environmental. Climate change has a direct
effect on the natural resources that our countries’

S/PV.7699

economies depend on, and that includes our economy.
As we know, more than 70 per cent of the population
of the Sahel is rural, depending directly for a living on
agriculture and herding, which occupy large tracts of
land and sustain millions of people. Even while many
people in rural areas are leaving them to live in cities,
the rural population is growing. In Chad, where I come
from, agriculture constitutes more than 50 per cent of
the country’s wealth.
The effects of climate change on agriculture are
numerous. Natural disasters, particularly drought and
a lack of water, have a catastrophic impact on our
agricultural resources. Our soil is impoverished, partly
because periods of drought and flooding come in rapid
succession, which leads to soil erosion and destruction
and the loss of biodiversity. When I was young — of
course, I am still young — we had a number of resources,
in the form of grasses and animal and vegetable species,
that have now disappeared forever. Climate change piles
poverty on top of poverty every day. That has a direct
impact on security because the depletion of resources
reinforces conflicts among communities. I know what
I am talking about.
With regard to conflicts over water resources, which
have been greatly depleted around Lake Chad — as
other briefers have already mentioned — land has been
appropriated. For the small amount of fertile land that
remains, the law of the most powerful applies. Smallscale farmers and ranchers do not have access. Access
to sources of water is becoming very difficult because
one must cross fields and fight to survive. Concerning
conflicts between nomadic herders and farmers
resulting from access to land, instead of working
together as they once did, using the herds to fertilize
the fields for their cultivation, everything has changed.
With the shifting of the rainy seasons, the fields are
occupied by the strident conflicts over nothing other
than basic resources. And as we all know in the Sahel,
that is a major problem for our States.
With regard to conflicts tied to migration, of
which we have already spoken, poverty, intensified
by climate change, is driving men and women to leave
rural areas for large cities, sometimes temporarily or
seasonally, during the dry season, to send money back
home. Consequently, they leave millions of women and
children at home, who must fight all alone to find food
and survive. Others leave for longer periods of time and
try to cross the seas in order to reach Europe. For them,
it is not a matter of choice. They are forced to do it.

16-148539/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

With regard to conflicts related to extremism — as we
heard from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Director — in the Lake Chad Basin, which has long
liver under the threat of Boko Haram, we know how
that works. Men have no choice, even though there
are soldiers who are fighting against the members of
that group. But we see their numbers growing every
day, along with the recruitment of young people.
Yet we wonder why it is easy to recruit them when
they are being killed every day. They offer sums of
money — $50, for example — that the potential recruit
has not seen for the entire year. He is offered $500 to
join, and it becomes very easy for him to make up his
mind, because for a man in Africa, and especially in
the Sahel, his dignity is defined by providing for his
family. If he cannot provide for his family’s basic needs,
his dignity is left to the highest bidder, while he must
assume that responsibility. He is ready to do anything
amd everything. He has no choice but to sign up. We
all are familiar with those threats, the Security Council
must play a significant role in countering them. We
know already the role that it is playing in attenuating
existing conflicts, but the prevention of those acute
conflicts is very important and urgent.
We also very well know that today climate change
and desertification are playing key roles in the Sahel.
Indeed, we must accelerate the implementation of the
Paris Climate Change Agreement. That, however, is
a specific mechanism that is charged with carrying
it out. We also know that those rural populations are
becoming increasingly vulnerable and need to adapt.
They therefore need the most urgent solutions possible
and must not depend on agreements that will take
years to implement, for it is a matter of survival for
those populations.

26/05/2016

community, the people do not wish to emigrate or change
their way of life, but their environment is changing
despite themselves and they have no control over it.
We must therefore strengthen actions allowing them
to preserve their way of life and culture by supporting
pastoralism and family farming. We welcome the major
projects in urban areas, but the small-scales projects
designed to allow small communities to stay where they
are even better. It is also by providing young people
with prospects for the future in their communities that
we will prevent them from succumbing to the pressures
of terrorist groups or leaving their land for another.
The President (spoke
Ms. Ibrahim for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I want to
first express my profound gratitude to you, Sir, and my
colleague from Spain and your delegations for taking
the initiative of organizing this very important meeting.
Our exchange today on the topic of peace and security
in Africa and challenges in the Sahel region are in
line with the briefing that the Department of Political
Affairs provided us on 22 March.

As we very well know, women are at forefront of
the impact of all those consequences. And as for the
children who will grow up without an education or
future, their destiny is to follow the roads that have
been paved for them in bad faith. We must avoid that
and come up with the necessary measures and solutions
for those people. In the simplest terms, the question is
not only how to eradicate poverty, but also how to carve
out a better life for them. They all want to be farmers
or herders and continue to survive, but that is no no
easy thing.

The Sahel region is the focal point of the
cumulative negative impact of several scourges, as
evidenced by the diverse perspectives of the briefers
whom we have just heard, and whom I would like to
warmly thank in the name of the Senegalese delegation
for having shed a raw light on our discussion. The
Sahel region could and should serve as a model for
experimentation and integrated implementation of
the major recommendations of the global processes
that the international community conducted from
2015 and 2016: the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), the
Paris Agreement on climate change — which has been
referred to — the World Humanitarian Summit that was
just held in Istanbul, and preparations for third United
Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development, or Habitat III, which will take place in
Quito in October.

Today, the international community must find
solutions to those crises, which are the only means to
offer a future and hope to rural communities. In my

In recent years, the types and number of criminal
activities perpetrated in the Sahel region have continued
to increase with the regular change of locations and

10/31

16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

targets, demonstrating once again the level of flexibility
and capacity of adaptability of the terrorist groups
operating in the region, including Boko Haram, Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, the Mouvement pour l’unicité
et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest and Ansar el-Dine,
among others. The humanitarian consequences of those
terrorist attacks are tragic, including approximately
2.8 million displaced persons, 20 million affected,
and 4.5 million experiencing humanitarian insecurity,
including children, and insecurity in general.
As Mr. Laborde eloquently demonstrated, there is
undoubtedly an inextricable link between the scourges
of terrorism, transnational organized crime and
trafficking of all kinds that fundamentally undermines
the security and stability of the region. The nature of that
link therefore demands a holistic approach that takes
into consideration the political, security, ideological
and humanitarian aspects of that fight. In other words,
we can win this fight only through a multisectoral,
multidimensional and interregional approach that
incorporates West Africa, the Sahel, Central Africa
and the entire Sahelo-Saharan region and addresses
the three dimensions of prevention, repression and
protection. In this fight, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, which is now in operation,
needs to assume a full role. We have just hear from its
Head, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ibn Chambas. We also believe it important to ensure
better cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, particularly through the African Peace
and Security Architecture.
It is also important to speed up the operationalization
of the Multinational Joint Task Force for the fight against
Boko Haram. That group undoubtedly poses one of the
greatest challenges to peace and security in the region,
where it acts with terrible cruelty. In order to curb the
terrorist threat, the second session of the Regional
Security Summit was held on 14 May in Abuja, with
the aim of taking stock of the strategies and actions
undertaken by the countries of the region and their
partners to fight terrorism in the Sahel. In a nutshell,
we sought to define an action plan to eradicate the root
causes of terrorism by focusing on investments for
development in the affected regions and delivery of the
social needs of the most vulnerable, in particular young
people, but also women, as Ms. Ibrahim mentioned,
through employment, training and education.
When he spoke at that meeting in Abuja, President
Macky Sall of Senegal said that “the fight against

S/PV.7699

terrorism may be in vain if the funding sources of
this scourge are not cut off”. He called for a focus on
education, training and employment, as well as on the
creation of income-generating activities in order to push
back ignorance and provide young people the reasons and
the means to hope. President Macky Sall added:
“It is in ignorance, poverty and social exclusion that
terrorism finds fertile ground for its development
by the indoctrination of some and the exploitation
of others”.
He concluded that otherwise we would simply be
treating the symptoms and not the malady.
The challenges to peace and security in the
Sahel region are multiple, but they are not unknown;
numerous studies have identified them. As a country
of the region, Senegal naturally faces such challenges
and constraints, some of which I would wish to recall.
Over and beyond the threats I noted earlier, I would
point to such phenomena as climate change, with its
corollaries drought, desertification, soil degradation,
soil salinization and, of course, the increasing scarcity
of and problems in maintaining water resources. These
diverse factors seriously hinder the development and
well-being of communities, making them vulnerable to
various scammers who exploit their misery to satisfy
their vile purposes.
To those elements, we can also add the issue of access
to property and the endemic problems of locusts and
grain-eating birds, all of which have a negative impact
on crops, food security and already modest incomes.
Cornered by persistent poverty, desperate young people
in these localities have no alternative than to change
their way of life, generating the phenomenon of rural
exodus that increases pressure on towns confronted
with overcrowding and poverty.
For others, there is a an even more perilous
adventure of clandestine migration towards an El
Dorado that does not exist. This exercise often consists
of facing the sea aboard vessels of dubious reliability or
leaving home for the great desert, abandoning in both
cases their fates to the hands of smugglers who have
few qualms about exploiting their vulnerability.
On a slightly different note, conflicts and tensions
require entire families to leave their homes to crowd
into camps for refugee camps or internally displaced
persons. The challenges to peace and security in the
Sahel region are numerous, but we have a good part of the

16-1485311/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

solution, notably through the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which contains solutions to the
well-defined problems that the region still faces. For
example, I would cite the promotion of programmes to
mitigate and adapt to climate change and the focus on
building long-term resilience in the region.
A German research organization, the Planck
Institute for Meteorology, has stated that by the year
2050, at the current pace of climate change, if nothing
is done, all the northern region of the African continent
will become uninhabitable for human beings. We can
all imagine all the consequences if that were to happen
for both the North and the South of Africa. The German
research Max Planck Institute predicts that if nothing
is done, at the current pace of climate change, by
2050 the entire northern part of the African continent
will be inhabitable for the human species. We can
all imagine the many consequences for northern and
southern Africa.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank our four briefers today for their
statements, which I believe provide a very clear view
of the complexity of the Sahel. I would also like to
thank those who will speak following the members of
the Council.
The Sahel has on many occasions been defined,
and the phrase is very familiar to us in New York, as
the ground zero of global warming. In recent years, far
from an improving situation, the region has continued
to face a consistent increase in temperature, persistent
droughts and other extreme climate phenomena such as
torrential rains. Every month, the United States National
Aeronautics and Space Administration announces that
the temperature of the Earth has hit a new historic
record — a record that always seems to exceed those of
previous months. The existing projections for the Sahel
region are truly alarming. At the same time, every
year, thousands of hectares of arable land are lost and
an ever-growing population has less and less land to
farm. That formula will clearly lead to instability. Such
instability has a number of root causes, ranging from
extreme poverty to the fragility of State infrastructures
and including violent extremism and the proliferation
of illicit trafficking and terrorist groups.
The day-to-day lives of those who inhabit the Sahel
region was clearly described to us by a very young — still
young — lady, Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim. We
know that the final solution to the challenge of climate
12/31

26/05/2016

change is not in the hands of the Security Council,
nor do we claim it to be. However, that cannot be used
as an excuse for the Council to ignore that reality in
exercising its primary responsibility for peacekeeping
and international security. Climate change is already
changing the rules of the game, and to ignore the truth
will just lead us to failure. That is the exact purpose of
this meeting, which I increasingly value. This initiative
was undertaken by us together with the Egyptian
presidency, to whom we express our full gratitude for
its support and for bringing this issue to safe harbour.
We proposed this meeting with three objectives in
mind: first, to ensure that the commitments undertaken
by the Council would not remain dead letter; secondly,
to provide necessary information so that the Council
can efficiently fulfil its preventative function; and,
thirdly, to address the crisis in the Sahel from a holistic
point of view, as the Ambassador of Senegal pointed
out so well. I would like to refer briefly to each of
these objectives.
With regard to fulfilling the commitments
undertaken by the Council, it is important to point out
that this meeting of the Council is a continuation of
the path already undertaken by the United Kingdom a
decade ago, which was too long ago, and it also fulfils
the commitments undertaken by presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15 in 2011, under the initiative of
Germany. More recently, in 2015 presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/24 reaffirmed the Council’s commitment
to addressing the challenges for security in the
Sahel, which are intrinsically related to the adverse
consequences of climate change in the region. Those
commitments, which we agreed to in this very Chamber,
cannot simply remain declarations of intentions.
With regard to the Council’s preventative function,
the intention is to provide the Security Council with
relevant information so it can have an overview of
the situation that would make it possible to accurately
diagnosis and define solutions that are more effective.
In other words, the idea is to better prepare it to carry out
its prevention role. Therefore, the presentations made
by a number of different speakers today, who I would
like to thank again for their brilliant briefings, have
shown us the interrelationship between the exacerbation
of desertification, as a maximum expression of the
effects of climate change in this region, and security
in the Sahel.
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

Finally, we want to ensure that an integrated and
coordinated approach, which we so often clamour for in
addressing a complex crisis, such as that in the Sahel, is
adopted. The region resides between three great threats
to security: the situation Libya; the insecurity in Mali,
where the peace process is progressing too slowly; and
the terrorist actions of Boko Haram in the north-east of
Nigeria and in the Lake Chad Basin. These crises are
fuelled by a number of factors, but there is not a single
one that alone would result in a future of violence
and instability in the region. It is the sum of many
circumstances that is leading the Sahel from the path of
peace, stability and growth. Therefore, I want to make
a series of three proposals for action.
First, the Security Council needs to continue
to receive information and fulfil the commitment it
undertook in 2011 to analyse the different factors
that, like climate change, impact peace and security in
fragile regions. Having appropriate information on how
these issues pose a challenge to stability in the Sahel
will strengthen the Council’s preventative function. In
that regard, I recall the myriad debates we have held
on the preventative function of the Council. Climate
change will therefore become one more early-warning
factor in order to be able to take action effectively when
it comes time to anticipating tensions. Humanitarian
crises due to food insecurity, water insecurity, massive
displacement of people and uncontrolled migratory
flows can be anticipated and we can implement the
appropriate measures. The Executive Secretary of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
Ms. Monique Barbut, provided us with an outstanding
briefing on this.
Secondly, the Council needs to ensure that the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel pay
due attention to the issues raised today, especially
the destabilizing role played by climate change in the
region. In order to do this in an orderly manner, it is
necessary to listen to and address the needs put forth
by the Sahel countries that are with us today. We have
recently seen how these countries are putting in place
a whole series of inter-State cooperation structures,
which are trying to establish a connection, which we
see very clearly, between security and development.
Finally, as was also brilliantly suggested by my
friend, the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, we think it
is a very good idea for the Counter-Terrorism Committee

S/PV.7699

Executive Directorate to analyse the impact of climate
change and look at whether or not the effects of climate
change exacerbate the fragility of specific peoples and
make them more vulnerable to violent extremism and
terrorist recruitment. Mr. Laborde has our full support
in that task.
The fact that we are holding this meeting today — at
which the challenges, including climate change, of a
region on the Council’s agenda are being considered
from an integrated approach — is itself a great step
forward, but we must continue working along these
lines, because climate change is part of our present and
it will no doubt define our future.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting and to thank the briefers for
their presentations.
The current situation in the Sahel region has
been stable in general, but the spread of terrorism
and serious transnational organized crime has made
the security situation fragile. The region also faces
multiple challenges, including uneven development.
The international community should increase its
input and take an integrative approach to addressing
these challenges.
First, we should actively promote the settlement
of regional hotspot issues. Mitigating regional hotspot
issues and realizing peace and national reconciliation
constitute the basis for peace and stability in the
Sahel region. The international community should,
on the basis of the respect for the sovereignty of the
country concerned, support the Malian parties in the
comprehensive implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation with a view to improving the
security situation, advancing national reconciliation
and steadily promoting the peace process. The
international community should pay attention to the
spillover effect of external problems, such as the Libya
crisis, on the Sahel region and reduce the negative
impact of such factors.
Secondly, we should comprehensively advance
counter-terrorism cooperation in the region. The
international community should pay attention to the
damage caused by terrorist activities to the security and
stability of the region and increase counter-terrorism
efforts in the region. We should support the States of the
region in their counter-terrorism endeavour with a focus
on comprehensively strengthening capacity-building

16-1485313/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

in the security area in connection with their counterterrorism needs. The relevant United Nations counterterrorism organs should increase their coordination and
provide targeted training and technical assistance so as
to comprehensively increase the ability of the countries
of the region to counter terrorism and eliminate
terrorist threats.
Thirdly, we should focus on the problem of
underdevelopment in the region. The countries of
the region should take the opportunity offered by the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) to formulate development
strategies suited to their specific conditions. The
international community and international financial
institutions should increase their development
assistance and help the countries of the region enhance
their capacity for development. The relevant United
Nations organizations should fully leverage their
advantages and study in-depth the development needs
of the countries of the region. They should promote
the international community in providing targeted
assistance and speed up the economic and social
development of the countries of the region.
Fourthly, we should promote synergy in addressing
the questions facing the Sahel region. Regional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Group
of Five Sahel, are familiar with the conditions of the
countries of the region and enjoy a unique advantage in
efforts to address these problems. The United Nations
should strengthen coordination with these organizations
and organically integrate national strategies, regional
strategies and the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel to coordinate resources and form synergies
in coordinating with the relevant organs in the West
African region. The United Nations should listen to and
heed the views of regional States and ensure a rational
allocation of resources so that the Organization can
more effectively respond to the challenges.
China and Africa belong to a community of
common destiny and interest. Strengthening unity
and cooperation with African countries has always
been an important cornerstone of our foreign policy.
In September last year, the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation held a summit in Johannesburg and decided
to elevate its relationship to that of a partnership of
strategic cooperation. We are willing to work with
African countries to implement the outcome of the
Johannesburg Summit and take practical actions to
14/31

26/05/2016

benefit African countries, including the Sahel countries,
with a view to realizing peace, stability and prosperity
on and the development of the African continent.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
all of our briefers. We are particularly grateful to
the Egyptian presidency and to Spain for convening
a meeting on the threats posed to the Sahel region
by climate change and terrorism. We, like those two
delegations and others in the Chamber, are really
concerned by the possible adverse effect that climate
change could have on the peace and security of what is
already a very fragile region. Add climate change to the
increasing threat posed by terrorism, and you see the
scale of the challenge facing these countries.
The Sahel is one of the most vulnerable regions
in the world to climate change. With a 2 per cent
temperature rise, scientists forecast that yields of millet
and sorghum could fall by a quarter by 2018, and 80 per
cent in Burkina Faso and Niger. Maize and rice yields
could also fall. This is not about productivity. This is
about stopping children from going hungry and stopping
people from slipping back into extreme poverty. With
one in nine people already going hungry across the
world, we cannot afford to let it become two in nine.
Sadly, that risk is becoming a reality, as our briefers
set out very clearly. Since the turn of the last century,
temperatures in the Sahel have already risen by 1.3
degrees Centrigrade, and rainfall has already decreased
by up to 30 per cent. This has led to desertification and
reduced organic soil matter. The effects of extreme
weather patterns, such as El Niño, continue to test the
resilience of countries in the Sahel.
As Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim has just set out for
us, without access to diverse and productive livelihoods
and, crucially, livelihoods that are adapted to climate
change, the young people in and of the Sahel will
become increasingly disenfranchised and increasingly
hungry. They will get even poorer and they will become
even more vulnerable to extremist messaging.
The Niger has Africa’s second-highest rate of
population growth and is ranked at the bottom of the
United Nations Development Programme’s Human
Development Index. Competition over scarce resources
and employment opportunities will increase, and longterm tensions between pastoralists and farmers will be
exacerbated. The call of extremism will thrive in these
conditions. That is why there needs to be a holistic and
coordinated response from the international community
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

that focuses on long-term factors. We welcome the
African Union Peace and Security Council’s explicit
acknowledgment of the link between climate change
and peace and security in March. The Council, as Spain
has already said, has also recognized that link and must
continue to focus on it as a key part of its conflictprevention role.
The United Nations has a critical part to play in
supporting the countries of the region in facing up to
these challenges. The United Nations, at the request of
the Council, has developed an integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which has at its heart building resilience
against threats such as climate change and terrorism.
It now also has a more effective structure in place for
implementing that strategy, following the merger of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel.
The United Kingdom will play its part. This year
we will provide $26 million to the Sahel region to
build resilience to extreme climate events. By 2017 that
figure will be $79 million. Our projects are creating
new coalitions for civil society, of the private sector,
Government, media, universities and meteorological
offices, to build community resilience and strengthen
national and international planning. This year, the
United Kingdom is also providing $9 million to the
Sahel region for a social protection programme. This
programme will build stronger social systems that are
able to respond to shocks and stresses, including climate
change. By 2018, we will have provided $70 million
through this programme.
We all recognize the significant threat terrorism
and organized crime pose to the Sahel. Through
tackling terrorism and insecurity in a holistic manner,
by addressing the root causes, including the effects of
climate change, we can help those who find themselves
drawn to extremist groups. The United Kingdom
supports the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, and we support the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and efforts through other actors, including the
European Union, to that end. However, collective and
coordinated action from the countries of the region
will also be needed to combat terrorism. The efforts
of the Group of Five Sahel — Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger — to increase their
cooperation and tackle insecurity are a very welcome
step forward. It is only through regional ownership and

S/PV.7699

political engagement with international support that we
will be able to overcome these challenges and ensure a
brighter future for the people of the Sahel.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking the delegations of Egypt and
Spain for convening this meeting. I would like to also
express my gratitude for the timely distribution of the
context note on the destabilizing effects that climate
change can have when they further exacerbate the
traditional causes of conflict in the Sahel. I would also
like to express my gratitude to Mr. Mohammed Ibn
Chambas, Ms. Monique Barbut, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde,
Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, Mr. Pierre Buyoya and
Mr. Angel Losada for their briefings.
Having perused the aforementioned context note,
Uruguay is convinced that the international community,
including the United Nations system, needs to focus its
efforts on addressing the structural causes of poverty and
inequity. It should do so through adequate mechanisms,
such as cooperation, official development assistance,
access to resources and the transfer of technology for
adapting to climate change. However, it should not take
a security approach, but rather one that addresses the
underlying causes, understanding that climate change
can pose a further challenge to the stability of societies
and international security. There is no easy answer.
That is why we must continue with our efforts in the
context of the Climate Change Convention, the Paris
Agreement, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030, among others, and fulfil the
commitments made.
An isolated approach positing a single possible
cause of a conflict linked to socioeconomic and
environmental factors might provide us with a
partial and even distorted view or understanding of
the dynamics that might lead a society to conflict.
Adequate and fluid cooperation among the various
bodies, under the terms set forth by the Charter of the
United Nations, the programmes of the Organization
and specialized bodies, is necessary in order to address
factors that might affect security, including the extreme
consequences of climate change. That does not mean
that the topic of climate change needs to be on the
agenda of the Security Council. We do not believe that
would be relevant.
In any event, we should not underestimate the
importance that the United Nations should attach to
helping to prevent conflicts in the most vulnerable areas

16-1485315/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

through its peacebuilding activities and projects and
programmes implemented by various United Nations
agencies, the goal of which is to provide an environment
that is more suitable to human development.
Uruguay is cognizant of the fact that the security
situation in the Sahel deserves the special attention of
the Council, especially given the terrorist activities
being developed there, as well as the significant
trafficking of drugs and weapons in that vast region,
where many areas lie beyond effective State control.
Periodically in the north of Mali, terrorist, criminal
and extremist activities advance despite the progress
achieved after the signing of the Peace Agreement.
The civilian populations in the north continue to face a
series of difficulties in accessing State institutions, and
are unable to enjoy the peace dividends that stem from
the agreement.
In the meantime, the number of displaced persons
continues to grow, while terrorist attacks — more
than 200 of which have been perpetrated since early
2015 — are increasingly effective and sophisticated and
claim an ever-larger number of victims. United Nations
forces on the ground have been the targets of more than
40 per cent of such attacks, against which they have
trouble defending themselves given their asymmetric
nature and the scarce resources and personnel available
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. In that regard, the
strategic review to be formally presented next week is
not just relevant but indeed urgent.
In order to address the regional problem, we
need tailor-made campaigns. That is why we applaud
such initiatives as the Group of Five Sahel, which has
become an institutional framework for coordinating
and overseeing regional cooperation. We commend
the initiative of the Lake Chad Basin countries in
establishing the Multinational Joint Task Force to
address the problem of Boko Haram. We also appreciate
the recent restructuring of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and hope that it will provide us with
a better overview of the situation in the Sahel and of
the progress made in the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which is relevant to a number of
countries that are not within the region itself.
The 4.5 million displaced persons in the Sahel will
continue to grow in number due to political instability
in Libya and the terrorist threat in the region, including
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Ansar el-Dine,
16/31

26/05/2016

Boko Haram, and the Mouvement pour l’unicité et
le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest, to mention just a few.
All of this is made possible by the porous borders and
lack of State control. The best way to address it is by
building the institutional capacities of the States of the
region, providing education, increasing the capacities
of Government security forces, and providing greater
access to justice and health-care centres.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Special Representative Ibn Chambas,
Executive Secretary Barbut, Executive Director
Laborde and Ms. Ibrahim for their briefings today. I
should also like to give a special thanks to Spain and
Egypt for drawing the Security Council’s attention to
the urgent need to focus on the effects of the changing
climate on security in the Sahel region.
Some Council members have pushed back on the
appropriateness of having this discussion in this forum.
Skepticism about the relationship between climate
change and security is not new, but skepticism does not
make the facts any less serious or urgent. Climate change
is not just about whether glaciers remain majestic or
polar bears survive. Climate change is an aggravating
factor, among other political, socioeconomic and
security considerations, that exacerbates underlying
tensions, undermines governance, contributes to
resource conflicts and negatively impacts development.
As Secretary of State John Kerry said last year,
this is not about Bambi. This is about people and it is
about poverty. While no conflict is caused solely by
climate, to ignore the interplay between security and
climate change — and there are few places where that
interplay is felt more acutely than the Sahel — is to
ignore fundamental realities. From Mauritania and
Mali to the Lake Chad Basin to the Horn of Africa,
we see the complex challenges exacerbated by climate
change on peace, stability and security. Unpredictable
rainfall, higher temperatures, frequent droughts
and natural disasters in the Sahel have augmented
existing destabilizing pressures from terrorism to
trafficking, and exacerbated the problems of population
displacement and weak governance. Put simply, climate
change is indeed a threat multiplier.
The Boko Haram crisis in the Lake Chad Basin
region starkly illustrates the interplay between climate
change and security. According to a recent World Food
Programme study, over the past half-century Lake Chad
has receded drastically due to various environmental
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

pressures, which has increased competition and conflict
over already scarce resources, such as arable land and
water, and degraded regional food security and quality
of life.
Simultaneously, Boko Haram’s barbaric terrorist
campaign, now entering its seventh year, has greatly
exacerbated the existing food insecurity faced by the
population of the Lake Chad Basin region. The Boko
Haram crisis has disrupted farming and trade and cut
off communities from the means they require to subsist
and to survive. Today, an estimated 4.2 million people
are in need of emergency food assistance in the Lake
Chad Basin region and 2.6 million are displaced within
Nigeria and the neighbouring countries. Meanwhile,
this humanitarian crisis has been but a blip on the screen
of the international community, drawing only sporadic
attention and a woefully insufficient response. Indeed,
Emergency Relief Coordinator Stephen O’Brien this
week referred to the crisis in the Lake Chad Basin
region, where poverty and desertification have been
compounded by Boko Haram violence, as the world’s
“most neglected, underreported, underfunded and
least addressed”.
Military intelligence and law enforcement that
protect human rights norms are vital to combating
terrorism. In that regard, we applaud the important
territorial advances made by the Governments of
Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and Cameroon to roll back some
of Boko Haram’s safe havens in the Lake Chad Basin
region. However, only a truly comprehensive strategy
that mobilizes a broad range of stakeholders, including
development and humanitarian actors, can address the
conditions conducive to terrorism and the scars left in
its wake. The United States is encouraged that, under
Nigeria President Buhari’s leadership, last week’s
Regional Security Summit committed to carrying
out a sustained, comprehensive approach against
Boko Haram that couples rights-respecting security
operations with civilian efforts to restore stability and
promote governance and economic development to
break the cycle of violence in all countries where Boko
Haram is active.
The United Nations system, including the Special
Representatives for West Africa and the Sahel and
Central Africa, should continue to assist the Lake
Chad Basin region to implement such a comprehensive
strategy. In addition, the United Nations needs to
mainstream preventing violent extremism and counterterrorism issues throughout its core work on peace and

S/PV.7699

security and sustainable development so that it can help
Member States, including in the broader Sahel region,
to deliver in those crucial areas. We also encourage the
United Nations system and its partners to make further
progress towards the effective implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which
was first endorsed by the Council in 2013 and should
now be re-evaluated and updated so that it can better
assist Governments of the region to mitigate against
compound threats, including climate change.
Let us be clear. No one is suggesting that Boko
Haram was caused by climate change. It most certainly
was not. But the devastation wrought by environmental
degradation and challenges like severe drought and the
scarcity of resources that come along with it can spark
a kind of poverty and political volatility that are the
oxygen of discontent and drivers of instability, if left
unchecked. Recognizing that reality does not require
us to be any less relentless in our pursuit of terrorists
like Boko Haram or Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.
We will not be. It just allows us to be more effective in
doing so.
As our discussion here today illustrates,
complex and interrrelated governance, security and
humanitarian challenges, exacerbated by the effects
of climate change across the Sahel region, require
urgent and fresh thinking and action. We encourage
the leaders of the Sahel to continue to deepen their
cooperation, including through the Group of Five Sahel
and the Nouakchott Process, by coming to agreement
on a shared vision of the region’s threats and the
efforts needed to address them, including improving
the sustainable management of natural resources and
effective, inclusive governance that both combats
terrorism and addresses the conditions conducive to it.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation for the initiative of Egypt
and and Spain in convening this briefing. Allow me
also to join others in thanking all of the four briefers.
(spoke in French)
I should like in particular to thank Ms. Hindour
Oumarou Ibrahim for having conveyed the voice of the
people of her region directly to the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
Japan looks forward to the acceleration of the
United Nations actions in the Sahel under the leadership

16-1485317/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

of Mr. Ibn Chambas as Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
The Sahel faces many major challenges today. Peace
and security remain fragile. The spread of terrorism
from the Sahel to the rest of West Africa is worrisome.
I saw the reality with my own eyes in northern Mali,
where, due to the absence of State authority, the local
population has no choice but to coexist with terrorists
and to depend on an informal economy.
Despite all the challenges, there remains hope.
Some countries are becoming resilient to the threats.
Building resilient societies in the Sahel is an achievable
goal. The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel (UNISS) is a valuable tool to that end. One of the
key elements overarching the UNISS strategic goals is
the importance of institutional capacity-building, which
Japan fully supports. Indeed, Japan’s commitments to
institution- and capacity-building in Africa, which were
made at the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD-V) have already been translated
into concrete actions. That includes capacity-building
support for some 2,000 people in the Sahel aimed at
enhancing counter-terrorism capacity. That support
was announced by Prime Minister Abe at the TICAD-V
thematic session dedicated to the Sahel.
The role of the Group of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in
promoting the UNISS should also be commended. The
G-5 Sahel has made efforts to foster regional capacities
through the establishment of subregional training
schools in the field of security and defence. We fully
support such actions.
Countries that have more or less successfully
implemented the UNISS, including through inclusive
governance and social cohesion, show greater resilience
to terrorism, organized crime, drought and other threats
to peace and security. I was ambassador to some of
those countries. In the case of Burkina Faso and Niger
I was ambassador some time ago, and I witnessed those
cases. In Burkina Faso local communities have been
constructing more thane 1,400 reservoirs for irrigation
but also in anticipation of future droughts. Their
society is a model of people combining their efforts, not
only to prepare for the worse, but also to reinforce the
foundations of their livelihoods. In Niger, various ethnic
communities are politically represented and integrated
into the central Government, and that ensures effective
and responsible governance throughout the country
despite its vast territory and great diversity.
18/31

26/05/2016

I believe there are two keys to creating societies
that are resilient to threats. The first is ownership
and the second is consideration of the local context.
When Japan was implementing the technology-transfer
project to counter desertification in Burkina Faso,
we recognized the potential difficulty of ensuring
sustainable maintenance and the practical difficulties of
applying advanced technologies to local conditions. We
drew two lessons from that experience. The first was
that it is very important to make full use of traditional
knowledge and customary procedures. The second was
that in order to ensure ownership, decision-making
must be promoted at the community level through the
traditional system. The efforts of the United Nations
and other international partners in the Sahel should be
guided by the principles of ownership and consideration
of the local context.
Ownership has been one of the core principles
guiding the Japan-led multi-stakeholder TICAD process
for more than two decades. This coming August the
next TICAD will be held in Africa, at the summit level,
for the first time in the African continent’s history. We
look forward to the active participation of countries
from the Sahel region and the G-5 Sahel.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank the Egyptian presidency and Spain for
having taken this initiative to convene this important
and extremely timely debate. I also thank all the briefers
for the excellent quality of their statements — Mr. Ibn
Chambas, Mr. Laborde, Ms. Barbut and Ms. Ibrahim.
The views that they shared with us are very helpful in
guiding our work.
To a great extend I share what has already been
said. I will limit my statement to three main ideas.
First, the challenges to the security and development
of the Sahel are immense. The effects of climate
change have particularly affected the region, and that
at a time of strong demographic growth, especially as
between 2015 and 2050 the population will increase
from 85 million to more than 200 million inhabitants.
That could be an asset, or it could be a major liability
if the growth of the population is not accompanied by
sufficient development, because that could produce
tragedies — forced migration, political instability,
insecurity and the temptation of extremism. The Sahel
today therefore is at a crossroad, but there is no foregone
conclusion if the Sahel countries and their partners
come together to meet those challenges. Already, we
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

see in Mali how the mobilization of the international
community can bear fruit in a situation that is much
better today than in 2012.
My second thought concerns the strategy to adopt to
meet the numerous challenges in the Sahel. Our approach
can be effective only if it integrates that complexity.
That means meeting the challenges in different areas.
Here it is crucial to underscore the link made here
today among climate, security and development. In
the Sahel, clearly there are many problems. There is
food insecurity linked to soil and land degradation,
which is made worse by population growth and climate
warming. In that framework, all initiatives need to be
encouraged. The United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel should be quickly implemented. We also
welcome the streamlining of the prevention and crisis
management plans in the framework of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
Furthermore, regional initiatives need to be
promoted. The framework of the Group of Five Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), as we have underscored on numerous
occasions, today seems to be very pertinent in terms of
meeting challenges. Here, I would like to mention the
Great Green Wall for the Sahel and the Sahara Initiative
and the sustainable development projects around Lake
Chad. Over and beyond that, the work of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Africa
Union is also to be encouraged, as is the work of the
European Union, which, as members are aware, is very
committed to the Sahel.
Looking at a more global dimension, the universal
integrated approach to development — which is that
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) and the Paris Agreement — establishes
a deadline. Its implementation, especially in the Sahel
and in other large areas of vulnerability on the planet,
is the major issue facing our generation. But we can
change the situation in the Sahel only if we move
forward determinedly and collectively with all the
relevant stakeholders — the States, the United Nations,
international financial institutions, civil society
and businesses.
All things considered — and this will be my
last point — I can confirm France’s full support for
the long term to meet those challenges of the Sahel.
France has been involved in an unprecedented manner
in terms of security to deal in the short term with the
threat of terrorism and the instability that it engenders.

S/PV.7699

Security in the Sahel region does not affect just the
Sahel, because terrorism has also become globalized,
as everyone is well aware. The French approach, with
Operation Serval and then with Operation Barkhane, is
based on a sustainable partnership with the armies of
the Sahel with a view to making them more able to fight
terrorism efficiently, in an autonomous manner and
over the long term. I wish to renew, to our African and
international partners, our full commitment to stand by
their side in the fight against violent extremism.
Above and beyond the essential security measures,
President François Hollande confirmed — at the summit
on 1 December 2015 with the African Heads of State on
the margins of the twenty-first session of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP21) — his
commitment to mobilizing the donors and the entire
international community to focus on Africa’s three
major priorities: energy sources, the Great Green Wall
for the Sahara and the Sahel Initiative, and restoring
Lake Chad. The French Agency for Development and
the French Global Environment Facility finance or
co-finance numerous development projects. President
Hollande announced on that occasion that France will
donate $6 billion towards African energy needs by 2020,
$2 billion of which is earmarked for renewable energy.
Finally, President Hollande announced a significant
increase in official development assistance — €4 billion
more, starting in 2020 — which will increase our aid
from €8 billion to €12 billion, demonstrating France’s
exceptional commitment on behalf of the most poor and
the most vulnerable.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for his briefing. Likewise,
we thank Ms. Monique Barbut and Ms. Hindou Oumarou
Ibrahim for their briefings, as well as Mr. Jean-Paul
Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate.
Last 25 November, the Security Council
convened a meeting (see S/PV.7566) that related to
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. At that time, the security
situation in the region was described as highly unstable.
Transnational organized crime, trafficking in small
arms and light weapons and narcotics and the emergence

16-1485319/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

of the scourge of terrorism have left a particular mark
on the region, even amid major efforts by countries and
subregional organizations through various initiatives
for national and regional security, the value of which
we acknowledge and encourage.
The grave political and military situations that have
developed in Mali and Libya have been determining
factors in defining security strategies to combat
the presence and expansion of terrorist groups such
as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Al Mourabitoun and Ansar Eddine, among others.
Venezuela reiterates its concern to the Council over
the impact of armed violence and increasing violent
extremism and instability triggered by the military
intervention in Libya in 2011.
The environment generated since then has
exacerbated cross-border criminal activity, transforming
the region into a magnet for groups that threaten social
stability and State authority, primarily because of the
lack of resources and social stability, thus generating
a climate of violence and fear. We note the progress
and will of the Governments to cooperate in combating
the threat, in which the international community plays
important role in preventive action and implementation
of sustainable development initiatives, over and above
the military solutions.
Today, almost a year after it was signed, we remain
committed to the success of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and appreciate the role
played by the international partners, especially the
African States and the Algerian mediation team. The
best way to overcome festering conflicts such as that
is by way of a political accord between the parties,
prioritizing national ownership with the appropriate
involvement of third parties in pursuing dialogue and
harmony. Similarly, we value the work of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, while remaining aware of the difficult
environment in which it is mobilized.
On the other hand, we are concerned about the
presence of the Boko Haram terrorist group in the Lake
Chad basin and nearby areas. We commend the efforts
of Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and Cameroon, as part of
the Multinational Joint Task Force, to fight that terrorist
organization and hope that the threat will shortly come
to an end. We also welcomed the regional security
summit held in Abuja on 14 May, which brought together
the political will of regional and international actors in
20/31

26/05/2016

favour of strengthening a common security strategy
with a focus on preventing the spread of terrorism.
From the Venezuelan perspective, structural
solutions to the problems of peace should be promoted,
with a vision of sustainable development and a focus on
achieving the economic and social progress of societies
as a whole. Of course that is a long-term task, but it
must begin by prioritizing development projects that
will, in turn, impact on other sectors, including peace
and security.
The particular geographical features of the region,
which is predominantly a desert climate, impact on
other social and economic activities, as well as access
to water and food, but it is not a new phenomenon.
We do not believe that there is necessarily a direct or
automatic relationship between environmental change
and armed conflicts; rather, conflicts are fueled by
the destruction of State capacity and the interests of
third parties in promoting instability, which results in
increasing terrorism and crime.
We believe that the major challenges of climate
change and its impact on the daily lives of millions
of people, as exemplified by the El Niño phenomenon
and its terrible floods and droughts, must be addressed
through full compliance with the recently signed Paris
Agreement and through the organs authorized for that
goal by their broad and democratic character — like the
General Assembly — avoiding jeopardizing the climate
agenda while focusing on addressing the causes of the
conflicts. While we welcome the initiative to address
the challenges of peace and security affecting the Sahel,
we believe that this Council is not the appropriate
political forum to address environmental issues arising
from climate change.
The complex humanitarian situation in the Sahel
today is affecting more than 20 million people. It is the
result of armed conflict; displacement; lack of access to
services, water and food; diseases and natural disasters.
It calls for strenghtening State capacities, fulfilling
commitments made by the international community to
support the region, and new commitments in favour of
the most critical sectors.
Venezuela takes note of the attention focused on
the region, through various national, multinational
and international initiatives to improve the security
situation in the Sahel, particularly States’ policies to
strengthen their own security sectors. We reiterate our
strong support for the Group of Five Sahel — composed
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

of Mauritania, Burkina Faso, Chad, the Niger and
Mali — the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the Sahel and the Nouakchott Process, which have
actively contributed to the implementation of social and
security initiatives with significant success, including
in the political sphere. We call for the harmonious
coordination of those policies, together with the
international community, to advance the common goal
of a safer region, always bearing in mind the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly with regard to the sovereignty and selfdetermination of peoples.
The situation and geographical conditions of the
Sahel and the extent of recent events have made it a
particularly sensitive region, used as a channel or
route of migration flows having an extraordinary
human impact in the Mediterranean region. We call
for the renewed impetus that motivates us to fight the
human trafficking mafias to also lead to thought and
consistency on the part of some international actors
so as not to compromise the security situation in the
African States through military interventions and
armed conflicts whose characteristics have a global
scope and particularly affect the most vulnerable
civilian population on all continents.
Africa has been a historical victim of ambition
and of the plundering of its natural resources by more
powerful countries. It has paid the consequences
through decades of violence and armed conflict, almost
always driven from the outside. We affirm our belief
that the path to peace in Africa, and in many other parts
of the world, will come by ensuring that development
projects and strategies, and the proper administration
of policies and natural resources, are the sovereign
responsibility of each people and each Government and
aimed at achieving peace and sustainable development.
In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
and our full confidence in the road map laid out in the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
in the projects of the specialized agencies and regional
organizations, such as Office for West Africa of the
Economic Commission for Africa and the African
Union, as sustainable political and economic paths
towards peace in the Sahel.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s meeting, and the

S/PV.7699

delegation of Spain for initiating it. We also thank all
of today’s briefers for their very useful presentations.
Climate change in the Sahel, along with
desertification and land degradation, is one of the
contributing factors stymying the development
prospects of the countries of the region. It also has
serious security implications, since the shrinking of
the natural resources vital to economic development
breeds competition and rivalry among communities and
countries, spoiling relations, severing ties, escalating
tensions and even provoking clashes. Global warming
was already affecting the region’s stability well before
the adoption of the Paris climate change agreement.
My delegation therefore is convinced that a better
understanding of the ways in which climate change
multiplies security risks can help to manage and reduce
the negative effects of environmental degradation.
In that context, we believe that the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) should formulate
strategic guidance on combating desertification
and land degradation and ensuring the sustainable
management of pasture land. To that end, we also look
forward to closer cooperation and evolving synergies
among UNEP, the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification and other multilateral environmental
mechanisms. Ukraine believes that the United Nations
Environment Assembly (UNEA) should tackle the
issue of protecting the environment in areas affected by
armed conflict. We have already introduced a relevant
UNEA draft resolution — the first of its kind — that we
hope will see light quite soon.
As recent lessons have taught us, voids that are
the result of underdevelopment — such as a lack of
education opportunities, stagnant or declining economic
activity, limited growth prospects for small businesses,
weak job markets and so forth — are quickly filled by
radical forces eager to exploit public discontent in their
pursuit of their own agendas. In that regard, Ukraine is
concerned about the threat posed by terrorist activities
in the Sahel region. Terrorist groups — specifically
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab and their affiliates — have a destabilizing
effect on the region’s peace and security, with dire
humanitarian consequences for civilians, including the
most vulnerable of them — women and children.
In that context, Ukraine commends the efforts of
national Governments in the Sahel to address the issue
of the changing nature of the threat of terrorism and

16-1485321/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

to prioritize it at both the international and regional
levels. We also welcome the outcomes of the Second
Regional Security Summit, held on 14 May in Abuja on
the initiative of the President of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria and aimed at strengthening the regional
response to the threat posed by Boko Haram.
Along with combating terrorists through military
means, it is also vital to suppress their financing and
prevent them from acquiring weapons. Key elements
for achieving that goal are the effective management of
weapon stockpiles; the speedy disposal of small arms
and light weapons during disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration campaigns; the enhancement of
cooperation on border controls between the countries
of the region; and bringing down the transnational
organized criminal networks responsible for arms
trafficking in the region.
However, to ensure that the effects of counterterrorism efforts are lasting, we should consolidate
and implement a wide range of preventive measures
that promote social and economic development and
dialogue, respect for the rule of law and human rights,
the engagement of women and young people in strategic
communications, and investments in human capital, job
creation and education. Such steps will help to reduce
the appeal of extremist groups and support for them
and will strengthen resilience against them, thereby
preventing the Sahel from becoming fertile ground for
the recruitment of terrorists among its tens of millions
of disadvantaged people.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I would like to thank
our briefers — Mr. Chambas, Mr. Laborde, Ms. Barbut
and Ms. Ibrahim — for their insights. The challenges
they outlined have implications that go far beyond
the Sahel and its people. They relate to wider security
issues on the Council’s agenda, as well as to refugee
and migration issues addressed by other bodies of the
United Nations and its Member States.
One of the recurring themes of discussions on
conflict prevention and resolution has been to call
for the Council to be more alert to the underlying
drivers of conflict. Tackling the symptoms of conflict
without adequately identifying and addressing its
underlying causes is a recipe for failure and continued
instability. It is therefore entirely appropriate, in our
view, that the Security Council should focus attention
on the underlying drivers of instability in the Sahel and
consider their implications for conflict in the region.
22/31

26/05/2016

The causes of instability in the Sahel are complex
and varied. They include underdevelopment and
economic and political marginalization. Those
factors have fed unrest and instability and have
made the whole region vulnerable to encroachment
by extremists and transnational criminal networks.
As we have heard from our briefers, those trends are
undoubtedly being magnified and exacerbated by the
acute and intensifying challenges posed by droughts,
irregular rainfall, desertification and other climate and
ecological changes.
What we have heard today is a further manifestation
of the reality highlighted during the Council’s open
debate on the security challenges faced by small island
developing States (see S/PV.7499), convened during
New Zealand’s presidency in July 2015. Environmental
degradation and climate change can result in major
security concerns for small, vulnerable States with
limited resilience and capacity to adapt, whether they
are small islands or large, arid continental spaces. Most
of the tools for addressing such specific climate-related
challenges lie outside the Council Chamber. But
it is important that our discussions of the Sahel
are underpinned by a firm understanding of those
manifold challenges. They must be factored into our
conflict analysis and integrated into our strategies for
maintaining peace and security in the region.
One of the Council’s major focuses regarding the
Sahel region has rightly been addressing the threat
posed by terrorism. We have placed heavy emphasis on
counter-terrorism measures, which play an essential role
in disrupting the terrorist networks that thrive where
governance is weakest. But they are not sufficient. It
is also necessary to consider the economic, social and
climatic drivers that facilitate terrorist recruitment.
As Ms. Ibrahim mentioned, if extremist groups such
as Boko Haram can offer a few hundred dollars to
poor, desperate people who are facing climate-induced
hardship and therefore have only grim and uncertain
choices in providing for their families, we should not
be surprised that many, tragically, have chosen to
join them.
The multiple drivers of conflict in the Sahel also
remind us that it is a mistake to simply call every person
who takes up arms a terrorist. In most cases, where
individuals and minority groups have rebelled out of
a sense of hopelessness, peace and security will be
secured only through negotiation and peace processes
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7699

designed to accommodate their grievances and achieve
rehabilitation and reintegration.

extremism, terrorism, transnational organized crime,
natural disasters and the ravages of climate change.

New Zealand has consistently stressed the
importance of various actors working together to
address peace and security issues. We have, for
example, been active proponents of encouraging both
the African Union Peace and Security Council and our
Security Council to improve their working methods
and work cooperatively with subregional bodies. That
principle is just as important in the Sahel region as it
is elsewhere. In the Sahel, we are unfortunately faced
with a situation where the problem is reasonably welldefined but the solution is lost among a surfeit of
strategies. Duplicative, contradictory or competitive
approaches will simply serve to dissipate our effort and
diminish the impact on the ground. In that regard, we
welcome the recent consolidation of United Nations
regional offices to create the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel.

With regard to the security situation, owing to
the spike in armed conflict and violence throughout
the region, Governments have been forced to spend
additional resources to address security challenges, at
the expense of social development. In northern Mali,
which we just recently visited, the Lake Chad Basin
and other areas of the Sahel region, the actions of
armed groups, terrorists and transnational organized
crime are having a devastating impact on civilians.
As of December 2015, more than 4.5 million people
were displaced, seeking refuge in already highly
vulnerable communities. As violence and conflict
escalate in the Lake Chad region and in northern
Mali, millions of people are increasingly dependent on
the generosity of their vulnerable neighbours and on
humanitarian assistance.

New Zealand stands ready to discuss creative
options to further rationalize existing efforts to deliver
tangible results for the Sahel region and its people.
I thank Spain and Egypt for initiating this
discussion today.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank you, Sir, and Spain for having initiated this very
interesting debate, bringing closer to the Council a
reality of which we need to take account, especially as
we are dealing with a region that is very sensitive.
I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who has just delivered the
point of view of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS). Mr. Ibn Chambas
is in that Office, newly created to respond to the
challenge, and I would like to thank him for his good
briefing. Similarly, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Paul
Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate; Ms. Monique Barbut, Executive
Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification; and Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim,
Coordinator of the Association des femmes peules
autochtones du Tchad, for bringing us so close to the
realities that she is living every day in the Sahel region.
The Sahel region is confronted with huge
challenges: extreme poverty, food and malnutrition
crises and conflicts, youth radicalization, violent

Food insecurity, malnutrition and poverty
in the Sahel region require a concerted effort by
the international community in order to assist
people affected by severe hunger and malnutrition.
Humanitarian action in the Sahel is guided by the 20142016 Sahel Regional Strategic Response Plan. The
three-year strategy aims at delivering coordinated and
integrated life-saving assistance to people affected by
emergencies, as well as at kick-starting a more tailored
response to the food and nutrition crises affecting
millions of people in the region.
Angola commends the humanitarian response
personnel engaged in providing assistance to populations
living in areas with very unsafe access, given the sheer
scale and complexity of the challenge and the potential
for further deterioration. While Governments of the
region continue to deploy efforts with the international
community to solve the humanitarian crisis, a new
sense of urgency and commitment is required for a more
effective response to the humanitarian threat. In that
regard, Angola also welcomes the joint coordination
by the countries of the region, especially the Group of
Five Sahel.
The impact of climate change and natural disasters
and the degradation of lands in the Sahel are other matters
of extreme concern. Over the past decades, growing
climate alterations and more frequent distress have
pushed the Sahelian people to the brink of humanitarian
disaster. Water for the region’s agriculture, which
is 98 per cent rain-fed, is getting scarcer, and water

16-1485323/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

availability per inhabitant has dropped by over 40 per
cent over the past 20 years. Agriculture is affected by
climate change, desertification and also the insecurity
affecting the region, as areas suitable for agriculture
are being occupied by armed groups, terrorists and
transnational organized crime. That makes agricultural
activities impossible, resulting in the extreme scarcity
of food every year.
The shrinking of Lake Chad is a striking example
of the environmental degradation in the Sahel region.
Lake Chad, which previously straddled the borders of
Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria, has over the last
50 years shrunk to a small percentage of its earlier size,
making it more difficult for the people who depend on
it for their livelihood. That forces them to dislocate in
search of water and good land for agriculture, thereby
causing the rise of inter-ethnic violence between the
migrant people and the local communities residing in
the fertile areas. Ms. Ibrahim indicated clearly for us
the impact of climate change on the lands in this region
that we are discussing this afternoon.
With 60 per cent of the region’s population under
25 years of age, lacking education and unemployed,
poverty and social exclusion provide fertile ground for
disenfranchisement, grievances and radicalization. The
perception that Governments neglect them easily draws
youth to recruitment by extremist and terrorist groups
operating in the Sahel region and beyond, making them
easy prey for groups like Al-Qaida in the Islamic Sahel
and Maghreb, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
in Libya, and Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region,
among others.
We commend the work of UNOWAS in the Sahel,
in collaboration with the United Nations agencies,
international financial institutions, regional and
subregional organizations, donors and partners, for
its contribution towards the implementation of several
projects in various Sahel member States in order to
materialize the United Nations Integrated Strategy Plan
for the Sahel. The international community, and the
United Nations in particular, should continue assisting
the Sahel countries in the fight against terrorism and
to overcome the challenges affecting the region. We
particularly commend the role played by France to fight
terrorism in the region, with special forces operating
in coordination with the national armed forces of the
countries of the region itself. The efforts of the Group
of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries to organize joint
security operations at the borders and their decision to
24/31

26/05/2016

create a multinational task force to combat terrorism
and transnational organized crime in the Sahel translate
the determination of those countries to fight terrorism
in the region. The decision of the G-5 Sahel is similar to
that of the Multinational Joint Task Force created by the
Lake Chad Basin States and Benin, who joined forces
to fight Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region.
In conclusion, we call on the Sahel member
States to continue to join forces to decisively address
the challenges affecting the region. We urge the
international community to continue to support regional
efforts in the maintenance of peace and security for the
development and stability in the Sahel region.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to join earlier
speakers in thanking all the briefers for their respective
briefings, to which we have listened with much
interest. We particularly appreciate the perspective
of Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim in describing the
harrowing difficulties endured by the people of
the Sahel.
As noted by previous speakers and the briefers, an
inhospitable climate, environmental degradation, food
insecurity and malnutrition are some of the factors
that ensure that life for the people of the Sahel is
harsh and that make them extremely vulnerable. Their
hardship is further compounded by violence, conflict
and insecurity, which have risen at an alarming rate,
particularly during the past few years. We wish to
emphasize that the linkages between these so-called
non-traditional threats and the peace and security
situation in the region are real and have clearly resulted
in increased suffering and deterioration of the quality
of life for the people of the Sahel.
The wide-ranging nature of the threats faced
by the Sahel and its population requires an equally
comprehensive and holistic approach to reverse, or at
the very least mitigate, their consequences. Therefore
Malaysia believes that the discussion today is timely,
and we thank the delegations of Egypt and Spain for
organizing it.
Ongoing exposure to an extreme climate, coupled
with erratic weather conditions causing increasingly
severe and frequent flooding, as well as longer and
unpredictable droughts, has resulted in crop failure
and food insecurity across the Sahel. Such conditions
exacerbate the region’s pre-existing vulnerabilities,
pushing its population to the brink of humanitarian
disaster. A recent report by the United Nations
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7699

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
highlights that 4.5 million people have been newly
displaced throughout the Sahel region, almost three
times more than in 2012, just four years ago. The report
further noted that the key drivers for such massive
displacements include the adverse impacts of climate
change as well as increased violence and conflict in
the region. Such massive displacements exacerbate
an already fragile humanitarian situation, placing
both host States and those displaced at greater risk of
insecurity and instability.

we welcome and support the continuing focus by the
African Union (AU) on the Sahel and its emphasis on
governance, security and development in its strategy
for the region, mirroring the priorities of the United
Nations itself. Recalling the open debate earlier this
week on the future of the African Peace and Security
Architecture (see S/PV.7694), we believe that there is
scope for greater coordination between the AU and the
United Nations on the Sahel to ensure the continuity
and complementarity of the programmes and initiatives
in the region.

We share the concerns expressed regarding the
rapidly deteriorating capacities of States and institutions
in the region to provide essential services, including
health, security, water, sanitation and education, as
they struggle to cope with the massive influx of newly
displaced persons. In that regard, we wish to commend
the tireless work and perseverance of humanitarian
actors and agencies on the ground, despite themselves
being subject to persistent threats, especially from
armed groups and criminal elements.

On that note, Malaysia believes that the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
has a vital role to play in connecting the United Nations
with regional and subregional actors, particularly the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the G-5 Sahel. UNOWAS should
seek to improve the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The need for
better coordination among relevant entities should also
be factored into the review of that Strategy.

We are convinced that for the Sahel, climate change
is a key driver of insecurity and instability. Drawing
from the lessons of the Sahel, climate change, if left
unchecked, could in fact become one of the most
significant threat multipliers at the global level.

The scale of the crisis faced by the Sahel region and
its complexity and potential for further deterioration
require our urgent attention and collective efforts.
Additional resources must be mobilized not only
to support the needs for development and for the
consolidation of the rule of law and good governance,
but also to break the cycle of crises and instability in
the region. As a member of this Council, Malaysia
remains committed to continue working closely with all
regional and international partners and the countries in
the region to address and find a comprehensive solution
to the challenges in the Sahel.

We also share the assessment that the pervading
atmosphere of an impoverished existence and near
hopelessness across the Sahel means that youths in
the region are especially vulnerable to radicalization
and recruitment by terrorists and violent extremist
groups. It is imperative that this threat is addressed
now, before it constitutes a bigger threat in the future.
In that regard, we welcome initiatives, such as the
ongoing collaboration between the European Union
and the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute, to promote inclusive and
credible deradicalization activities in the region. We
also support the efforts currently being undertaken to
counter terrorism and violent extremism in the region
by the Group of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries,
supported by France through Operation Barkhane. We
note that the African Union is currently contemplating
a similar effort.
We believe that the stabilization of the security
situation in the Sahel is a key strategic element that must
continue to be prioritized in plans and programmes at
the national, regional and international levels. Therefore

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia pays particular attention to the
developing situation in the Sahel and has consistently
favoured active coordination between the United
Nations and the African Union and subregional
organizations to normalize it.
We wish to recall that the phenomena of terrorism and
violent extremism in the Sahel have sharply increased
in recent years. The situation has sharply deteriorated
since the situation in Libya was destabilized. The
security situation is still negatively affected by porous
borders, which enable the trafficking in drugs, weapons
and other contraband. Without making progress on a
settlement in Libya, it will not be possible to find a
lasting solution to terrorism in the Sahel.

16-1485325/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

We are convinced that we should currently focus
on rebuilding and strengthening the counter-terrorism
potential of the States of the region, as required by
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In that regard, we would like to thank the Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), Mr. Laborde, for his briefing. We
highly value the efforts of CTED in assessing the real
needs of States in terms of combating terrorism.
Russia has always focused on building countries’
capacities and providing bilateral support to train
professionals, including law enforcement agents.
Furthermore, we consider it crucial to work on
implementing resolution 1624 (2005), highlighting
terrorism prevention, by making terrorism less
attractive and by countering the dissemination of
terrorist ideology and violent extremism.
With regard to the specific problem of desertification
in the region, we agree that it undermines the traditional
way of life and the economic potential of the countries
in the region. At the same time, we believe that natural
phenomena, including land and soil degradation caused
by natural factors or human activities cannot a priori be
regarded as a threat to international peace and security.
Drought and land degradation could aggravate the
situation in areas of conflict, the causes of which, in our
opinion, can still be attributed to ineffective responses
by the appropriate political institutions to emerging
issues. The main platform for addressing desertification
and land degradation is the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification.
When considering the problem of desertification
in a cross-border context, we firmly believe there is
a need to find mutually beneficial solutions based on
partnership and respect for national sovereignty. We
should also focus on fostering technical cooperation
and training national staff on land use for countries in
need. Naturally, the assistance provided should take into
account the countries’ specific national development
needs and strategies, as well as regional aspects.
That said, we feel it is inappropriate for the Security
Council to be directly involved. It does not have the
relevant expertise and the necessary tools in this area.
The Council’s involvement could be counterproductive
and lead the international community away from
a search for practical solutions to combat land
degradation. Not one of the briefers mentioned the role
26/31

26/05/2016

of the Security Council in combatting climate change
and desertification, and that was not by chance.
In New York, real value could be added by holding
substantive discussions on this topic in the framework
of the specialized Second Committee of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development,
especially since the importance of addressing
desertification and restoring degraded land in order to
achieve sustainable development was emphasized in
the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda (resolution
70/1), under Goal 15.
We believe that desertification is not the only
challenge to food and economic security in the Sahel
that might lead to radicalization and make it easier
for terrorists to promote their ideologies and recruit
adherents from among the hardest-hit segments of the
population. We are convinced that the whole range of
equally complex problems of the region needs to be
addressed through the consistent implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. This
is a useful initiative, which has proved its worth. We
have only just begun to tap into its full potential by
successfully implementing projects in several areas. We
hope that the merging in February of the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
with the United Nations Office for West Africa will
create the necessary synergy to implement this strategy.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I join members of the Council in thanking our
briefers for their varied, multidimensional briefings.
Undoubtedly, the Security Council is in dire need of
such a comprehensive vision, and it must undertake
an in-depth analysis to identify the root causes of the
conflicts we are dealing with.
The valuable briefings we heard have clearly
shown that the compound and interlinked nature of
the challenges confronting the Sahel region creates a
complicated reality that requires solutions based on a
comprehensive approach, with multiple instruments
that deal with all the threats with the same level of
attention. In confronting these varied challenges,
international, regional and national efforts must be
concerted and coordinated so as to prevent criminal and
terrorist armed groups from exploiting any weaknesses
in the region.
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7699

Egypt believes that the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel can be the appropriate political
framework for coordinating and mobilizing all efforts
to deal with the challenges effectively. The effective
implementation of the Strategy will produce a
qualitative shift in the reality of the region. Therefore,
Egypt agreed with the Secretary-General’s proposal in
January of this year to merge the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel with the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) in order to maximize the logistical and
human resources available and to find the means to
achieve a true qualitative leap in the implementation
of the Strategy, while concentrating on improving the
national capacities of Sahel States.

dimensions are taken into account. Indeed, we believe
the Peacebuilding Commission must serve as the
political forum for achieving synergy among the United
Nations efforts.

We therefore believe that the review of the Strategy
is of utmost importance in order to identify what
progress has been achieved and the shortcomings in
its implementation. We must identify the obstacles to
implementation, both nationally and regionally. We also
believe that future efforts to implement the Strategy
must be sufficiently flexible to adapt to variables and
escalating challenges in the African Sahel, especially
the challenges related to climate change, environmental
deterioration and the spread of terrorist ideologies and
organized crime throughout the region.

Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): At the outset I wish
to thank the President for this opportunity to take the
floor and inform the Council of the activities of the
African Union in the Sahel region. My intervention
will focus on four points: first, a reminder of the data
and principles that underpin the African Union strategy
in the Sahel; secondly, the African Union contribution
to meeting the security challenges; thirdly, meeting
the challenges of governance; and fourthly, meeting
development challenges.

It is important to mobilize international attention
to increase awareness of these new threats in the Sahel.
We must encourage international and regional partners
to invest in building national and local capacities to
mitigate environmental crises and to ensure more
sustainable local communities. Therefore, Egypt calls
for UNOWAS to ensure that future reports provide a
vision for the implementation of the Strategy in the
Sahel, including figures, statistics and time frames
for the implementation of programmes and activities.
How did the Office respond to national priorities and
the needs of the peoples of the region? That would
help the Security Council be aware of the level of
implementation and its shortcomings.
Resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, adopted
on 27 April, was an excellent addition to the efforts
to implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel. The direction for the Security Council
and the General Assembly in that resolution gives
priority to the establishment of a comprehensive
political framework for efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in which political, security, economic and social

Egypt is prepared to cooperate with the peoples
and Governments of the Sahel through the programmes
implemented by the Egyptian Agency of Partnership
for Development, which builds national capacities in
various fields based on the principles of partnership
and national ownership.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Buyoya.

The African Union commitment to the Sahel region
dates to the Libyan crisis. In December 2011, a joint
United Nations-African Union mission was despatched
to the Sahel region. The idea was to examine the
impact of the return of migrants on the stability of
the countries of the region. A report was published
by the mission and considered by experts in March
2012, in Addis Ababa. Recommendations were made
to both the African Union and the United Nations.
Those recommendations laid the basis of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Those very
recommendations will also inspire the African Union
strategy for the Sahel, adopted on 11 August 2014 by its
Peace and Security Council.
Through the strategy, the African Union is seeking
to respond to the three challenges identified in the
Sahel: security, governance and development. In the
area of security, we have seen that the Sahel region has
experienced many problems that have been touched
upon here. Those include security problems, terrorism;
smuggling, including the trafficking of drugs, other
products and humans; migration, rebellions and domestic
conflicts linked, among other things, to competition for
natural resources caused by climate change.

16-1485327/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

In the area of governance, it has been noted that
the countries in the Sahel region have several problems.
In particular, they are vast countries. Their populations
have been nearly abandoned to the margins of the
region, particularly in areas experiencing enormous
economic and environmental fragility. Those countries
are fragile in terms of governance. They have access
to limited resources. They do not fully control their
territory. There are problems of corruption.
With respect to development, those areas are
very poor. They are some of the poorest areas in
Africa — indeed, in the world — and their populations
are exploding. In terms of the ecosystem, the situation is
very fragile. Certain areas see regular food insecurity,
natural disasters, flooding and droughts.
The link between security and climate change,
for example, has been established by examining the
situation in northern Mali. It is common knowledge
that the people who unleashed hostilities in northern
Mali were Touareg Malians. They are basically Arabs
who emigrated to Libya in 1973 because of a terrible
drought that occurred at the time. In that case, we see
that the link between insecurity and climate change in
the Sahel is a reality that has been proven by the history
of the region.
In the African Union strategy document, we start
by defining the Sahel, because there is no common
understanding of a definition of the Sahel. For us,
the Sahel consists of the area straddling the southern
Maghreb and northern sub-Saharan Africa, from the
Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea. It includes numerous
countries, which is important to highlight. In discussing
the African Union strategy, we consider the African
Union in its entirety — namely, the Commission, the
regional economic organizations, and a number of
specialized agencies in Africa involved in development
or governance. There are organizations that are
dedicated to the environment, such as the Great Green
Wall for the Sahara and the Sahel.
The role of the African Union, in cooperation
with other international community organizations,
is to help countries in the region cope with the three
challenges identified — security, governance and
development — without assuming their national roles.
If we consider the three challenges, we believe that
the African Union can bring a comparative advantage,
in particular in the areas of security and governance.
Why is the African Union investing in security in the
28/31

26/05/2016

Sahel, whereas, normally, according to the rules of
the organization, the regional economic communities
deal with security? The answer to that question
is very clear. It lies in the fact that the Sahel region
straddles several regional economic communities,
including the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States, East African Monetary Union in the North
and Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other organizations in eastern African.
What is the contribution of the African Union to
security? As many have said, there are three hot issues
involving security in the Sahel. The situation in northern
Mali is well known. Unfortunately, it is not improving
despite the signature of the Peace Agreement. There are
still the usual terrorists movements — Ansar el-Dine,
the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de
l’Ouest and Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb — who
are operating there against Mali forces, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the population, and so on. Today,
we also have what I could term a new generation of
terrorist groups, including the Macina Liberation Front.
We see that instead of decreasing, insecurity is even
extending not only southwards but throughout West
Africa. Incidents in Ouagadougou and the GrandBassam reflect that trend.
The second cause of a lack of security lies in the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin. We have heard for
about 10 days now that the situation is under control,
but we are aware that there is still a very high level
of violence.
The third source of insecurity arises from the
situation in Libya, where the situation is confused but
poses a real threat to the entire Sahel region, particularly
with the presence of the Islamic State there. Heretofore,
young people from the Maghreb and sub-Saharan
Africa went to Syria and Iraq to be trained; today they
do not need to travel so far. They can go to Libya.
What is the contribution being made by the African
Union? From the beginning of the crisis in Mali, the
African Union has been working on the liberation
of northern Mali, on mediation and follow-up of the
Ouagadougou Agreement and Algiers Platform, and
in following up on the peace agreements. The African
Union participates in the technical commission
on security that monitors the ceasefire, and in the
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

committess on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, integration and security sector reform.
The second aspect of African Union involvement
is to promote regional security cooperation via the
Nouakchott Process, whose emphasis is on information
exchange. For example, every two months we bring
together the heads of the security and information
services from 11 Sahel countries. Every six months, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence Ministers
of 11 Sahel countries come together because we find
that political confidence is engendered by security
cooperation. Today, it is an established fact that regional
cooperation is the way forward. It yields results in the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin. It yielded results
following the Grand-Bassam attacks. Four countries
of the region joined forces to investigate the networks
of the perpetrators of those attacks, and the results
are tangible. We must therefore continue along that
path. I think that is what emerged also from the Abuja
Summit recently.
Another dimension of African Union involvement
the assessement, undertaken at the request of the Heads
of State of the countries in the region, of the situation in
northern Mali and to see how the African Union and the
countries of the region can come together to strengthen
the fight against terrorism. In that regard, an the report
of the assessment mission will soon be issued.
My next point involves the contribution of the
African Union to governance and the political realm.
In Mali, the African Union was at the very heart of
the peace process since Ouagadougou and Algiers,
and is today involved in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. The African Union is chairing the
subcommittee of the follow-up committee addressing
political and institutional matters. We know that this
problem is at the heart of what we could term the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, which is
barely gaining momentum, although we still believe
that the prospects for peace in Mali are real because the
signatories of the Peace Agreements still believe in it,
thanks to the massive political and economic support of
the international community.
With regard to Libya, the African Union is working
via neighbouring countries and the dispatch of a special
envoy and an international Libya monitoring group. In
the countries of the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
the African Union has strongly supported the use
of the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko

S/PV.7699

Haram. In other countries of the region in the Sahel,
we practice preventative diplomacy and closely
monitor developments in those countries when it comes
particularly to elections, especially in the Niger, Chad
and Burkina Faso. The African Union is also involved
through certain projects and programmes to promote or
support good governance, particularly decentralization,
deradicalization, support for electoral processes, and
human rights.
Economically, the African Union has two items
on its agenda. First is the mobilization of African
institutions working in the economic sphere, such as the
African Development Bank, the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development and several departments of the
African Union Commission. The second involves the
coordination of Sahel strategies. Given the multiplicity
of such strategies, it was agreed in November 2013
that a coordination framework would be established
for those strategies, to be managed by the countries
of the region. Mali chaired the framework for today
years; today Chad is in the Chair. The African Union
and the United Nations provide the secretariat for what
we have called the Ministerial Coordination Platform
of Sahel Strategies.
In conclusion, the Sahel remains a regional rife
with difficulties. With respect to security issues, two
situations deserve the ongoing focus of the Council.
The first is the situation in northern Mali, where despite
all that has been done by the international community
there is no improvement. Something must therefore be
done to avert a future in which the terrorists will have
gained the upper hand over the rest of the international
community. The second is the situation in Libya. So
long as Libya remains unstable, there will be no peace
in the Sahel. It is as simple as that. These issues must
therefore remain on the Council’s agenda.
Turning to development, we happily note that there
is continued interest in the Sahel, but the region’s needs
are huge and the international community’s efforts must
be long-term. One felicitous development in the region
that must be supported is the assumption of ownership
of all these strategies on the part of countries of the
region. I refer here to the establishment of the Group of
Five (G-5) Sahel, which emerged as a result of all the
debates held since 2013 under the Nouakchott Process.
The G-5 must be supported, but we must not forget that
the Sahel region covers an area greater than that, and
that in order to meet certain challenges, such as those

16-1485329/31

S/PV.7699

Peace and security in Africa

of security and development, we must cast our gaze
beyond the G-5.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
Mr. Losada.
Mr. Losada (spoke in Spanish): Let me first
thank Egypt, as President of the Security Council, as
well as Spain and the other members of the Council
for providing the European Union the opportunity to
enumerate the many efforts we are making in the Sahel
region towards the construction of what we consider, or
wish to consider, a strategic, multifaceted partnership
between the European Union and the Sahel.
I also wish to thank and commend the briefers
for their outstanding statements early in this meeting,
which have not only enriched the debate on the Sahel,
but also demonstrate the fact that the Sahel is and must
remain high on the international agenda.
(spoke in French)
The Sahel is the theatre of many crises and
represents a multitude of challenges, but — we must
not forget — opportunities as well, such as the Peace
Agreement in Mali signed just one year ago, and the
consolidation of regional cooperation within the Group
of Five (G-5) Sahel. At the same time, however, we
are witnessing growing irregular migration in African
territory and towards Europe, a rise of extremist and
terrorist forces, as Mr. Laborde eloquently described,
and the effects of climate change, including accelerated
desertification in the Sahel region, as laid out by
Ms. Barbut and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ibn Chambas.
I wish to make a point here. At the end of the day,
we must ensure the presence of the State if we are to
fight terrorism, because a vacuum of governance is the
oxygen of terrorism. I shall make four observations in
this regard: the European Union Sahel strategy, Mali,
the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel and the fundamental
question of coordination.
My first point is the strategy and actions of the
European Union. The European Union was the first to
adopt — even before the crisis in Mali — a strategy and
comprehensive approach for the Sahel in 2011, which
gave rise to a regional action plan adopted in April
2015. Its aim is to strengthen our political dialogue
with the subregion and to support the countries of the
Sahel region, now extended to all the countries of the
G-5 Sahel.
30/31

26/05/2016

The European Union and its member States are
strongly committed to the Sahelian countries, in
particular through a comprehensive approach that
closely links development issues to security issues,
short-term emergency measures and support for
structural reforms in the medium and long terms.
For us, this is very clear. There is no security without
development, but there is no development without
security. The two are very closely linked and form the
very basis of the European Union’s 2011 strategy.
The European Union is to allocate more than
€5 billion to the Sahel between 2014 and 2020 through
its various instruments of cooperation and humanitarian
activities. That amount is expected to exceed €8 billion
with the actions of member States included. Other
European Union instruments include the Common
Security and Defence Policy missions such as the
European Union Sahel Capacity-Building Missions in
Mali and the Niger, the European Union Mali Training
Mission, and the actions of member States.
At the Valletta Summit in November 2015, an
emergency trust fund of the European Union was
adopted in favour of stability and the fight against the
root causes of irregular migration and the phenomenon
of displaced persons in Africa. The Sahel and Lake
Chad Basin account is funded to €1 billion. Almost 30
projects were decided in January and April, amounting
to nearly €382 million. On 13 June, the operational
committee will meet to approve new projects. I would
also recall that the terrorist threat in these two regions
is a reality that we can only fight together. It is to
strengthen this cooperation that the European Union
supports the Multinational Joint Task Force in the fight
against Boko Haram. It will, of course, continue to
do so.
Climate change and its impact on the Sahel, as
mentioned today by the Executive Secretary of the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
is also a clear priority in the approach of the European
Union. Europe was the heart of the historic agreement
reached at the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and
is fully committed to its implementation, particularly
in the Sahel through the strengthening of the resilience
capacities of the vulnerable populations — the Global
Alliance for Resilience Initiative — adaptation to
climate change through the support provided in the
framework of the programmes of the Global Alliance
16-14853

26/05/2016

Peace and security in Africa

against Climate Change, and the integrated and
sustainable management of natural resources.
The Sahel countries are increasingly faced with
desertification and land degradation, which threaten
food security, livelihoods, population stability and
security and, more broadly, the economies of these
country, which rely heavily on agriculture. As the
Permanent Representative of Spain put it so well,
this is ground zero of global warming. The European
Union is a major player in the Convention to Combat
Desertification, whose implementation inalienable right
actively supports through a wide range of initiatives,
such as our support for the Great Green Wall, Action
Against Desertification, the RIVER project and other
projects to promote sustainable land management. The
European Union and its member States are determined
to continue to support the Sahel countries in this fight,
which remains essential to the long-term prosperity,
stability and security of the region.
My second point concerns Mali, to which President
Buyoya referred. I take this opportunity to recall the
historic opportunity offered by the implementation of
the peace and reconciliation agreement in Mali. We
must remember that we are far from where we were
a year ago, when there were still clashes among the
various factions. There can be no stability in the Sahek
without stability in Mali. That is therefore a priority
goal. I want to emphasize the strong commitment of
the European Union and its member States in Mali,
alongside the United Nations, using all technical and
financial instruments, and to acknowledge the efforts
being made by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and Operation Barkhane against these many challenges
to peace in Mali and the Sahel.
My third point concerns the G-5 Sahel. The
European Union welcomes the establishment of G-5
Sahel, which we support at the political level. The
Group demonstrates the firm commitment of these
countries to pooling their efforts to confront, together
and in coordination, the many cross-border challenges
in the areas of security and development.
The Summit of Heads of States of the G-5 Sahel,
held on 6 November 2015 in N’Djamena in the presence
of the High Representative and Vice-President of the
European Commission, Federica Mogherini, set the
goals to be achieved with the adoption of a European
Union-G-5 Sahel road map. The road map identifies the
mechanisms for dialogue, consultation and cooperation,

S/PV.7699

and the main activities and joint initiatives planned for
2016. Security, border management, the fight against
terrorism, the issue of youth and radicalization,
trafficking and organized crime are at the heart of our
shared priorities. I take this opportunity to emphasize
that another meeting between the High Representative
and the Foreign Ministers of the G-5 countries is
scheduled for 17 June in Brussels, where they will
analyse the implementation of our road map and the
way ahead.
My final point concerns the coordination among
the international actors. Coordination, I believe, is at
the centre of our debate. If we count all the various
initiatives and strategies on the Sahel, I believe that
there may now be 16 or even more. It is clear that there
is a real need for coordination. Such coordination
does exist. President Buyoya referred earlier to the
Platform and other institutions. I want to emphasize
the excellent coordination between the European Union
and the United Nations, which is illustrated, inter alia,
by the participation of Mr. Mahamat Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif
and Head of MINUSMA, in the European Union
Political and Security Committee in Brussels, as well
as by many meetings and fruitful exchanges between
the institutions and their special representatives,
in particular Special Representative Ibn Chambas.
There is also very close cooperation with the African
Union and other institutions, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, and with Operation
Barkhane. But we must work very hard within that
coordination; otherwise, we will find ourselves working
against ourselves. It goes without saying that we must
work together.
Finally, it is clear that these challenges can really
be met only in a framework of democratic governance
and human rights, which includes the protection of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms, democratic
principles, the rule of law and equal access to justice
and basic social services, the fair and sustainable
management of natural resources, and of course good
governance.
That is the basis of the strategic partnership between
Africa and the European Union. Let me finish by
quoting the High Representative in regard to building a
strategic partnership based on the principle of African
ownership. Her adage sums up our desire to act. “We do
not work for Africa; no, we work with Africa.”
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

16-1485331/31
