A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/176
2 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.1)]
49/176.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1/
which states that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from
Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, 2/
Reaffirming the importance of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 3/
Welcoming the recommendation in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 4/
that providing necessary resources for assistance to victims of torture should
be given high priority, inter alia, by additional contributions to the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Recalling its resolution 36/151 of 16 December 1981, in which it noted
with deep concern that acts of torture took place in various countries,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.

3/

Resolution 39/46, annex.

4/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

95-77035

/...

A/RES/49/176
Page 2

recognized the need to provide assistance to the victims of torture in a
purely humanitarian spirit and established the Fund,
Alarmed at the widespread occurrence of torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment,
Convinced that the struggle to eliminate torture includes the provision
of assistance in a humanitarian spirit to the victims and members of their
families,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 5/
Noting the steps taken by the Secretary-General, through the staff of
the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat, to assist the Board of
Trustees of the Fund in its efforts to increase public awareness of the Fund
and its humanitarian work,
Recalling the statement by the Board of Trustees of the Fund on the need
to receive contributions from Governments on a regular basis, which, inter
alia, would prevent the interruption of programmes in the continuation of
which the Fund plays an instrumental role,
Taking account of the fund-raising campaign launched on the
recommendation of the Board of Trustees of the Fund at its eleventh session,
held from 22 April to 1 May 1992, to enhance the capacity of the Fund to
respond more favourably to the increasing number of requests for assistance to
victims of torture,
Taking account also of the increasing number of projects and the
repeated requests by the Board of Trustees of the Fund to have adequate staff
for the operations of the Fund,
Noting with satisfaction the establishment of an international network
of centres for the rehabilitation of torture victims, which plays an important
role in providing assistance to victims of torture, and the collaboration of
the Fund with the centres,
1.
Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have already contributed to the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture;
2.
Appeals to all Governments, organizations and individuals in a
position to do so to respond favourably to requests for contributions to the
Fund, if possible on a regular basis and annually before the meeting of the
Board of Trustees of the Fund and if possible also with a substantial increase
in the number and level of contributions so that consideration may be given to
the ever-increasing demand for assistance;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to all Governments the
appeals of the General Assembly for contributions to the Fund;
4.
Expresses its appreciation to the Governments that pledged
contributions to the Fund at the 1994 United Nations Pledging Conference for
Development Activities;

5/

A/49/484 and Corr. 1 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/49/176
Page 3

5.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include the Fund on
an annual basis among the programmes for which funds are pledged at the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities;
6.
Expresses its appreciation to the Board of Trustees of the Fund
for the work it has accomplished;
7.
Renews its request to the Secretary-General to make use of all
existing possibilities, including the preparation, production and
dissemination of information materials, to assist the Board of Trustees of the
Fund in its efforts to make the Fund and its humanitarian work better known
and in its appeal for contributions;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, within the overall
budgetary framework of the United Nations, the provision of an adequate and
stable level of staffing and technical equipment to ensure the efficient
operation and management of the Fund;
9.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session on the operations of the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for the Victims of Torture.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
