301 (IV). Question of Indonesia

,

The Gtnerai Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 274 (III):i 1 of
11 May 1949,
l. Welcomes the announcement that an agreement was reached at the Round Table Conference held at The Hague between 23 August and
2 November 1949;
2. Cam mends the parties concerned and the
United Nations Commission for Indonesia for
their contributions thereto ;
3. Welcomes the forthcoming establishment of
the Republic of the United States of Indonesia
as an independent, sovereign State.

27211d plenary meeting,
7 December 1949.

302 (IV). A~sistancc to Palestine
refugees
The General Assrn1/1/y,
Recalling its resolutions 212 (111) 32 of 19 November 1948 and l <J..J. ( [ 11 J:;:; of 11 December
1948, affirming in particular the provisions of
paragraph 11 of the latter resolution,

which have materially assisted m bringing relief
to Palestine refugees ;

5. Recognizes that, without prejudice to the
provisions of paragraph 11 of General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, continued assistance for the relief of the Palestine
refugees is necessary to prevent conditions of
starvation and distress among them and to further
conditions of peace and stability, and that constructive measures should be undertaken at an
early date with a view to the termination of international assistance for relief;
6. Considers that, subject to the provisions of
paragraph 9 ( d) of the present resolution, the
equivalent of approximately $33,700,000 will be
required for direct relief and works programmes
ior the period 1 January to 31 December 1950 of
which the equivalent of $20,200,000 is required
ior direct relief and $13,500,000 for works programmes ; that the equivalent of approximately
$21,200,000 will be required for works programmes from 1 January to 30 June 19 51, all
inclusive of administrative expenses; and that
rlircct relief should be terminated not later than
31 December 1950 unless otherwise determined
by the General Assembly at its fifth regular
,iession ;
7. Establishes the United Nations Relief and
vVorks Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East:

Having examined with appreciation the first
interim report 31 of the United Nations Economic
Survey Mission for the ?-.Iiddle East and the report"" of the Secretary-Ceneral on assistance to
Palestine refugees,

(a) To carry out in collaboration with local
governments the direct relief and works prog-rammes as recommended by the Economic Survey Mission;

l. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments which have generously responded to the
appeal embodied in its resolution 212 (III), and
to the appeal of the Secretary-Ccneral, to contribute in kill(l or in funds tu the alleviation of
the conditions of starvation and distress among
the Palestine refugees;

( /J) To consult with the interested Near Eastern Covernments concerning measures to be taken
by them preparatory to the time when international assistance for relief and works projects
is no longer available;

~- Establishes an Advisory Commission consisting of representatives of France, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America, with
power to acid not more than three additional
members from contributing Govcrnmenb, to advise and assist the Director of the United Nations
Relief and \Vorks Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East in the execution of the programme; the Director and the Advisory Commission shall consult with each N car Eastern Government concerned in the selection, planning and
execution of projects;

2. Expresses also its gratitude to the International Com,nittee of the Reel Cross, to the League
of Red Cross Societies and to the American
Friends Service Committee for the contribution
they have made to this humanitarian cause by discharging, in the face of great difficulties, the responsibility they voluntarily assumed for the di;;tribution of relief supplies and the general care oi
the refugees; and welcomes the assurance the:,
have given the Secrdary-Ccneral that the, ,,,·ill
continue their co-operation ·with thl' United
Nations until the end of l\farch 1950 on a nrntually acceptable basis;

'I. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint
the Director of the United Nations Relief and
\Vorks ,\gency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East in consultation with the Governments
represent eel nn the Ach·isory Commission;

3. Commends the United Xations International
Children's Emergency Fund for the important
contribution which it has made towards the United
Nations programme of assistance : aml conm1ernls
those specialized agencies which have rendered
assistance in their respective fields, in particular
the \Vorld Health Organization, the United
Nations Erlucational, Scientil1c and Cultural Organization and the l ntPrnational Ref ugce Organization;

(a) The Director shall be the chief executive
officer of the United Nations Relief and \Vorks
:\gency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
responsible to the General Assembly for the
opnation of the programme;

( /,) The Director shall select and appoint his
staff in accordance with general arrangements
made in agreement with the Secretary-General,

4. Exprcss,·s ib thanks to the mmwrous religions, charit;11,k and l111111:u1itari;m organizations

31
See Official Records of the fourth session of the Genrra/ .·1ssc111h/_\'. A1111cz to the Ad Hoe Political Commit/re,
document A/1106.
"'' Ibid., documents A/1060 and A/1060.'.\,ld.1.

:II Sec ()flicic1f R1'r"1 1 rds of flic third session of fh1· Gener,,( .·lssc,n/,f.\', florf I!. Rc...,()111tic111-,, pag-L' 19.

"" Ibid., !'art I. Resolutions, page 66.
33
Ibid., page 21.

23

Assembly resolution 212 (III) and to make withdrawals therefrom for the operation of the United
Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees and, upon
the request of the Director, for the operations of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East;

including such of the staff rules and regulations
of the United Nations as the Director and the
Secretary-General shall agree are applicable, and
to the extent possible utilize the facilities and
assistance of the Secretary-General;
( c) The Director shall, in consultation with
the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
establish financial regulations for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency hr Palestine
Refugees in the Near East;

17. Calls upon the Governments concerned to
accord to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
the privileges, immunities, exemptions and facilities which have been granted to the United
Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees, together
with all other privileges, immunities, exemptions
and facilities necessarv for the fulfilment of its
functions ;
,

( d) Subject to the financial regulations established pursuant to clause ( c) of the present
paragraph, the Director, in consultation with the
Advisory Commission, shall apportion available
funds between direct relief and works projects in
their discretion, in the event that the estimates
in paragraph 6 require revision ;

18. Urges the United Nations International
Children's Emergency Fund, the International
Refugee Organization, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization and other appropriate agencies
and private groups and organizations, in consultation with the Director of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, to furnish assistance within the
framework of the programme ;

10. Requests the Director to convene the Advisory Commission at the earliest practicable date
for the purpose of developing plans for the organization and administration of the programme, and
of adopting rules of procedure;
11. Continues the United Nations Relief for
Palestine Refugees as established under General
Assembly resolution 212 (III) until 1 April 1950,
or until such date thereafter as the transfer referred to in paragraph 12 is effected, and requests
the Secretary-General in consultation with the
operating agencies to continue the endeavour to
reduce the numbers of rations by progressive
stages in the light of the findings and recommendations of the Economic Survey Mission;
12. Instructs the Secretary-General to transfer
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East the assets
and liabilities of the United Nations Relief for
Palestine Refugees by 1 April 1950, or at such
date as may be agreed by him and the Director
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East ;
13. Urges all Members ~ the United Nations
and non-members to make voluntary contributions in funds or in kind to ensure that the amount
of supplies and funds required is obtained for
each period of the programme as set out in paragraph 6; contributions in funds may be made in
currencies other than the United States dollar in
so far as the programme can be carried out in
such currencies ;
14. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to advance
funds deemed to be available for this purpose and
not exceeding $5,000,000 from the Working Capital Fund to finance operations pursuant to the
present resolution, such sum to be repaid not
later than 31 December 1950 from the voluntary
governmental contributions requested under paragraph 13 above;
15. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to negotiate with the_ International Refugee Organization for an interest-free loan in an amount not to
exceed the equivalent of $2,800,000 to finance the
programme subject to mutually satisfactory conditions for repayment;
16. Authorizes the Secretary-General to continue the Special Fund established under General

19. Requests the Director of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East :
(a) To appoint a representative to attend the
meeting of the Technical Assistance Board as
observer so that the technical assistance activities
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East may be
co-ordinated with the technical assistance programmes of the United Nations and specialized
agencies referred to in Economic and Social
Council resolution 222 (IX) A 36 of 1: .. ••"'USt
1949;
(b) To place at the disposal of the Technical
Assistance Board full information concerning any
technical assistance work which may be done
by the United Nations Relief and vVorks Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in order
that it may be included in the reports submitted
by the Technical Assistance Board to the Technical Assistance Committee of the Economic and
Social Council ;
20. Directs the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to consult with the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine in the best interests of their respective tasks, with particular reference to paragraph 11 of General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948;
21. Requests the Director to submit to the
General Assembly of the United Nations an annual report on the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for P,alestine Refugees
in the Near East, including an audit of funds, and
invites him to submit to the Secretary-General
such other reports as the United Nations Relief
and \Vorks Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East may wish to bring to the attention of
Members of the United Nations, or its appropriate organs;
22. Instructs the United Nations Conciliation
Commission for Palestine to transmit the final
36 See Official Records of the Economic and Social
Council, Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Resolutions. page -4.

24

report of the Economic Survey Mission, with such
comments as it may wish to make, to the Secretary-General for transmission to the Members of
the United Nations and to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East.
273rd plenary meeting,
8 December 1949.

303 (IV). Palestine: question of an
internatfonal regime for the Jeru•
salem area and the protection of
the Holy Places
The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolutions 181 (II) 37 of
29 November 1947 and 194 (IIl) 38 of 11 December 1948,
Having studied the reports of the United
Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine set
up under the latter resolution,

I. Decides
In relation to Jerusalem,

Believing that the principles underlying its
previous resolutions concerning this matter, and
in particular its resolution of 29 November 1947,
represent a just and equitable settlement of the
question,
1. To restate, therefore, its intention that Jerusalem should be placed under a permanent international regime, which should envisage appropriate guarantees for the protection of the Holy
Places, both within and outside Jerusalem, and
to confirm specifically the following provisions of

General Assembly resolution 181 (II) :39 ( 1) the
City of Jerusalem shall be established as a corpu.s
separatum under a special international regime
and shall be administered by the United Nations;
(2) the Trusteeship Council shall be designated
to discharge the responsibilities of the Administering Authority ... ; and ( 3) the City of Jerusalem
shall include the present municipality of Jerusalem
plus the surrounding villages and towns, the most
eastern of which shall be Abu Dis; the most
southern, Bethlehem; the most western, Ein
Karim (including also the built-up area of
Motsa); and the most northern, Shu'fat, as indicated on the attached sketch-map ;40
2. To request for this purpose that the Trusteeship Council at its next session, whether special
or regular, complete the preparation of the Statute
of Jerusalem, 41 omitting the now inapplicable provisions, such as articles 32 and 39, and, without
prejudice to the fundamental principles of the
international regime for Jerusalem set forth in
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) introducing therein amendments in the direction of its
greater democratization, approve the Statute, and
proceed immediately with its implementation. The
Trusteeship Council shall not allow any actions
taken by any interested Government or Governments to divert it from adopting and implementing the Statute of Jerusalem;
II. Calls upon the States concerned to make
formal undertakings, at an early date and in the
light of their obligations as Members of the
United Nations, that they will approach these
matters with goocl will and be guided by the
terms of the present resolution.

275th plenary meeting,
9 December 1949.

11

Sec Official Records of the second session of the
Gm"al Assembly~ Resolutions, page 131.
88
See Official Records of the third session of the GenBal Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 21.
19
Sec Official Records of the second session of the
Gm"al Assembly, Resolutions, page 146.

0
• Sec annex on page 26. (This map appears as Annex
B to resolution 181 (II) of the General Assembly, dated
29 November 1947.)
41
See Official Records of the second session of th,
Trusteeship Council, Third Part, Annex, page 4.

2S
