V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of the United Nations, 115 which explains in more detail the
nature of famine and the means of eradicating it in Africa,
Noting with appreciation the assistance provided to African countrie~ through bilateral and multilateral channels.
inter alia, by the Food and Agriculture Organization or the
United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Food Programme. the World Bank and
other competent organizations,
Recognizing the vital role played by transport infrastructure in food situations, particularly in emergency food
situations,
Recognizing the useful contribution that the effective execution of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation
of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development
of Africa can make to the improvement of the food situation,
in particular, and to the rapid over-all developr.ient of
Africa,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
food problems in Africa 116 and expresses its concern at the
inadequacy of the results achieved in the implementation
of its resolution 35/69;
2. Urges all the countries of Africa to implement, in
accordance with their national development programmes
and priorities, measures to increase substantially their food
and agricultural production;
3. Calls upon the international community to continue
to support efforts undertaken by African countries at the
national, subregional and regional levels to increase fo0d
production through, inter alia, the provision, on a priority
and long-term basis, of additional financial and technical
assistance to Africa by organizations of the United Nations
system, such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Development Programme
and other organizations involved in the financing of agricultural development, and through an increase in lending
by the World Bank to the agricultural sector in Africa;
4. Stresses that international assistance should not only
take the form of food aid and the corresponding additional
support but, more important, should also support national
efforts for the restoration and development of agricultural
production, specifically crops and livestock, in the regions
affected;
5. Urges Governments and the international organizations concerned to provide the necessary technical, financial
and food assistance to food security projects in the region,
especially in the countries of the Sahe! and the SudanoSahelian countries, in the framework of their own activities,
including strengthening the Food Security Assistance Scheme
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations through the participation of current and prospective
donors;
6. Calls for the urgent consideration of the adoption of
a positive and flexible approach to the financing of agricultural development by external institutions and Governments, which would finance, inter alia, recurrent expenditure
in connection with investment and the cost of factors of
production, and for the granting of concessional terms as
appropriate;
7. Recognizes the role of the international community.
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme in mobilizing food aid and
agricultural assistance in Africa, and requests existing and
new duuor countries to increase the resources required to
meet African needs for food aid and agricultural development;
"' "Famine in Africa" (document CM/1106 IXXXVI) of the Organization of African Unity).
116

A/36/149.

121

8. Recommends that the Programme for the Control of
African Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Developmt:nt, endorsed by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its twentieth
session in its resolution 8179 of 28 November 1979, should
be implemented on an urgent basis under the over-all coordination of that organization and with the active financial
and technical support of the international community;
9. Urges all relevant organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to intensify their activities in
Africa to assist Governments, inter alia, in the areas relating
to food production, agricultural processing, integrated research and extension services;
10. Also urges the international community to assist
countries in the African region to achieve, by 1985. the
following goals:
(a) A significant improvement in their food situation
and the laying of the foundations for the attainment of selfsufficiency in cereals, livestock and fish;
(b) Significant progress towards attaining a 50 per cent
reduction in post-harvest losses, through, inter alia, the
construction of storage facilities;
( c) An improved transport infrastructure to facilitate
food distribution at the national, subregional and regional
levels;
(d) Expanded and more effective agronomic research,
with special emphasis on improved seeds and an adequate
supply of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals suitable
for African conditions;
11. Further urges all relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to expand their training
programmes in the building up of national capabilities for
the preparation, execution, monitoring and evaluation of
agricultural development projects;
12. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Commission for Africa, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity, to take every
necessary measure, including the holdin_g of joint meetings,
with a view to considering the possihilifies for implementing
General Assembly resolution 35/.'.J9 and the p1esent resolution;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and organs and bodies of the United Nations system, in his final report called
for in resolution 35/69:
(a) To identify the problems perceived in the attainment
of the goals set forth in paragraph IO above;
(b) To estimate the amount of external resources needed
to attain those goals;
(c) To report on the level of technical and financial
resources which the United Nations system will deploy towards the attainment of those goals and to suggest ways of
attracting extra funding;
(d) To report on the action-oriented plans of the relevant
organs and organizations of the United Nations system
which will implement the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/187.

Restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May I 974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order. 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, con-

122

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

taining the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States.
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation.
Reaffirming its resolutions 32/197 of 20 December I 977
and 33/202 of 29 January 1979 on the restructuring of the
economic and social sectors of the United Nations system,
as well as its resolutions 34/215 of I 9 December 1979 and
35/203 of 16 December 1980 on the implementation of
section VIII of the annex to resolution 321197,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 35/203, 117
the comments of the Secretary-General 118 on the report of
the Joint Inspection Unit on the relationships between the
Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation and entities of the United Nations Secretariat, 119 and the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of section IV of the annex to Assembly
resolution 32/197, 120
I. Decides to tran~mit to the Economic and Social
Council, for consideration at its second regular session of
1982, the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 35/203 and the
comments of the Secretary-General on the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and to return to the question of the relationships between the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation and entities of the
United Nations Secretariat al its thirty-seventh session. in
the light of the deliberations of the Council, in order to
continue to implement fully section VIII of the annex to
Assembly resolution 32/197;
2. Also decides to return, at its thirty-seventh session,
to the question of the implications of the restructuring process for the regional commissions, within the over-all context of its resolution 32/ l 97, as well as in the light of further
observations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its next session, to be held in 1982, and of the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1982.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

36/188. Problem of remnants of war
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVII). 2996 (XXVII)
and 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December I 972, pertaining to cooperation between States in the field of the environment,
the international responsibility of States in protecting the
environment and the establishment of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling also its resolutions 3435 (XXX) of 9 December
1975 and 35/71 of 5 December 1980,
Recalling further decisions 80 (IV) of 9 April 1976, 121
101 (V) of 25 May 1977 122 and 9/5 of 25 May 1981 121 of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,

117

A/36/477.
A/36/419/Add.l.
11
• See A/36/419.
120
A/36/577.
11

•

121
See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thirt_v;/irst Session.
Supplement No. 25 (A/31/25), annex I.
122
Ibid., Thirty-second Session. Supplement No. 25 (A/32125). annex I.
m Ibid .. Thirty-si.xth Session. Supplemetll No. 25 (A/36125 and Corr. I. J.
annex I.

Convinced that the removal of remnants of war should
be the responsibility of the countries that implanted them
and should be carried out at their expense.
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 124
2. Regrets that no real action has been taken to solve
the problem of remnants of war despite the various resolutions and decisions thereon of the General Assembly and
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
3. Reiterates its support of the demand of the States
affected by the implantation of mines and the presence of
other remnants of war on their lands for compensation for
the losses incurred from the States responsible for those
remnants;
4. Appeals to all States, particularly those responsible
for the presence of remnants of war in developing countries,
to co-operate with the Secretary-General in order to enable
him to make specific and effective recommendations for
solving the problem of remnants of war;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his contacts and consultations with Member States pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 35171 and to collate all relevant information received from States, in order to find ways
and means, including the possibility of convening a conference under the auspices of the United Nations, of solving
the problem of remnants of war, and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 198/

36/189.

Session of a special character of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme

The General Assemblv,
Recalling paragraphs 13 to 15 of its resolution 35/74 of
5 December 1980 on international co-operation in the field
of the environment.
Concerned that there is need to revive the sense of urgency and commitment by Governments for national and
international co-operative action to protect and enhance the
environment, which found expression at the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm
from 5 to 16 June 1972,
Recognizing that important changes in the perception of
the environment and of environmental problems have occurred since that Conference and recognizing also the importance of the interrelationships between people, resources,
environment and development,
Convinced that the session of a special character represents a unique opportunity for Governments to re-emphasize
their continued commitment to and support of the cause of
the environment and the United Nations Environment
Programme.
1. Decides that the session of a special character of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme should he held at Nairobi from 10 to 18 May 1982
and that the Governing Council should report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
2. Approves the draft provisional agenda for the session
as set forth in section I of the annex to the present resolution;
3. Further dendes that the rules of procedure of the
Governing Council will apply to the session of a special
character. with modifications to rules 17. 18, 19, 31 and
