A /70/PV.112

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

112th plenary meeting

Monday, 25 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Terrorist attacks
The President: I wish to express my continued
sorrow and anger about the recent spate of terror attacks
and mass murders that have taken place around the
world. I offer my deepest condolences and compassion
to the victims and the relatives of those affected by
these extremely cruel acts. These kinds of attacks
have no place in a civilized global community and we
must, through increased international cooperation, do
everything we can to prevent them from happening in
the future.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its
39th plenary meeting, on 26 October 2015, the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item 12.
In order for the General Assembly to consider agenda
item 12, it will be necessary to reopen its consideration.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.

16-23174 (E)

Agenda item 12 (continued)
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Solemn appeal made by the President of the
General Assembly (A/70/983)
The President: I shall now read out the solemn
appeal contained in document A/70/983:
“The ancient Greek tradition of the ekecheiria,
or ‘Olympic Truce’, born in the eighth century
B.C., serves as a hallowed principle of the Olympic
Games. In 1992, the International Olympic
Committee renewed this tradition by calling upon
all nations to observe the Truce.
“Through its resolution 48/11 of 25 October
1993, the General Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce from the seventh day
before the opening to the seventh day following the
closing of each Olympic Games. This appeal was
renewed in the Millennium Declaration.
“In the 2005 World Summit Outcome, our
leaders emphasized that ‘sports can foster peace
and development’, and encouraged the General
Assembly to foster a dialogue and agreed proposals
for a plan of action on sport and development.
“On 3 November 2005, the General Assembly
held a plenary debate on the agenda item ‘Sport
for peace and development’, and also adopted,
with universal support, resolution 60/8, entitled

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1623174*

A/70/PV.112

‘Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic Ideal’, deciding to consider this
item every two years in advance of each Summer
and Winter Olympic Games.
“The
2030
Agenda
for
Sustainable
Development acknowledges sport as an important
enabler of sustainable development, recognizing
the growing contribution of sport to the realization
of development and peace in its promotion of
tolerance and respect and the contributions that
it makes to the Sustainable Development Goals,
including the empowerment of women and of young
people, individuals and communities, as well as to
health, education and social inclusion objectives.
“To this end, on 26 October 2015, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 70/4. In that
resolution, the Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce individually and
collectively, within the framework of the Charter of
the United Nations, throughout the period from the
seventh day before the start of the XXXI Olympic
Summer Games until the seventh day following the
end of the XV Paralympic Summer Games, to be
held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
“The Olympic movement aspires to contribute
to a peaceful future for all humankind through
the educational value of sport, in particular youth.
The Games will bring together athletes from all
parts of the world in the greatest of international
sports events as a means to promote peace, mutual
understanding and goodwill among nations and
peoples — goals that are also part of the founding
values of the United Nations. For the first time
ever, a team of refugees will participate under
the Olympic flag in the Olympic Games in Rio de
Janeiro, acting as a powerful symbol of inclusion
and our shared humanity.
“As an expression of these common objectives,
the International Olympic Committee has decided
to fly the United Nations flag at Olympic Park.
The United Nations system and the International
Olympic Committee have strengthened their
mutual cooperation and support through joint
endeavours in such fields as human development,
poverty alleviation, humanitarian assistance, health
promotion, HIV and AIDS prevention, child and
youth education, gender equality, peacebuilding
and sustainable development.
2/18

25/07/2016

“I welcome the leadership of Olympic and
Paralympic athletes in promoting peace and human
understanding through sport and the Olympic
ideal, and the commitment made by various States
Members of the United Nations to developing
national and international programmes that promote
peace and conflict resolution and the Olympic
and Paralympic values through sport and through
culture, education and sustainable development.
“As President of the General Assembly at
its seventieth session, I solemnly appeal to all
Member States to demonstrate their commitment
to the Olympic Truce for the 2016 Rio Olympic
and Paralympic Games and to undertake concrete
actions at the local, national, regional and world
levels to promote and strengthen a culture of peace
and harmony based on the spirit of the Truce.
Referring to the original tradition of the Olympic
Truce practised in ancient times, as described in
resolution 70/4, I also call upon all warring parties
of current armed conflicts around the world to
boldly agree to true mutual ceasefires for the
duration of the Olympic Truce, thus providing an
opportunity to settle disputes peacefully.”
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of the solemn appeal in connection with the
observance of the Olympic Truce?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/70/L.49/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda
items 15, 116 and 123 at its 52nd plenary meeting,
on 13 November 2015. Members will also recall that,
under agenda item 15, the Assembly adopted resolution
70/110 at its 82nd plenary meeting, on 23 December
2015. Members will further recall that the Assembly,
16-23174

25/07/2016

A/70/PV.112

at its 90th plenary meeting, on 1 April 2016, adopted
resolution 70/259 under this item.

Industrial Development Decade for Africa (20162025)”.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to
introduce draft resolution A/70/L.49/Rev.1.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt the draft resolution?

Mrs. Aueareechit (Thailand): On behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to introduce the
draft resolution entitled “Third Industrial Development
Decade for Africa (2016-2025)”, contained in document
A/70/L.49/Rev.1.
Africa’s average share of new factories in gross
domestic product has remained about 10 per cent
since the late 1970s. The slow pace of Africa’s
industrialization is responsible for the region’s low
performance in translating growth into good jobs and
poverty reduction. Based on an assessment of the
situation, the General Assembly adopted the first and
second Industrial Development Decades for Africa in
support of Africa’s efforts to overcome the challenges
of industrialization. Unfortunately, limited progress
was made owing to a lack of resources, capacities and
geostrategic reasons.
The time has come to invest in inclusive and
sustainable industrialization as an engine for growth
and provide strategic leverage to support African
countries through the adoption of the third Industrial
Development Decade for Africa for the year 2016
to 2025. With the present draft resolution, we have
the opportunity to address industrial development
challenges in the context of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1), in particular Goal 9, and open the door to
enhanced international and regional cooperation,
including North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation as well as assistance from international
institutions, including the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, to fully support the
implementation of this Third Decade and assist African
countries in promoting inclusive, sustainable industrial
development.
In closing, I would like to thank our coordinator
from Chad, facilitator from Morocco and all partners
involved in the negotiation of the draft text. We
hope that the General Assembly will adopt the draft
resolution by consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/70/L.49/Rev.1, entitled “Third

Draft resolution A/70/L.49/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 70/293).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Agenda item 23 (continued)
Groups of countries in special situations
(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries
Draft resolution (A/70/L.56)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution entitled “Political
Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm
Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011-2020”, issued as document A/70/L.56.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to make a
statement in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
In paragraph 120 of draft resolution A/70/L.56,
the Heads of State and Government and high
representatives participating in the Comprehensive
High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation
of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 state
that they encourage the General Assembly to consider
holding, in 2021, the Fifth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries.
Pursuant to this provision, it is understood that
all issues related to the meetings comprising the Fifth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries in 2021, including the date, format,
organization and scope of the Conference, have yet to be
determined. Accordingly, in the absence of modalities
for the meeting, it is not possible at the present time
to estimate the potential cost implications of the
requirements of the meetings and of documentation.

16-231743/18

A/70/PV.112

Once the modalities, format and organization of the
meeting are decided, the Secretary-General will submit
the relevant costs of such requirements in accordance
with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. Furthermore, the date of the meeting will have
to be determined in consultation with the Department
of General Assembly and Conference Management.
Accordingly, adoption of draft resolution A/70/L.56
does not give rise to any financial implications under
the programme budget.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.56, entitled
“Political Declaration of the Comprehensive Highlevel Midterm Review of the Implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011-2020”. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.56 was adopted (resolution
70/294).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
delegations that wish to make statements following the
adoption of the draft resolution.
Mr. Tatiyapermpoon (Thailand): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
At the outset, please allow me to express our
thanks to the President for convening this meeting
of the General Assembly to endorse the Political
Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm
Review of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020,
which was adopted on 29 May in Antalya, Turkey. Our
appreciation also goes to you, Mr. President, and to the
Permanent Representative of Belgium as co-facilitators
of the process for your leading role and tireless efforts,
as well as to all the stakeholders involved in the process
for their constructive engagement.
As we embark on our common journey towards
sustainable development, the principles of universality
and inclusiveness must not be forgotten, lest we all fail
as a team. It is not only important for all of us to engage
in a constructive manner to reach consensus on this
political outcome, we must also expedite our provision
of assistance to enhance the capacities of least developed
countries (LDCs) in support of their efforts to achieve
the priority areas set forth in the Istanbul Programme
of Action and to implement the 2030 Agenda.
4/18

25/07/2016

With strong support from all of us and with
coordinated actions, we are confident that the LDCs
will be able to overcome their structural weaknesses.
Against that backdrop, we are hopeful that at least half,
if not all, of the LDCs will meet the graduation criteria
by 2020. The Group of 77 and China would like to once
again express its solidarity with its LDC friends and
its commitment to provide them with support in their
efforts to implement the Istanbul Programme of Action
and the 2030 Agenda, in order to make their development
gains sustainable, inclusive and meaningful.
Mr. Sekiguchi (Japan): Japan welcomes the
adoption of resolution 70/294. We would like also to
express our sincere appreciation to the Permanent
Missions of Belgium, Benin and Turkey for leading the
process of the discussion on the Declaration.
After lengthy deliberations on the part of Member
States, including the meeting held in Antalya, Turkey,
from 27 to 29 May, the Political Declaration was adopted
unanimously. During the process, Japan engaged
constructively in the discussions, and we are pleased
to see several items of importance to us incorporated
into the Declaration, such as our policies to support
the construction of quality infrastructure, resilience to
natural disasters and disaster risk reduction.
Allow me now to briefly touch upon on our next step
to support our least developed country (LDC) partners,
namely, the sixth Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD VI), to be held this
August. Since Africa is home to 34 of the world’s 48
LDCs, sustainable development in Africa is a major
concern to Japan, and so we have been co-organizing
TICAD every five years since 1993. This year, for the
first time, the TICAD summit meeting will be held
in Africa and hosted by Kenya, in Nairobi, on 27 and
28 August.
It was preceded by the preparatory ministerial
meeting held in Banjul last month. This conference will
be an important occasion to deepen our discussions and
partnerships on critical issues such as the global health
architecture, strengthening the response to publichealth emergencies, violent extremism and commodity
price volatility, while at the same time promoting
Africa’s own efforts to achieve Agenda 2063, as well
as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1).
Of course, the implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action is vital to all LDCs, not only
16-23174

25/07/2016

to Africa, as noted in the ministerial declaration of
the High-Level Political Forum adopted last week. I
should like to emphasize that both the LDCs and their
development partners must undertake more concerted
development planning efforts to achieve the global
goals of the Istanbul Programme of Action as well as of
the 2030 Agenda in order to leave no one behind.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): The least developed
countries (LDCs) would like to express our thanks
to all of the States Members of the United Nations
for having adopted the very important resolution
70/294, endorsing the Political Declaration of the
Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the
Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries. We would like to put on record our deep
appreciation for the two co-facilitators of the process,
the Permanent Representative Belgium and you
yourself, Mr. President, for your skilled stewardship
of the process. The LDCs would also like to take this
opportunity to express sincere thanks and gratitude to
the peoples and the Government of Turkey for having
generously hosted the midterm review.
Ms. Amadeo (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the formal adoption by the
General Assembly of the Political Declaration of the
Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the
Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011-2020 (resolution 70/294). As we did in Antalya,
we would like to begin by thanking the Government
of Turkey for having hosted this successful event as
well as praise the co-facilitators of the midterm review,
Ambassadors Frankinet and Zinsou, for their leadership
and for their hard work.
The Istanbul Programme of Action presents us
with an ambitious and comprehensive framework for
addressing the development challenges facing the least
developed countries (LDCs). The United States remains
committed to supporting the LDCs, as illustrated by
the fact that more than one third of our total bilateral
net disbursements of official development assistance
between 2011 and 2014 has been to LDCs. In 2015, such
assistance increased by 8 per cent, the largest increase
of any bilateral donor.
But even more importantly, the United States
convinced of the need to use official development
assistance catalytically, to leverage new partnerships
that are better placed to address the challenges of the

A/70/PV.112

LDCs. The United States is engaged in many such
efforts, including Power Africa, the New Alliance for
Food Security and Nutrition, and the Global Partnership
for Sustainable Development Data. As these initiatives
show, the United States has been and will continue to
be a willing partner with LDCs in our joint efforts to
realize the aspirations and objectives of the Istanbul
Programme of Action and the goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
We reaffirmed these goals in Antalya, and we will
continue to do both here in New York and in the least
developed countries themselves.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Turkey welcomes the formal
endorsement by the General Assembly today of the
Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level
Midterm Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2011-2020 (resolution 70/294).
As the host country, we would like to thank
Member States for their constructive engagement
and contributions to the successful conclusion of the
midterm review. Our special thanks go also to the
co-facilitators of the preparatory process, Ambassador
Frankinet of Belgium and you yourself, Mr. President,
for the leadership and cooperation shown.
The robust Political Declaration that we adopted
in Antalya demonstrates our collective commitment
to eradicating poverty, achieving sustainable
development and building a better future for all. We
should all do whatever is required to ensure that the
Istanbul Programme of Action is fully implemented.
The Political Declaration has paved the way for taking
concrete action over the next five years to this effect.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Turkey
will continue to fulfil its responsibilities and act in
solidarity with the least developed countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Remond (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. We would first like to take the
opportunity of this formal endorsement to thank the two
co-facilitators of the entire midterm review process,
Ambassadors Frankinet of Belgium and you yourself,
Mr. President, for your wonderful work over the past
month, for your vision and for guiding us towards what

16-231745/18

A/70/PV.112

we consider is a strong Political Declaration of which
we can all be proud.
We would also like to thank the Republic of Turkey
for warmly welcoming us in Antalya, and, of course,
we want to thank the United Nations Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States for its support throughout the process
and its tireless work for the least developed countries
(LDCs), a group of countries to which the European
Union attaches particular importance.
Throughout the negotiations leading to the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), we have consistently argued that
no one should be left behind and that in this process,
special attention should be given the challenges faced by
the LDCs. As part of our efforts to support developing
countries in implementing the Agenda, we will
continue to put the LDCs at the centre of our trade and
development policy. We have come a long way since the
adoption of the Istanbul Programme of Action, and we
would like to congratulate those LDCs that have made
progress towards graduation. The European Union is
determined to facilitate a smooth graduation process
and is fully committed to the objective of enabling at
least half of the LDCs to meet the graduation criteria
by 2020.
Progress over the past five years has been slow,
but we are confident that the Antalya midterm review,
inspired by the landmark agreements reached in 2015,
can help us get back on track. The Antalya Political
Declaration (resolution 70/294) is a strong, ambitious
and balanced text. It builds on the major breakthroughs
of Agenda 2030 and thereby provides us with a
robust road map for the coming years. The European
Union looks forward to working with all partners to
operationalize it and thereby advance towards meeting
the objectives of the Istanbul Programme of Action.
The President: On behalf of the General Assembly,
I would like to thank Her Excellency Ms. Bénédicte
Frankinet, Permanent Representative of Belgium
to the United Nations, and His Excellency Mr. JeanFrancis Régis Zinsou, Permanent Representative of
Benin to the United Nations, and the facilitators of the
intergovernmental consultations on all issues relating
to the comprehensive high-level midterm review of the
implementation of the Programme of Action of Istanbul
for a job well done.
6/18

25/07/2016

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution (A/70/L.48/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda item 66
and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item 14 at its
34th and 35th plenary meetings, on 16 October 2015.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.48/Rev.1.
Mr. Tatiyapermpoon (Thailand): On behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to introduce
the draft resolution entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, contained in document
A/70/L.48/Rev.1.
African countries have taken concrete steps
to implement the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) through a socioeconomic
renewal agenda in order to transform its development
agenda. Despite efforts aimed at implementing
NEPAD, Africa is still far from realizing the levels of
support required under the Partnership. Tremendous
challenges faced by the continent, particularly the fight
against poverty, high youth unemployment and rising
inequality, inter alia, still require continued global
cooperation and partnership and an enabling national
and international environment conducive to growth and
development with multi-stakeholder participation.
As we are all committed to achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
without leaving anyone behind, it is vital that we pay
particular attention to the special needs of Africa and
to the importance of implementing commitments made
to African countries. On behalf of the Group of 77
and China, we would like to express our gratitude to
16-23174

25/07/2016

A/70/PV.112

the facilitators, the coordinator and all those partners
involved in the negotiation of the draft text. We hope
that the General Assembly will adopt it by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/70/L.48/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/70/L.48/Rev.1: Georgia and Turkey.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.48/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/70/L.48/Rev.1 was aopted
(resolution 70/295).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina welcomes the adoption of resolution 70/295,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international support”.
We support that strategy aimed at resolving the major
challenges currently facing the African continent,
such as the need for African countries to embark both
individually and collectively on the path to growth and
sustainable development and to avoid their ongoing
marginalization from the process of globalization and
from fully enjoying the benefits of the global economy.
While we recognize that each country faces specific
challenges in achieving sustainable development, we are
also aware that it is necessary to highlight the specific
problems that confront the most vulnerable countries.
For that reason, we showed the greatest flexibility in
the course of the negotiations of this text on and for
Africa, working within the Group of 77 and China with
a strong feeling of cooperation and solidarity with our
African brothers.
We wish to point out, however, that Argentina
firmly believes in the full validity of what our countries
agreed in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)

and the Paris Climate Change Agreement. In that regard,
my country wishes to underscore that in the Paris
Agreement the vulnerability associated with adapting
to climate change falls on the shoulders of developing
countries, without mentioning any group of countries
in particular. There is also no preference accorded to
any particualr group when it comes to the means for
implementing climate-change efforts; instead, the
Paris Agreement reiterates what was established under
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in terms of what developed countries provide to
developing countries.
Finally, we believe that it is necessary to recall that
the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
recognized the importance that development and
the transfer and dissemination of ecologically sound
technology to developing countries should be carried
out in advantageous, favourable and preferential
conditions according to mutually agreed arrangements.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 66 and of agenda item 66
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 175 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/976)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.57)
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.57, entitled
“Agreement concerning the Relationship between the
United Nations and the International Organization for
Migration”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.57 was adopted (resolution
70/296).
The President: I now call on representatives
who wish to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Ms. Bajaña (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to speak with regard to paragraphs
1, 41, 101 and 104 to the annex contained in resolution
70/296, which was submitted under sub-item (a) of

16-231747/18

A/70/PV.112

agenda item 23 (a), and with regard to paragraph 50
of resolution 70/295, concerning the Paris Agreement,
submitted under sub-item (a) of agenda item 66.
Nicaragua expresses reservations with regard to
the content of those paragraphs because it is not, nor
will become, a State party to the Paris Agreement. In
order to achieve consensus and show great flexibility
and full solidarity with the least developed countries
and our African brothers and sisters, our delegation did
not object to the adoption of those resolutions, nor did
it ask for a separate vote on those paragraphs. However,
while we wish to affirm that we do not object to such
a reference in the resolution, that exception should at
no time become a precedent and such language should
not be imposed on us in future draft resolutions,
declarations and documents.
Once again, my delegation reiterates for clarity’s
sake that this is situation is exclusively a reflection of
our solidarity with the least developed countries, our
African brother States and small island States. We
request that this statement be reflected in the official
records under the relevant agenda items.
Ms. Amadeo (United States of America): On 30 June,
165 Governments, including my own, as member States
of the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
came to consensus in Geneva to recommend that IOM
enter into a relationship agreement with the United
Nations. The United States fully supports the draft
relationship agreement and welcomes the adoption of
resolution 70/296, which approved it. We are in an era
of unprecedented human mobility. Migration brings
greater benefits to States of origin and destination.
Migrants bring needed skills to destination countries,
provide billions of dollars in remittances to help those
at home and enrich the cultures of the societies that
they join. Migration also brings challenges, however, as
when it is not a choice but a necessity for those forced
from their homes by conflict, famine, extreme humanrights abuses and serious natural disasters.
The IOM and the United Nations should be
commended for the work that they have done together
over the years to address those migration challenges,
but additional coordination is needed and welcomed.
We, the international community, need to adjust our
structures to meet the new challenges and demands and
improve the global response to vulnerable migrants,
who most need assistance. As the sole international
organization with an exclusive migration mandate, the
8/18

25/07/2016

IOM has 65 years of experience in helping Governments
manage migration. The organization is a flexible and
responsive partner in humanitarian and development
contexts, and a vast repository of knowledge and
expertise in migration issues. The IOM’s status as a
United Nations-related organization will help improve
coordination and avoid duplication of migration-related
activities and services related to migration. By bringing
the IOM into a stronger relationship with the United
Nations, the agreement establishes a solid foundation
for strengthened coordination and collaboration to
help us all better address the international migration
challenges, while protecting the human rights
of migrants.
As a nation of immigrants, the United States
is committed to promoting safe, legal and orderly
migration and looks forward to the IOM and the United
Nations working closer together to further those goals.
Mr. Nayan (Philippines): The Philippines would
like to thank the President for convening this plenary
meeting, which allows Member States to exchange
views on resolution 70/296, concerning the relationship
between the United Nations and the international
Organization for Migration IOM.
The Philippines recognizes migration as a
multidimensional reality, and the IOM’s impact and
contribution in the area of migration as well. The IOM
is committed to the principle that humane and orderly
migration benefits migrants and societies. As such, it
strongly believes in the positive contribution of migrants
and migration and is committed to the realization of the
human rights of migrants. Hence, we fully support the
strengthening of the relationship between the United
Nations and IOM in order to enhance the ability of both
organizations to deliver on their respective mandates,
in the interests of migrants and Member States. In
that regard, the Philippines welcomes the adoption of
a procedural resolution for the purpose of approving
the draft agreement and its signing at the high-level
plenary meeting of the General Assembly to address
large movements of refugees and migrants, to be held
on 19 September.
The President: As we know, the number of people
on the move, including those who are fleeing conflict
and persecution, is unprecedentedly high. Through
the World Humanitarian Summit last May and the
high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
on 19 September on large movements of refugees and
16-23174

25/07/2016

migrants, the international community is working to
strengthen the global response and to address both
immediate and long-term challenges associated with
this situation. As the global lead organization on
migration, the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) plays an important role in the protecting the
rights of migrants and assisting displaced people and
migration-affected communities, including in the areas
of resettlement and return.
In that context, the United Nations and IOM have
a strong mutual interest in strengthening international
relationships during these difficult times, and the
General Assembly, by its resolution 70/263, of 27 April
2016, recognized this need and invited the SecretaryGeneral to take steps to conclude an agreement to that
end between the two organizations. I therefore take
this opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General
and the Director-General of IOM on the agreement
that has just been approved by the General Assembly.
It is an example of the kind of concrete action that is
needed to face the current crisis, and as mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s note, the agreement will be
signed at the meeting of the Assembly to be held on
19 September 2016.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 175?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/70/L.58)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/70/L.58, entitled
“Scope, modalities, format and organization of the highlevel meeting on antimicrobial resistance convened by
the President of the General Assembly”. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.58 was adopted (resolution
70/297).
The President: On behalf of the General Assembly,
I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Juan José
Gómez Camacho, Permanent Representative of
Mexico to the United Nations and Co-Facilitator of the
consultations on the draft modalities resolution for the
high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance, for a
job very well done.

A/70/PV.112

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 125?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124
Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
Draft resolution (A/70/L.59)
The President: The report of the Secretary-General
under agenda item 124 has been circulated in document
A/70/917.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.59.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): It gives me immense
pleasure to introduce, on behalf of the sponsors,
the draft resolution entitled “Interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union”, contained in document
A/70/L.59.
Bangladesh takes pride in presenting this text. We
are pleased that it has been receiving the overwhelming
support of Member States and that it has been adopted
every time by consensus.
The agenda of interaction between the United
Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union (IPU) was established by resolution 65/123 as a
stand-alone agenda item, in recognition of the unique
role of parliaments as legislative and oversight bodies.
The current President of the IPU, Mr. Saber Hossain
Chowdhury, is a distinguished parliamentarian of
Bangladesh. That is why Bangladesh has taken the
lead role in introducing this year’s resolution at the
United Nations.
The father of the nation of Bangladesh,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, presented the
Constitution of Bangladesh in 1972 immediately after
our independence, which guarantees the democracy of
our country. In line with its constitutional commitment,
Bangladesh remains a strong advocate for promoting
and protecting democracy and democratic values and
principles not only at the national level but also at the
international level. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s
commitment to democracy is embedded in her ardent
belief that “only democracy and freedom can empower

16-231749/18

A/70/PV.112

people and ensure progress, development and social
justice”.
In Bangladesh, the National Parliament represents
the solemn expression of the will of our people. Nothing
that the United Nations decides can be implemented
at the country level unless the Parliament and the
parliamentarians are on board. The adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1),
of course, calls for a stronger engagement between
the United Nations and the national parliaments,
particularly through the IPU. There are important
direct references to the oversight and legislative role
of parliaments in Agenda 2030, which gives the United
Nations and its Member States a clear mandate to work
more closely with parliaments and parliamentarians.
This agenda item refers, of course, not only to
national parliaments but also to the IPU. The IPU is the
oldest multilateral organization, founded in 1889, with
a membership of 170 parliaments and a constellation of
11 associate members.
We would like to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (A/70/917), which urges greater
cooperation between the United Nations and the
IPU. The United Nations works with parliaments and
parliamentarians but can do so even more effectively
by coordinating its work in-house and through closer
cooperation with the IPU. The IPU is an observer at
the United Nations and is in a unique position to ensure
greater success in outcomes for “we the peoples” and
for the most efficient use of Member States’ resources.
We also welcome the new cooperation agreement
between the United Nations and the IPU, which builds
on an existing one dated 1996.
We thank the Member States and their delegations
for their active participation in the intense negotiation
process this year. The draft provides for specific modes
of interaction such as including parliamentarians in
national delegations to United Nations conferences,
holding a joint parliamentary hearing every year,
getting United Nations country teams and parliaments
to work more closely together, and so on.
In the draft resolution, the role of the IPU and
parliaments in supporting the implementation of the
2030 Agenda is fully recognized. The draft welcomes
the IPU contribution to the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development; recognizes
the tremendous work of the IPU on climate change,
disaster risk and development finance; takes stock of
10/18

25/07/2016

new areas of cooperation between the United Nations
and the IPU, such as in the field of disarmament;
acknowledges the association of the entire United
Nations development system, and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in particular, with
the IPU. It also refers to the seminal work of the IPU
and UNDP in developing a set of Common Principles
for Support to Parliaments; it encourages the United
Nations system to help facilitate greater South-South
and triangular cooperation; and last but not least, it calls
for Governments to facilitate the orderly, safe, regular
and responsible migration and mobility of people,
including through the implementation of planned and
well-managed migration policies.
The draft resolution every year receives the support
of a large number of Member States from all regions of
the world. I am pleased to mention that this year around
70 countries are sponsoring this important draft. We
express our sincere thanks and commendations to all
the sponsors for their support and commitment and also
to the general membership for its continued support.
I hope that, as in past years, we will be able to adopt
draft resolution A/70/L.59 by consensus.
Mr. Houngbedji (Benin) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for having convened this meeting
on interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, an issue
of great importance for the effectiveness of the efforts
of the international community. I should like also to
express my great appreciation to the Secretary-General
for having devoted a particularly important report
(A/70/917) to the issue, which is extremely useful in
shedding light on the extent of this cooperation.
I welcome the importance attached to the interaction
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which enables us to
mobilize a common commitment to strengthening the
rule of law, democracy and development; allows us
to work for the effectiveness of legislative power in
Member States; and, in particular, makes it possible
to strengthen their contribution to global governance.
Its primary aim is to promote peace, stability and
optimal conditions for the sustainable development of
our societies.
From that standpoint, I wish to welcome the start
in 2016 of the implementation of the major programmes
adopted by the United Nations in 2015. The international
16-23174

25/07/2016

community is therefore well equipped to retake control
of the development of the planet and of humankind
and to decisively address the challenges that have
been identified.
In so doing, it is important to mobilize all forces
and all contributions so as to ensure effective action
with a view to attaining the normative goals that we
have set ourselves. The Sustainable Development Goals
are the most elaborate and consensual reflection of this.
In particular, the National Assembly of Benin
welcomes the numerous initiatives undertaken by the
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to
strengthen the capacity of national parliaments to tackle
the issue of the promotion and enhancement of the role
of women in our societies and to protect them through
appropriate legislation. Benin participates in these
efforts and, through me, urges their intensification.
Along the same lines, the importance attached
to issues concerning the promotion of youth makes
it a topic of common interest in the context of the
interaction of parliaments with the United Nations. As
testament to that, I need only cite the resolution calling
for the participation of young people in the political
process, adopted at the Assemblée parlementaire de
la francophonie at its forty-second session held in
Antananarivo from 8 to 12 July. The resolution takes its
lead from the Francophone Youth Strategy 2015-2022,
the subject of which is women and youth as actors for
peace and development. The Strategy was adopted by
the Heads of State and Government of La Francophonie
at the Dakar summit in 2014. It forms part of the United
Nations World Programme of Action for Youth to the
Year 2000 and Beyond and the numerous activities
undertaken by the Organization and its Member States
to implement the Programme.
The remobilization of young people is essential
in response to the real risks to which aimless and
marginalized youth are exposed. Those risks include
the radicalization and seduction of young people by
the currents of violent religious extremism, which
facilitate their recruitment by terrorist organizations
whose misdeeds we know and deplore. Accordingly, the
National Assembly of Benin intends to organize, with
the support of friendly parliaments, an inter-African
parliamentary conference for a strengthened and
concerted effort on the issue of harmonizing counterterrorism legislation in African countries. That
initiative is essential, given the considerable rise of

A/70/PV.112

terrorism threat level in our countries. It is also justified
by the differing levels of performance among African
States, in particular with regard to integrating into
our domestic legal system international instruments
aimed at fighting terrorism and transnational crime to
prevent terrorism.
Beyond those measures, the interaction between the
Inter-Parliamentary Union and the United Nations must
contribute to honouring the commitment to leaving no
one behind, made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development Program (resolution 70/1). Situations that
disproportionately affect the most vulnerable deserve
special attention. Such cases include, among others,
youth unemployment, the depletion of vital resources
owing to the adverse effects of climate change, upheavals
in the social fabric, the rising number of crises and the
persistence of conflicts leading to mass migration.
Those are important areas for interaction between
the United Nations, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union. It is desirable that draft
resolution A/70/L.59 on that interaction clearly explain
the progress that has been achieved in those areas.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General (A/70/917) on
the interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
We appreciate the efforts undertaken by Mr. Saber H.
Chowdhury, President of the IPU, and the Mission of
Bangladesh, in submitting draft resolution A/70/L.59,
entitled “Interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union”, to the General Assembly at its seventieth
session. I am delighted that my country could participate
in this meeting as one of the sponsors of that significant
draft resolution.
The report of the Secretary-General comprehensively
presents the significance of deepening and broadening
the interaction and partnership between the United
Nations, national parliaments and the IPU in working
towards to the most efficient implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals (resolution
70/1). In that regard, I welcome and reiterate our support
for the outcomes of the successive World Conferences
of Speakers of Parliament held in 2000, 2005, 2010
and 2015. Myanmar views the national parliaments as
pivotal institutions of national legal frameworks. They
contribute greatly to the aspirations of the people by
delivering democracy and good governance.

16-2317411/18

A/70/PV.112

In the light of that, Myanmar believes that
strengthening the quality and resources of national
parliaments is vital. We recognize the IPU’s worldwide
initiatives in strengthening the capacities of national
parliaments, in collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). We are pleased to
note that the UNDP’s capacity enhancement supports
one in three parliaments through some 70 current
programmes. Thus, the UNDP’s parliamentary
strengthening programme is evidently an important
part of its assistance in achieving inclusive political
processes. It benefits many countries in building,
promoting and maintaining democracy and good
governance through capacity-building and technical
assistance support for elections, constitutional
processes, civic engagement and leadership quality
training. It also focuses on sustainable development
and human rights issues, including climate change,
gender equality, HIV/AIDS and combating corruption.
The National Parliament of Myanmar, the
Pyidaungsu Hluttaw, has aligned its functions in
accordance with the IPU strategy of better parliaments,
stronger democracies. With the support of the IPU,
UNDP and donor countries, the capacity-building of
the members and staff of the Myanmar Parliament
has been consistently organized. The Parliament has
regularly observed the International Day of Democracy
since its inception in Myanmar in 2011 in order to raise
the awareness of the people.
I would like to reaffirm my country’s enthusiasm in
engaging with the international community, enhancing
the exchange of information and sharing of good
practices. As such, I am pleased to inform representatives
that the thirty-seventh General Assembly of the
Inter-Parliamentary Assembly of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) will be held in Nay
Pyi Taw, Myanmar, from 29 September to 3 October,
on the theme of a vibrant ASEAN Inter-Parlementary
Assembly for a progressive ASEAN Community.
By supporting previous resolutions inviting the IPU
to participate as an observer in the work of the General
Assembly, and, more importantly, those endorsing a
more systematic engagement with the IPU, Myanmar
is confident that the partnership between the United
Nations, IPU and national parliaments will continue
to be strengthened. Accordingly, the impact of agenda
item 124 will continue to benefit the work of national
parliaments. On that note, I wish to reaffirm Myanmar’s
support for the draft resolution on this agenda item.
12/18

25/07/2016

Mr. Salimi (Morocco) (spoke in French): We
welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
(A/70/917), which highlights the long and rich tradition of
interaction and partnership between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Those links of cooperation among parliaments — the
solemn incarnation of democracy within the political
system — and the United Nations system, which seeks
to disseminate democratic values, such as human
rights and good governance throughout the world, are
perfectly natural. The cooperation between parliaments
and the United Nations allows us to understand the
activities of the latter in different and vital areas of
society, such as human rights, public health, gender
equality and sustainable development. But it also
provides us all with the possibility to make our voices
heard in decision-making processes at the national,
regional and global levels.
In another respect, and as spokesman for the
populations that they represent, the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and other parliamentary organizations have
helped the United Nations to take account of their
views, as expressed through their parliaments as
intermediaries. I cite as examples the consultations
on the post-2015 development agenda and the work
of bodies such as the Human Rights Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the Commission on the
Status of Women and the World Health Organization.
Besides reporting back to their people on the work
of the United Nations in various areas, parliaments
themselves adopt and implement United Nations
programmes and strategies and integrate them into
their national Government and peoples. Parliaments’
role in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) is one of the best examples
of that process. By adopting and modifying laws and
allocating budgets in order to reach the Agenda’s stated
objectives, parliaments verify that the executive branch
has signed on to the decision and promote regional and
international cooperation for its implementation.
The importance of the decisive role of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, one of the world’s most
venerable multilateral organizations, in promoting
the commitment of parliaments to the major projects
and activities of the United Nations is growing day
by day. With its 164 member national parliaments,
the Inter-Parliamentary Union works tirelessly to
facilitate the participation of parliamentarians in the
main United Nations mechanisms, particularly through
16-23174

25/07/2016

their joint annual hearings. In that connection, we fully
endorse the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to promote regular interaction between the senior
officials of both organizations with a view to enhancing
the coherence of their activities.
We also welcome the signing on Thursday of a new
cooperation agreement between the United Nations and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which seeks to further
strengthen the ties between the two organizations
through the ongoing consideration of new avenues
for cooperation, such as the Sustainable Development
Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
The Kingdom of Morocco, a constitutional
monarchy, shares the same values and ideals as the
Inter-Parliamentary Union in undertaking innovative
and ongoing efforts to entrench the universal values
of freedom, human rights and peace and to promote
the culture of dialogue, openness and tolerance among
civilizations and peoples. The cooperation between
Morocco and the Inter-Parliamentary Union in ensuring
that their ideals prevail is long-standing and will only
increase with the passage of time.
The substantive draft resolution A/70/L.59 before
us today is a testament to the mutually beneficial
partnership between the United Nations and national
parliaments and to the flourishing relationship between
the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
We are proud to have co-sponsored the draft resolution
and encourage all Member State to join in the consensus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): The delegation of Cyprus
welcomes the opportunity to offer some brief remarks on
this important agenda item. I would also like to convey
Cyprus’ appreciation for the Secretary-General’s
report (A/70/917), which represents a comprehensive
review of the specific actions and political interaction
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
Cyprus resolutely supports enhancing this
interaction. In an international system based on the
principles of the rule of law and democratic governance,
stronger parliamentary participation on the global scale
is needed so as to identify possible solutions to global
problems and to work on implementing those solutions
at the national level. Based on our own experience, we
can testify that cooperation between the United Nations,
the IPU and national parliaments also contributes to
improving the role of the latter in promoting the rule

A/70/PV.112

of law and bringing national legislation in line with
international commitments.
Cyprus has co-sponsored draft resolution A/70/L.59
as a sign of its recognition of the strong relations
between the United Nations, national parliaments and
the IPU. We hope that it will be adopted by consensus
and that it will make a concrete contribution to further
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the IPU.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like to express
our appreciation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
for its efforts to strengthen cooperation with the United
Nations. We thank the delegation of Bangladesh for
introducing and facilitating draft resolution A/70/L.59,
entitled “Interaction between the United Nations,
national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”,
which Viet Nam co-sponsors and strongly supports.
The IPU was created in 1889 in a quest for peace
and democracy. Since then, the organization has played
an increasingly important role in the international
arena, provided a platform for regular interaction
between parliamentarians and United Nations, and
helped shape parliamentary input to major United
Nations processes, making active contributions to the
maintenance of peace, stability, security, development
and the promotion of human rights.
As we have embarked on the implementation
of the transformative 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), Viet Nam joins
other countries in encouraging the continued active
involvement of the IPU and national parliaments in
mobilizing parliamentary action in support of the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
We wish to see strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and the IPU in various fields, in
particular peace and security, economic and social
development, financing for development, disaster risk
reduction, climate change, international law, human
rights, democracy, good governance and dialogue
among civilizations.
Viet Nam became a member of IPU in 1979. As
an active, constructive and responsible member of the
IPU for nearly four decades, the National Assembly
of Viet Nam has been working closely with the IPU to
fulfil the Union’s aspirations, principles and objectives,
and has continuously expanded friendly relations with
parliaments and peoples around the world. Viet Nam
was very proud to successfully host the 132nd IPU

16-2317413/18

A/70/PV.112

General Assembly in Hanoi in March 2015, under
the theme “Parliament and the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals beyond 2015”.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Viet Nam’s
commitment to promoting closer cooperation among
national parliaments and bolstering interaction between
the United Nations and the IPU with a view to achieving
our common global objectives and building the future
we want.
Mr. León Ramírez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We are entirely convinced that the terms of the
agreement with which we are familiar and which was
the product of negotiations are crucial in guiding the
important relationship between the United Nations and
the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). That is because
we understand that as the world evolves, political
relationships become increasingly complex.
I am among those who believe that the relationship
between the United Nations and the IPU is important
not only from a declarative point of view, but also
in everything linked to the implementation of the
declarations we issue at the United Nations, as well
as the agreements of the IPU. Why do I say so? I say
so because, among the many subjects we address, that
which encourages me a great deal is the question of
climate change. How can we ensure that progress in
that area? Even more to the point, when will the day
come when we can say that these norms are mandatory?
We know it is a difficult subject, but I believe that
humankind’s progress obliges us to take an approach
along those lines. That is why, on behalf of the
delegation of Chile and of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States, which I have honour of presiding
over in the IPU, we welcome this agreement and think it
will be very important for the future of the relationship
between the IPU and the United Nations.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 57/32 of 19 November 2002, I call
on Mr. Saber Chowdhury, President of the Council of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mr. Chowdhury (Inter-Parliamentary Union): I am
pleased that we have fellow parliamentarians among us.
It is a distinct honour and pleasure for me, as President
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), the world’s
organization of national parliaments, to address the
General Assembly today on the very important agenda
14/18

25/07/2016

item of interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
At the outset, let me pay tribute to the President
of the General Assembly, Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, a
distinguished parliamentarian and former Speaker
of the Danish Parliament, for his vision, his energy,
his steadfast support and his passion for stronger
engagement between the United Nations and the
global parliamentary community. I should also
add — and I think it is not just a coincidence — that
there are two men who have presided over the two most
important agreements at the United Nations over the
past years — the Millennium Declaration of 2000,
which for the first time formally acknowledged the
need for cooperation between the United Nations and
parliaments through the IPU, and more recently, the new
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1) adopted in 2015. I refer to Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab
of Namibia, who was a Foreign Minister, a former
Speaker and a former President of the IPU, and former
President of the General Assembly, and Mr. Lykketoft
of Denmark. They are prominent parliamentarians and
very active IPU members.
I am also delighted that we have among us, as I
acknowledged at the beginning, speakers and honourable
members of parliament who have in fact been here as
members of the official delegations of their countries.
This is a sight that we encourage and that we would like
to see more of in the future, because I think that this is
really what the cooperation is all about — bringing a
parliamentary component and dimension to the work of
the United Nations.
The Assembly has before it the report of the
Secretary-General (A/70/917), which provides an
excellent overview of the comprehensive engagement
and the growing and evolving relationship between
the United Nations system and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, as well as between the United Nations and
national parliaments — including through various
regional and other parliamentary organizations, in a
wide variety of areas and fields ranging from peace
and security, to democracy and human rights, to
climate change, disaster risk reduction and sustainable
development. I am sure members will join me in
acknowledging the richness of this report, which attests
to the breadth and scope of our growing cooperation
and relationship.
16-23174

25/07/2016

The Assembly does not need me to tell it that
the world today is faced with multiple challenges,
unprecedented in their complexity and gravity. In
many parts of the world, the rule of law and our basic
rights and fundamental freedoms are under assault.
Inequality and social injustice are on the rise. In the
wake of massive humanitarian and political crises and
the difficulties in managing the waves of migration
that follow, populism and xenophobia are once again
rearing their ugly heads.
In the face of all this, the United Nations stands
as the critical cornerstone of multilateralism, solidarity
and cooperation among all nations. The IPU shares
the objectives of the United Nations. It brings the
perspective of parliamentarians as the direct voices
of “we the peoples” and thereby complements and
brings added value to the work of the United Nations.
We are hence deeply committed to working with
parliaments and parliamentarians around the world to
promote peace and security, better understanding and
cooperation, and a world free from want and free from
fear for all citizens.
Much has transpired since the last debate on this
General Assembly agenda item two years ago (see
A/68/PV.86). The year 2015 brought major international
processes promoted and initiated at the United Nations
and those include the Sustainable Development Goals,
the Sendai Declaration on disaster risk reduction
and the historic agreement on climate change agreed
in Paris. Throughout the process leading up to these
decisions, the IPU has been working to raise awareness
and engage the global parliamentary community,
helping to mobilize parliamentary action and support in
shaping and following up on these major international
commitments. We must remember that commitments
are only as good as the extent to which they are
implemented and that is where we, as parliamentarians,
and the global parliamentary community bring huge
value.
When it comes to the three United Nations
processes, in addition to trying to encourage national
ownership, we are also trying to make parliaments
see the connection and connect the dots between the
Sustainable Development Goals, disaster risk reduction
and climate change. They mutually reinforce each other
and we have to see them as part of one holistic agenda.
We must also remember that the agreements tell us
where we want to be in 15 years time and they are
very aspirational — they have to be — but they do not

A/70/PV.112

actually tell us how we get there. Therefore, devising
our own national plans in trying to find out how we
move from A to B becomes of critical importance. That
is something that the countries themselves, in their
national parliaments, will have to try to address.
At the parliamentary level, we also talk about the
five Ps. I know that in the cooperation agreement that
has just been signed between the IPU and the SecretaryGeneral, we talk about the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development transforming our world. That is essential
because what brings the IPU and the United Nations
together is a critical central focus on people and their
welfare. So, the centrality of people is something that
brings us together. We are natural partners.
When we talk about the interest of the people,
that is where the other four Ps come in. We talk about
prosperity, which is the second P. To ensure prosperity,
we have to make sure there is peace. Peace is not
simply the absence of war. Peace is an environment that
allows us to realize our potential as human beings. It
is about social justice. It is about dignity. That is the
third P — peace. The first three Ps are, in short, people,
prosperity” and peace. Then, of course, we come to
living within the planetary boundaries. If our current
patterns of consumption continue, we are going to
require at least three planets Earth to meet our needs.
We therefore are going to have live within the bounds
of what the planet can provide. That is the fourth P.
The final P, which is really what this agenda item is all
about, is about partnerships — strategic, collaborative,
across-the-system partnerships, which is the piece
where we, as parliaments and the IPU, seek to cooperate
with the United Nations system. These are the five Ps
that bring us together.
In our own National Assemblies, we have examined
the main expectations that parliaments have for the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as
the critical modalities of turning words into action.
Time and again, our members have underscored the
need for democratic governance as an essential enabler
of sustainable development and as a goal in itself.
When we go back to the 2000 Millennium Declaration,
governance was also mentioned, but it was more as
an aspiration and did not form part of the Millennium
Development Goals per se; it was just part of the
political declaration. This time around, the difference
is that, in Goal 16, we actually have a governance Goal.
So governance is an enabler; it is also an end in itself.

16-2317415/18

A/70/PV.112

This is our entry point into the whole development
agenda. It was the focus of the Speakers of Parliament
Conference, which was held here in this very Hall, when
Speakers from around the world came, debated and
gave their input regarding the United Nations system.
The Declaration of the World Conference, the fourth
held so far, submitted as a parliamentary contribution
to the global talks on the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) , stressed the awareness of and the need
for strong linkages between democracy, peace and
sustainable development in the service of the people.
As we engage with parliaments, we are trying to
help them become fit for purpose. This is also a debate
within the United Nations — how to make the United
Nations and its system fit for purpose. We are having
a similar debate within the parliamentary community,
as to how we make ourselves fit for purpose. We are
looking at Goal 16 — peace, justice, rule of law and
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels — as
the natural entry point for us.
We have been encouraging parliaments around the
world to look at the SDGs and take ownership for them
and try to come up with their own responses. Already,
we have arranged a number of regional seminars,
starting with the one in Dhaka, where South Asian
Speakers got together to look at tobacco control under
the rubric of “Health for all”. In April, we held a regional
seminar in Bucharest for Central and Eastern Europe,
which tackled education for sustainable development.
Other regional seminars are in the pipeline. We are
expecting to hold one in the second half of the year
in Latin America through Parlatino and the Latin
American Parliament in Panama and another in Africa
in cooperation with the Parliament of Uganda. We also
expect that the second Global Parliamentary Report,
produced jointly with the United Nations Development
Programme and expected to be issued towards the
end of this year, will provide valuable insight on
accountability and oversight, in particular as these
relate critically to the implementation of the SDGs.
We have also expanded our work with parliaments
to help bridge legislative gaps in meeting international
commitments in a variety of areas — human rights,
including a greater parliamentary involvement in the
Universal Periodic Review conducted by the United
Nations Human Rights Council, the elimination of
discrimination against women, child and maternal
health, discriminatory legislation as it relates to HIVAIDS, climate change — including through the adoption
16/18

25/07/2016

of the Parliamentary Action Plan in support of the Paris
Agreement — as well as in efforts to combat terrorism
and violent extremism, which is unfortunately the sad
reality of today.
Just a few weeks ago, following up on our
work with parliaments in Africa to enhance
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004), parliamentarians for the first time joined and
contributed here in New York to the United Nations
comprehensive review of international efforts to counter
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including into the hands of non-State actors. For many
years, the IPU has been supporting international
efforts to advance nuclear disarmament. We have
produced tools for parliamentarians, adopted robust
political resolutions and are now closely following and
supporting the work of the United Nations Open-ended
working group on nuclear disarmament.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the IPU has grown and evolved considerably over the
past 20 years, and I am pleased to note and report
to the General Assembly that on 21 July, just a few
days ago, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and IPU
Secretary General Martin Chungong signed a new
and revised cooperation agreement between our two
organizations. That agreement takes stock of the work
and progress that have taken place since 1996, when the
initial agreement was concluded. The agreement places
the institutional relationship on a stronger footing
and sets the course for even closer cooperation in the
years ahead. Needless to say, I welcome this positive
development in our relationship.
I also very much welcome draft resolution A/70/L.59,
under consideration by the General Assembly today.
It expresses strong support for interaction among the
United Nations, national parliaments and the IPU, and
it identifies key areas of joint work and cooperation
ahead. I am confident that it will provide a valuable
framework for taking our strategic partnership even
further for the good of our global community and the
common good.
We have found in Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
an outstanding leader and a strong supporter of
robust engagement with parliaments and the global
parliamentary community. On behalf of the IPU, I wish
to record our sincere thanks, appreciation and gratitude
to him for his inspiring leadership.
16-23174

25/07/2016

I would also like to thank the Permanent Mission
of my own country, Bangladesh, for guiding the
consultations among States Members of the United
Nations on the draft resolution. Its staff has done a
sterling job, and I wish to compliment and commend
them for it. I further wish to thank each and every one of
the many official sponsors of the draft resolution — and
I know we would have had a lot more if we had the
time to do reach them. I also wish to thank the staff
members who have worked tirelessly and diligently
behind the scenes, both at the United Nations and the
IPU, as well as colleagues from around the world, and
everyone else who, in his or her own way — small or
large — has tried to make a difference for the good of us
all. I sincerely hope that at the end of today’s debate, all
delegations will support — and support strongly — the
draft resolution and thus give us a renewed mandate to
pursue our cooperation for the common good, helping
to shape a better world for the people that we are
privileged to serve and represent.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/70/L.59.
One representative has asked to speak in
explanation of position before adoption. I remind him
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude to the delegation of Bangladesh for its efforts
in preparing draft resolution A/70/L.59.
The development of cooperation among the United
Nations, national parliaments and one of the oldest
organizations of its kind, the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU), can enrich all the participants in this process
and promote the progress of the ideas of peace and
dialogue between States, better understanding and the
importance of strengthening parliamentary institutions.
In paragraph 6 of the draft resolution to be
adopted today, there is a reference to the convening
last year of the Fourth World Conference of Speakers
of Parliament in New York. Such meetings are among
the most effective formats for cooperation. As noted in
the document, the Fourth World Conference provided
a high-level parliamentary contribution to the United
Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda. Unfortunately, the Russian
delegation was deprived of an opportunity to participate
in this Conference as it was unjustifiably impeded from
doing so by the host country. This was far from the

A/70/PV.112

first occurrence of refusing access of a delegation to
international events taking place at the United Nations
in New York.
Mr. Zinsou, (Benin), Vice-President, took the Chair.
In our view, this practice is a manifestation of a
selective and discriminatory approach, and as such
it needs to be addressed. During the course of the
negotiations on the draft resolution, we proposed to
complement the text with an expression of regret about
the inability of some representatives to be granted access
to participate in the conference. However, as a result
of the position of one delegation, our amendment was
not included in the final text. Nonetheless, mindful of
the importance of this draft resolution in strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, we
decided to join the consensus that traditionally prevails
on the discussion of this issue at the General Assembly.
In conclusion, we would like to express our hope
that, in the future, Member State delegations will enjoy
unimpeded access on a non-discriminatory basis to
participate in similar events held at the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.59, entitled
“Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolutionm, in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/70/L.59, the following countries have
also become co-sponsors of the draft resolution:
Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Benin, the Central
African Republic, Chad, China, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Egypt, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Greece,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Japan, Latvia,
Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico,
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Switzerland,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Viet Nam and Zambia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.59?
Draft resolution A/70/L.59 was adopted (resolution
70/298).

16-2317417/18

A/70/PV.112

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 124?

18/18

25/07/2016

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at noon.

16-23174
