A/68/696–S/2014/5

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
6 January 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda items 53, 124 and 132

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

Civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

Summary
Building resilient national institutions and capacities in the aftermath of
conflict is critical to the consolidation of peace. The present report, the last standalone report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict, addresses issues raised
by Member States, highlights results achieved in the past two years, underlines
lessons learned, and identifies remaining challenges and a way forward.
In proposing future directions, the present report emphasizes the delivery of
institution-building results in the field through a more systematic and coherent
response on the part of the United Nations that is strongly connected to national
priorities and to other international partners. In order to provide clear accountability,
this work will be incorporated within existing structures and business processes,
ending the work of the stand-alone team by June 2014, but maintaining the
momentum established over the past two years. Efforts will focus on three areas
where there is both a demonstrated potential to deliver results and a need to
consolidate and strengthen support: (a) improvement of support to institutionbuilding grounded in national ownership; (b) broadening and deepening the pool of
civilian expertise for peacebuilding; and (c) enhancing regional, South-South and
triangular cooperation.

14-20109 (E) 170114

*1420109*

A/68/696
S/2014/5

Improvement of the impact of institution-building cannot come at the expense
of the United Nations success in providing basic security and supporting political
settlements through peacekeeping operations or special political missions. Those
aspects are complementary: military and troop deployments and a stable political
situation can provide the breathing space needed to develop national institutions, and
successful institution-building consolidates gains in peace and security. We have
learned the hard way that without sustainable national institutions, it will take longer
for national authorities to assume their rightful role in the aftermath of conflict and
crisis.
The present report comes at a time when the United Nations is supporting
nationally owned institution-building in increasingly complex situations. These
include supporting the recent transitions in Libya, Mali, Somalia and Yemen;
consolidating progress in Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Iraq, Liberia and South Sudan, as well as other countries on the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The need for strengthened support to institutionbuilding will be front and centre in the coming years in those situations and others: it
is therefore timely to take stock of lessons learned and launch a concerted effort to
strengthen their application.

2/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

I. Importance of institution-building in the aftermath
of conflict
1.
My report of 11 June 2009 on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (A/63/881-S/2009/304) called for an analysis of how the United Nations
could better support national institution-building in the aftermath of conflict. In the
report on the independent review of civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict,
conducted by my Senior Advisory Group (see A/65/747-S/2011/85), a number of
recommendations and challenges were put forward, including for the United
Nations. Building on that vision, my report of 19 August 2011 on civilian capacities
in the aftermath of conflict (A/66/311-S/2011/527) identified concrete priority
actions.
2.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 66/255, affirmed the fundamental
principle of national ownership, stressed the importance of supporting national
civilian capacity development and institution-building, encouraged the United
Nations to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian expertise for peacebuilding, and
requested that I draw on all relevant expertise in the development of initiatives to
support national capacities and provide an update to the Assembly in 2012. In
response to that update (see A/67/312-S/2012/645), intergovernmental and expert
bodies of the General Assembly raised a number of issues on which they sought
clarification and additional information.
3.
In the report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/312S/2012/645), it was noted that there could be no sustained recovery from conflict
without nationally owned transformation of institutions that provide citizens with
political representation, justice, security, and economic opportunities. The report of
8 October 2012 on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/499-S/2012/746)
highlighted that institutions are critical to prevent relapse into violent conflict. A
considerable body of research has shown that countries with strong, accountable and
inclusive institutions are 30 to 45 per cent less likely to fall into large-scale
conflict. 1
4.
The General Assembly, in its resolution 67/266, the Security Council, in its
resolution 2086 (2013) and Presidential Statement of 21 January 2011
(S/PRST/2011/2), and the Peacebuilding Commission have all recognized the
criticality of national ownership in peacebuilding, the importance of enabling global
capacities to support national institutions and the need for strengthened cooperation
and coordination within the United Nations activities on peacebuilding.
5.
In its resolution 66/255, the General Assembly affirmed the fundamental
principle of national ownership and stressed the importance of supporting national
civilian capacity development and institution-building, including through
peacekeeping operations in accordance with their mandates. The efforts described in
the present report respond to the requests contained in the above resolution.
6.
In Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti,
Iraq, Libya, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen, Member States have mandated
the United Nations to support national institutions by, for example: building national
capacity to provide security and rule of law; supporting inclusive political
processes; assisting national authorities with the extension of State authority in
__________________
1 World Bank, World Development Report 2011 (Washington, D.C.).

14-20109

3/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

insecure areas; and helping to mobilize resources for national institution-building.
In each of those cases, critical outcomes for peace and security are contingent on the
emergence or strengthening of national institutions, and broader recovery and
development will in turn be affected by successful peacebuilding and institutionbuilding.
7.
Where the United Nations presence includes a peacekeeping operation or
special political mission, support to institution-building requires a partnership
among Governments, missions and the agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations, as well as regional organizations and other international and local
actors. The present report summarizes efforts undertaken and lessons learned in such
settings over the past two years.
8.
The first section of the present report highlights the key results achieved in the
past two years. The latter sections present lessons learned and plans to: (a) improve
support to institution-building, grounded on national ownership; (b) broaden and
deepen the pool of civilian expertise available for peacebuilding; and (c) enhance
regional, South-South and triangular cooperation.

II. Results
9.
The programme of work outlined in previous reports on civilian capacities in
the aftermath of conflict (see A/66/311-S/2011/527 and A/67/312-S/2012/645)
included piloting efforts aimed at: supporting national ownership at the country
level; strengthening institutional arrangements and expertise as well as partnerships
at Headquarters; and introducing measures to increase the nimbleness of the
supporting systems to deploy civilian capacities. There has been progress on many
fronts, including in the field, through better institutional arrangements for internal
coherence and through policy frameworks and tools that enable the provision of
more effective support to institution-building.
10. Credit for building national institutions rests with the countries and their
people, who have successfully overcome the legacy of conflict. The United Nations
has provided support to a number of countries over the past two years, including
Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Timor-Leste, which have seen
significant improvements in the performance of national institutions. United Nations
support has played an influential role in some sectors, including in police, justice
and corrections, local and central government, electoral and parliamentary
institutions, and support to civil society.
11. In order to improve United Nations support, previous reports on civilian
capacities laid out actions to strengthen institutional arrangements and expertise
across the five core gap areas (inclusive political processes, basic safety and
security, justice, core government functionality, and economic revitalization).
Progress has been particularly strong in the police, justice and corrections areas (see
box 1), and significant actions are under way in the areas of inclusive political
processes and core government functionality. Less has been achieved in the area of
economic revitalization. The latter will be taken forward through future partnership
work, as described in section V of the present report.

4/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

Box 1
Strengthened institutional arrangements in core peacebuilding areas
The most significant area of progress has been the designation of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) as the global focal point for police,
justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other
crisis situations. The global focal point has demonstrated its ability to
strengthen and combine the work of missions with the longer-term efforts
of United Nations country teams in the area of rule of law. Specifically,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP, through the
global focal point arrangement, have delivered:
• 12 joint field visits, which resulted in joint planning and
partnerships, and the provision of advice on programme structures
and funding streams in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti,
Liberia, Libya, Sierra Leone, Somalia and South Sudan
• Joint country support plans for Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti and Libya
• Joint planning processes for United Nations support in the Central
African Republic, Mali and Somalia
• Deployments of specialized expertise to Côte d’Ivoire and Libya,
with support from the UNDP Experts Roster for Rapid Response
• Co-location of UNDP, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) at United Nations Headquarters in New
York, coupled with seconded expertise provided by the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) to ensure gender mainstreaming in the work
of the global focal point
• Joint development of a resource note on sector planning for police,
justice and corrections in post-crisis and transition situations
In addition to the global focal point, the United Nations has
strengthened internal cooperation in the areas of provision of
constitutional assistance and support to inclusive political processes.
At the country level, United Nations presences have been active in
providing technical support to governments and civil society. To support
those efforts, the Department of Political Affairs and UNDP have
undertaken joint assessment missions to Libya, Sierra Leone and
Somalia, and have worked closely with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in Liberia and elsewhere. An internal coordination structure —
bringing together the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, OHCHR, the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), UNDP and UN-Women — meets regularly to coordinate
efforts and is undertaking a number of joint initiatives to improve
country support and share knowledge and lessons learned.
In order to improve delivery and partnerships in the area of core
government functionality, I endorsed the review of lessons learned in

14-20109

5/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

United Nations support to core government functions in the immediate
aftermath of conflict and called on UNDP to support the implementation
of its recommendations. The United Nations Working Group on Public
Administration is transitioning into a robust internal coordination
structure, and is led by UNDP and includes, among others, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Peacebuilding Support
Office, the United Nations Capital Development Fund, UNICEF and
UN-Women. This structure has developed a new partnership supported
by the United Nations-World Bank Partnership Trust Fund to enable joint
work between the United Nations and the World Bank in a number of
countries seeking assistance to rebuild the centre of government, local
government, public financial management, aid management and civil
service capacities in the aftermath of conflict. Work is also continuing on
improving integration between missions and United Nations country
teams in key areas, including the support to the extension of State
authority.

12. Policy measures to improve United Nations support to institution-building
include:
(a) Strengthening support for capacity development through the United
Nations Guidance Note for Effective Use and Development of National Capacity in
Post-Conflict Contexts. The guidelines assist missions and United Nations country
teams in supporting national capacity development and respecting national
ownership in the aftermath of conflict. They were used as substantive input into the
Somali Compact; they are also being used in Liberia to strengthen programming;
(b) The revised Policy on Integrated Assessment and Planning defined
national ownership as an essential condition for the sustainability of peace and
requested that integrated assessment and planning processes should specify how the
United Nations will support the implementation of national priorities developed on
the basis of a broad-based consensus.
13. To broaden and deepen the supply of expertise, outreach efforts through the
CAPMATCH platform engaged over 50 entities from Member States, of which more
than two thirds are from the global South. Lessons learned from this work are
discussed in further detail in section IV below. The outreach resulted in the
following deployments in critical areas of institution-building needs: (a) legislative
drafting expertise from Sierra Leone to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan;
(b) specialized police capacities from Rwanda to the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, supporting the national police in strengthening their human resources,
financial, facilities and fleet management capacities; (c) specialized training support
to the Liberian revenue authority at the request of the Government of Liberia, using
expertise from Sierra Leone and Sweden; (d) Liberian and Senegalese expertise to
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, assisting the government in shaping
its security sector reform, with support from the Peacebuilding Fund; (e) facilitation
expertise from Iraq to support the National Dialogue Conference in Yemen, with the
support of the Folke Bernadotte Academy in Sweden; and (f) 19 nominations by
Croatia, Egypt and Turkey of Government-provided personnel for highly specialized
institution-building expertise in justice and corrections, in support of existing

6/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

outreach efforts of the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
14. As outlined in prior reports on civilian capacities, the success of effective
outreach is dependent on nimble processes that facilitate the deployment of
expertise. To enhance access to specialized expertise from Member States, draft
guidelines on the utilization of Government-provided personnel have been
developed. To facilitate a more global view of personnel requirements, budget
presentation has been changed to present Government-provided personnel in the
civilian personnel expenditure grouping. Senior leaders and staff have been advised
on how to manage resources in response to evolving national requirements.
15. To draw on the strengths of the presence of the United Nations as a whole,
guidance on how to consider the issue of comparative advantage for carrying out
mandated tasks was provided as part of the revision of the policy on integrated
assessment and planning, and strengthened arrangements were put in place for the
transition of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste. Progress was
also made in facilitating the flow of voluntary resources by overcoming
impediments to funding from the Peacebuilding Fund through missions in support of
peacebuilding and institution-building activities, in conjunction with United Nations
country teams.
16. In broader partnerships to support national institution-building after conflict,
three areas of work have produced good results as summarized below. Lessons
learned and further work in these areas are summarized in section V below:
(a) In South-South and triangular cooperation, the civilian capacities
initiative supported exchanges in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Somalia and
documented the complementary strengths of Southern providers and donors from
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD);
(b) With the international financial institutions, the Chairs of the United
Nations Development Group, the civilian capacities steering committee and two
World Bank Vice-Presidents have issued a menu of options which outlines
15 different practical opportunities for collaboration between the United Nations
and the World Bank in conflict-affected countries;
(c) With regard to cooperation with regional organizations, collaboration
with the League of Arab States has resulted in a joint action plan which is in early
implementation; and the United Nations system has engaged with the African Union
to support the African Solidarity Initiative.
17. All those efforts will be judged by their application in the field. A compelling
example of what can be achieved when the United Nations works to apply new
approaches in a concerted manner is set out in box 2.
Box 2
A more robust approach to institution-building — Somalia
During the planning of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the technical assessment and preparation of the first budget paid
close attention to national institution-building. This resulted in a mission
design that is strongly based on partnership and is responsive to the
situation in-country.

14-20109

7/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

Drawing on experience from other countries, an options paper was
discussed with the Government to identify approaches to maximize
government visibility and national ownership in programming. Those
options were used by the Government in the New Deal Compact for
Somalia, as endorsed in Brussels in September 2013, and in the national
strategy for local governance.
Through the global focal point mechanism, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNDP conducted joint field assessments
and identified areas for joint activities between the mission and the
United Nations country team. This led to the establishment of co-located
teams in Somalia and holistic programmes to support the Government of
Somalia across the areas of police, justice and corrections. Furthermore,
joint activities and workplans between the United Nations country team
and the mission are being explored for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform and constitutional processes.
The provision of support on approaches to capacity-building and
institution-building, including the use of the United Nations Guidance
Note for Effective Use and Development of National Capacity in
Post-Conflict Contexts, has led to an approach that is endorsed by all
partners in the New Deal Compact. This included recognition of the need
for early and dedicated support to core government functions, including
the centre of government, the civil service and public sector capacities,
through a two-pronged approach, that consisted of (i) capacity injection
to meet immediate and emerging needs; and (ii) support to the
coordinated development and roll-out of basic cross-cutting administrative
systems.
Technical advice was also provided — using examples from other
countries — on how to structure a financing architecture that responds to
the stated requirements of the Government of Somalia.
The partnership with the African Union and the African Union
Mission in Somalia has been crucial in realizing gains. The United
Nations and the World Bank have also cooperated well across those
activities, with joint engagement in the New Deal process and on the
critical link between public financial management and security/justice
reform. Joint support is also envisaged for aid coordination.

18. However, it is also clear that more has to be done. As outlined above, actions
planned have been fully completed in some areas, while in others they have
demonstrated good potential which needs to be consolidated. The remaining
sections of the present report describe lessons learned and future direction in
supporting national ownership, outreach, and expanded South-South and triangular
cooperation and partnerships.

8/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

III. Lessons learned in supporting national ownership of
institution-building in post-conflict settings
19. The General Assembly, in its resolution 66/255, and the Security Council, in
its resolution 2086 (2013), both affirmed the fundamental principles of national
ownership and stressed the importance of supporting national capacity development
and institution-building, including through peacekeeping operations in accordance
with their mandates. Support to national institutions is crucial to build confidence in
transitions by demonstrating that national institutions can provide inclusive political
processes, basic security, justice, social services and jobs.
20. We continue to learn how to translate national ownership into practice in
supporting complex post-crisis institution-building as set out in the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/499S/2012/746). Lessons learned in this area have continued to draw on the relevant
experience of field practitioners, as requested by the Assembly in its resolution
66/255, and highlight four key points:
(a) Enhancing national ownership means aligning with national decisionmaking cycles and understanding that progress is iterative. Institution-building
depends on national priorities and decisions. National commitment is critical. While
a common and broadly consulted national vision is necessary, those processes often
take considerable national preparation and debate — as in the case of discussions in
Côte d’Ivoire on security sector reform — and can go through multiple cycles. The
timing of national decisions can therefore be uncertain, but the process needs to be
respected and accommodated. This will inevitably require adjustments to institutionbuilding support, for example, if national processes result in changing priorities and
timings for international support. The United Nations therefore needs to pace and
sequence its support to align with national decisions and processes and to ensure
that national partners are fully committed to doing their part to build institutions and
leverage United Nations support. Doing so may also require a careful assessment of
which United Nations entity is best placed to support specific national institutions;
(b) Rapid confidence-building is key. International support in the aftermath
of conflict needs to enable national institutions to show visible, early results to
maintain political momentum. In Mali and Somalia, for example, national
authorities have prioritized community-level infrastructure, social services and job
creation for stabilization purposes, as well as early progress in reforms in the areas
of governance, security and justice. United Nations presences need to move quickly
to support the appropriate national institutions to deliver services that can help
secure peace and build trust and promote progressive use of and alignment with
country systems. This might mean bringing rapid advice, as with support to the
national dialogue in Yemen or discussions on security sector reform in Côte
d’Ivoire. It may also require modest but rapid financial assistance, and adapting
programme delivery on the ground to give more visibility to the evolving role of
national institutions during transitions;
(c) Building institutions requires sources of early and sustained financing as
well as access to expertise. National authorities have primary responsibility for
ensuring that there are sustainable and predictable sources of funding for institutionbuilding through their national budgets. However, few countries after a conflict have
staff in the right place with the right skills, coupled with equipment and facilities,

14-20109

9/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

and the support of long-term predictable funding sources. Some countries, such as
Libya and Timor-Leste, have had significant national resources to invest, but in
most post-conflict countries, international financial assistance plays a key role. The
international provision of short-term expertise and training, in the absence of policy,
programme and financing frameworks, can lead to unsustainable substitution or the
creation of individual capacity rather than organizational capability. A better
approach is to embed assistance into programmes that support the national
leadership vision, develop buy-in from many stakeholders and ensure sustainable
funding that retains staff and supports long-term institution-building;
(d) Institution-building is a political as well as a technical process which
takes time. In support of this duality, relevant Secretariat departments and agencies,
funds, and programmes can bring complementary strengths. Agencies, funds, and
programmes often have a depth and continuity of country knowledge, including a
solid base of experience in capacity-building, and relationships that may have
existed prior to mission arrival and that will undoubtedly exist after a mission
departs, notwithstanding the role of the Department of Political Affairs in its
continuous observation of country situations. Missions, in general, bring a powerful
combination of civilian capacities, political leverage and field presence; in
multidimensional peacekeeping operations, the mix of police, military and civilian
capacities offers a particular strength (see Security Council resolution 2086 (2013).
Missions and agencies, funds and programmes both have technical expertise.
Combining these related but differing strengths should improve the quality of
United Nations support to institution-building in relevant contexts.
21. These lessons have a number of implications for how the United Nations
provides support to institution-building. While much support to institution-building
is performed by agencies, funds, and programmes, the deployment of peacekeeping
and special political missions provides both opportunities and challenges for the
United Nations to better integrate efforts. The section below focuses on mission
settings, where the mandated role of the mission in institution-building must be
situated in the context of national priorities and capacities, and framed in the light of
the roles of development actors — from the United Nations and beyond.
22. The measures outlined below provide clarifications requested by the General
Assembly during its sixty-seventh session on the relationship to existing structures,
business processes and oversight mechanisms. They include a systematic approach
to strengthen existing integrated planning approaches through the life cycle of a
mission, and enhanced provision of information on institution-building outcomes,
planning assumptions, inputs and risks to the General Assembly through existing
mechanisms, in particular reports and proposed budgets.

A.

Integrating efforts
23. To ensure that the United Nations presence delivers together and leverages
differing comparative advantage across the full range of actors present in the
aftermath of conflict, missions and United Nations country teams will continue to
strengthen joint action and clear division of labour to support political, security, and
rule of law institution-building and the extension of state authority (see General
Assembly resolution 67/226). Building on many examples of joint action in Liberia,

10/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

Libya, Mali, Somalia and elsewhere, senior leadership teams, supported by the
necessary resources and capacities, will:
(a) Provide close direction to integrated assessment and planning processes
through which missions and United Nations country teams identify ways to
complement each other, both during mission start-up and at regular intervals
thereafter, especially in institution-building support;
(b) Explore the use of joint delivery mechanisms, including integrated teams
where appropriate, comprising mission and United Nations country team expertise
and functions, such as those that have been established for electoral, constitutional
and security and justice support with UNDP and other United Nations country team
partners;
(c) Carefully plan and manage mission transition and drawdown to ensure
the sustainability, measurement and benchmarking of capacity development gains,
as well as continuity of support by the United Nations country team and partners.
24. Full consideration of institution-building requirements and needs must take
place at the early stages of mission design and take into account from the onset the
complementarity between the activities and strengths of the United Nations missions
and country teams. In start-up mission situations, where senior mission leadership is
not yet on the ground, support to institution-building in the aftermath of conflict
must therefore be an organizational focus and commitment at the very early stages
of the Headquarters-level mission planning and count upon the same senior
guidance and engagement required at the country level.
25. Current capacities at headquarters to undertake integrated assessments and
planning for institution-building support are limited. I will consider further the
options available to address these requirements.

B.

Aligning with national decision-making cycles
26. Translating national ownership into practice requires that mission formulation
and implementation be sensitive to national decision-making cycles. In the Libyan
context, in the immediate aftermath of the revolution, successive short-term
mandates were intended to enable the United Nations to tailor its support to the
requests, pace and absorptive capacities of national institutions. However, the lack
of national capacity in many areas addressed in the mandate became apparent over a
longer period of time, and despite extensive planning, the inability of national actors
to absorb or utilize the technical advice the mission sought to offer in certain areas
in its early stages revealed the importance of continuously assessing national
capacity and national demand in real time and sequencing United Nations initiatives
accordingly. The Policy on Integrated Assessment and Planning highlights this need
to take account of national decision-making cycles. Accordingly, I will more
systematically lay out the implications of national decision-making cycles in reports
on country situations.
27. To provide a more thorough basis for decision-making by the General
Assembly, mission planning and the consequent budget proposals will give more
specific and distinct attention to mandated institution-building tasks and will
articulate desired results that each mission will pursue from the outset of its

14-20109

11/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

mandate, in conjunction with the United Nations country team. This strengthening
of planning and design will include:
(a) More clearly delineated institution-building outcomes and design of
activities in mission planning and, consequently, in proposed budgets;
(b) Description of how national decision-making cycles may affect activities
in the narrative and planning assumptions of budget proposals and on how mission
activities may adapt;
(c) Descriptions of the mix of inputs required (for example, various types of
personnel) and the operational costs, within approved financial levels, to support
institution-building objectives (for example, funds for national counterparts to
attend training, necessary small infrastructure rehabilitation or materials for national
institutions). When applicable, they would also indicate implementation through the
United Nations country team.
28. Supporting evolving national requirements requires the ability to adapt the mix
of civilian skills to respond to needs. In response to the request of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for an explanation as to how
heads of mission now exercise the ability to make such changes, the applicable
conditions and procedures have been set out in the standard operating procedures on
staffing tables and post management in United Nations peacekeeping missions and
special political missions. For non-staff expertise, such as consultants and individual
contractors, missions are able to shape the scope of work to meet the functional
requirements for expertise that evolve during the course of the year. Any
redeployment of financial resources to accommodate a change from the originally
planned volume of resources is carried out in compliance with the established policy
for the administration of allotments.

C.

Supporting rapid confidence-building in national institutions
29. To support rapid confidence-building, integrated assessment and planning
processes are increasingly focusing on how the United Nations can support the
capabilities and visibility of national institutions in delivering a few key outcomes
in the political, security, justice, economic and social areas. Agencies, funds and
programmes are adapting their support to do this: an example is the rapid and
innovative “go to school” programme in Somalia, where UNICEF, working with
Somali governmental institutions, has delivered results which would otherwise have
been obtained through parallel systems. Ongoing work on resilience is further
addressing this question.
30. In the justice and security sectors, and in the case of support to political
processes and extension of State authority, there may be an urgent need for rapid
institutional support which is not covered by existing programmes. For those
sectors — and others as needed — senior leadership teams will use assessment and
planning processes to identify situations where the absence of resources to support
the basic functioning of national institutions in mandated areas may threaten peace
and security and draw them to the attention of Member States.
31. Support for confidence-building also entails effective and timely provision of
required expertise. The United Nations deploys this expertise through a range of
modalities that have been developed over time. Staff resources, the main source of

12/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

civilian capacity, are complemented by other modalities to deploy expertise in a way
that reflects the variety of functions, types of expertise needed, and the possibility of
drawing from a wide range of sources of that expertise. For example, support for
security sector reform, police, justice and corrections institutions, border
management and core government functionality might draw on expertise from civil
services of Member States, where such expertise generally resides, to be deployed
through Government-provided personnel. 2 Consultancy services, while always a
small part of mission personnel costs, may play a significant role in providing the
ability to respond quickly to shifting national priorities. Applicable General
Assembly resolutions and internal issuances must be complied with in the planning
and implementation of each modality.

D.

Ensuring that expert advice is linked to sustainable
financing frameworks
32. Post-conflict public financial management is a promising area for cooperation
between international financial institutions and the United Nations. There has been
good collaboration in Afghanistan and Liberia, and there is new work under way in
other countries. To acknowledge the importance of sustainable financing for
institution-building, senior leadership teams will, within mandated areas:
(a) Work with host governments and partners to ensure that robust financing
frameworks are in place to support resilient political, security and rule of law and
security institutions;
(b) At the request of host governments, seek to work together with the World
Bank and other international financial institutions to combine their public financial
management analysis and support with United Nations professional sectoral
expertise. 3
33. Effective institution-building support requires a system-wide approach and
joint action. At the country level, responsibilities hence rest with senior leadership
teams, and I will update the General Assembly globally on progress through my
reports on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict. Each entity of the United
Nations system — including designated lead Secretariat departments and agencies,
funds and programmes — is responsible for acting on those lessons in their own
mandated areas and in accordance with the requirements of their governance
structures.
34. While each national situation is unique and a one-size-fits-all approach must
be avoided, it is clear that effective support for nationally owned institution-building
requires the systematic consideration of the factors described above. I recommend
that the General Assembly encourage the application of the lessons learned and
the measures described in paragraphs 19 through 33 above.

__________________
2 Information on the differences between Government-provided personnel and type II gratis

personnel was provided to the General Assembly in December 2012, following the
recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
Information on deployments and nationality of such personnel will be reported on regularly. The
forthcoming peacekeeping overview report will provide information on the guidelines, including
their compliance with General Assembly resolutions 67/287 and 67/255.
3 A toolkit for this activity is being developed.

14-20109

13/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

35. I call upon Member States to ensure sustained and predictable financing
for the United Nations to support institution-building in the aftermath of
conflict, in particular in supporting integrated efforts of the Secretariat,
agencies, funds and programmes as outlined above.

IV. Lessons learned in broadening and deepening the pool of
civilian expertise for peacebuilding
36. The participation of Member States in CAPMATCH and the deployments
highlighted in section II illustrate how outreach to Member States can help the
United Nations to broaden and deepen the pool of civilian expertise for
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict, including from countries in
the global South, with relevant experience in post-conflict peacebuilding or
democratic transition and among neighbouring countries in a subregion.
37. They also demonstrate that the need for outreach holds true for peacekeeping
operations and special political missions alike as well as across the range of regular
modalities and business processes available to the United Nations and approved by
the General Assembly and its organs.
38. The experience of the CAPMATCH pilot also demonstrates, however, the
degree of effort and resources that are needed for the United Nations to engage in a
close partnership with Member States, including those in the global South who have
valuable experiences to share but who may not be able to avail themselves of the
domestic systems to make those experiences easily available to others. The role of
the CAPMATCH platform in supporting outreach in partnership with United Nations
entities mandated for this purpose and the challenges experienced by it are
highlighted in box 3.
Box 3
CAPMATCH pilot
The CAPMATCH pilot demonstrated the strength of demand from
the field for increased access to specialized civilian capacities and
showed the breadth of expertise available from untapped sources,
including from conflict-affected countries, and across the global South. It
also demonstrated, however, the need for the provision of human support
to the automated tool and the need to apply established selection
processes.
Demand focused on the core areas of United Nations peacebuilding
that fall within mission mandates: security institutions; rule of law;
political institutions; and core government functionality. Approximately
85 per cent of requests in CAPMATCH were from missions and their
lead departments at Headquarters. Agencies, funds, and programmes
made limited use of the system and relied on their existing networks and
outreach mechanisms.
The outreach team was able to establish a strong network of
contacts within Member States (50 registrants, of which 69 per cent are
from the global South). Work performed by the team was conducted as

14/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

supplementary outreach in support of established procedures. Over the
pilot period of the initiative, deployments were supported in six country
situations and sectors (see section II above), in addition to assisting in
expanding the pool for outreach to multiple duty stations.
In practice, the business process of outreach was labour intensive.
The team was often required to manage differences between the way in
which demand was requested and the manner in which civilian expertise
was available. Supporting requests often included an element of lessons
learned on the level at which personnel should be solicited in order to
attract the right seniority of expertise. For example, a request for
expertise in legislative drafting for South Sudan was reissued to identify
someone at a more senior level in order to solicit the right experience
using Government-provided personnel. Time frames were subject to
change, and the team had to work closely with Member States to support
the processes of identifying the right expertise to nominate and respond
to questions on needs.
Member States engaging with the process also identified a set of
challenges internal to their processes, in particular for those who do not
have a tradition of providing civilian personnel through the United
Nations. They included how to identify relevant areas of niche expertise,
procedures for the release from and re-entry into the national service of
personnel, and for some, the legislative basis for deployments. The work
of the independent civilian capacities network, which brought together
Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Norway, South Africa, Russia and
Turkey for a series of meetings in Bali, Indonesia, Brasilia, Moscow and
Oslo, has helped to clarify those challenges, as seen by Member States.
Efforts at outreach were welcomed to help work through those
challenges. Member States wanted engagement in a manner that could
promise a sustained relationship over the long term, as there were a
number of issues for both parties to work out to make deployments
possible. The lessons from the CAPMATCH pilot also highlighted the
importance of the systems established by the Department of Field
Support and the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations for outreach, and of the demand
of both Member States and missions to intensify those efforts. There was
a clear sense that Member States wanted to engage with the United
Nations, both within the normal structures of the Secretariat and through
established selection processes.

39. Drawing on the lessons learned from the pilot, I intend to: (a) discard the idea
of automated matching; and (b) strengthen outreach efforts at Headquarters to
broaden and deepen the pool of civilian capacities available to support institutionbuilding tasks mandated to missions.
40. Those efforts will include a particular focus on deepening the pool of civilian
capacities to support the emergence of national institutions that can address the
specific challenges related to gender in post-conflict situations, as outlined, inter

14-20109

15/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

alia, in Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and in my report
on women’s participation in peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466).
41. They should also draw on the findings of the review of the United Nations
gender architecture in post-conflict countries, led by UN-Women in partnership with
the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
OHCHR, UNICEF, UNDP and the United Nations Population Fund, which
emphasized the need to increase the availability of specialized gender expertise
across a range of post-conflict institutional needs and substantive areas within
mission mandates, such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform or the rule of law. The demand for, and value of, such support is
illustrated by experiences such as the recent exchanges between Côte d’Ivoire and
Senegal, financed by the Peacebuilding Fund, in promoting women in security
command structures and establishing gender-sensitive police services. I am
committed to appoint more women protection advisers to peacekeeping missions to
address gender-based violence, as well as to ensure gender expertise in integrated
assessment and planning and at the highest levels of mission management, and to
encourage continued collaboration between United Nations missions and country
teams on these issues.
42. More broadly, my aim is to ensure that peacekeeping and special political
missions are supported by a field-focused workforce planning and outreach capacity
within the headquarters that is aligned with the Organization’s reform initiatives and
imperatives, and that helps peacekeeping and special political missions to access the
expertise necessary to successfully implement their mandates.
43. The units that currently perform outreach are overstretched. The Office of Rule
of Law and Security Institutions currently has one full-time position budgeted for
thematic outreach for criminal law and judicial advisory services for over 400
advisory positions of corrections and justice experts in peacekeeping and special
political missions that provide institution-building advice and expertise. The
situation is even more severe in the Field Personnel Division of the Department of
Field Support, where one full-time position is designated for monitoring and
coordinating outreach activities for all position requirements in missions.
44. To effectively support peacekeeping and special political missions, future
outreach activities must be linked to a strengthened workforce planning approach so
as to focus on the identification of the critical gaps in capacity and determine where
the optimum source of suitable candidates may be found and how to mobilize them
promptly. To do so, the Department of Field Support plans to propose to strengthen
within existing resources the capacity of the Field Personnel Division to perform
those functions. Those functional elements, together with thematic subject matter
experts in the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions and other functional
elements within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Political Affairs, will then be in a better position to leverage their allotted resources
to ensure that peacekeeping and special political missions will receive the civilian
capacities they need to successfully deliver on their mandates.
45. I recommend that the General Assembly support the strengthening, within
existing resources, of the capacity of the Department of Field Support to carry
out workforce planning and outreach. In complement to those efforts, I
recommend that Member States commit additional voluntary technical and

16/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

financial resources to increase outreach to the global South within the United
Nations system.

V. Lessons learned in enhancing regional, South-South, and
triangular cooperation and partnerships with international
financial institutions
46. In is resolution 66/255, the General Assembly identified enhanced regional,
South-South and triangular cooperation as a key element of institution-building in
the aftermath of conflict. This approach recognizes that support delivered though the
United Nations system is only a portion of the overall assistance needed to support
national institutions.
47. Over the past few years, a number of South-South cooperation and triangular
exchanges have delivered good results, such as from the South Sudan
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) project, which is now well
evaluated, to exchanges between Somalia and Timor-Leste; Côte d’Ivoire and
African countries that have gone through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform processes; and Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Further examples are detailed in box 4.
Box 4
Lessons learned — promoting South-South and triangular exchanges
of institution-building experiences
In Yemen, UNDP assisted the Government in developing the Youth
Economic Empowerment Project, which provides youth with rapid
employment in a first phase and evolves to provide matching funds for
business development, complemented by technical advice. This
programme builds upon the experience of youth empowerment and
sustainable livelihoods programme in Burundi, linked to the reintegration
of combatants, with financial support from Japan and the Republic of
Korea. The ability of UNDP to draw upon expertise developed in
different post-conflict country programmes was critical in developing
this exchange.
The Government of Liberia requested assistance, with the support
of Sweden, to draw on experiences from Sierra Leone to strengthen
revenue collection. While an initial exchange was ultimately successful,
the delays experienced highlighted the need for the involvement of
United Nations operational entities to liaise between the host government
and providers. The United Nations Mission in Liberia and UNDP played
this role.
Building upon the experience of Brazil in strengthening national
capacity in school feeding, nutrition and food security, the World Food
Programme (WFP) partnered with the Government of Brazil to establish
the Centre of Excellence against Hunger. The Centre used the lessons
learned from Brazil to provide technical assistance to other countries,
such as Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Rwanda and Timor-Leste.
The involvement of WFP in identifying opportunities to apply relevant

14-20109

17/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

experiences was important in achieving results and disseminating
information about the programme.

48.

The lessons from those experiences are that:

(a) There is demand from post-conflict countries and a willingness to engage
with Northern and Southern Member States;
(b) Realizing the benefits of such exchanges takes operational linkages in the
field, and at the global level, to facilitate dialogue with host and provider countries,
prepare exchanges and support them on the ground.
49. The United Nations has also documented evolving approaches from within
Member States, both Northern and Southern providers. 4 Southern countries often
involve their domestic sector and provincial agencies to provide assistance to postconflict countries and other partners (“sector solidarity”). This approach is in line
with the argument made by conflict-affected countries in favour of an increase in
peer-to-peer exchanges. Northern cooperation, while less closely linked to domestic
experiences of institutional transformation, also brings decades of experience and
the ability to connect technical cooperation to broader sources of financing, such as
general or sector-specific budget support and rehabilitation projects. The approaches
are complementary and can be productively drawn upon in a more coordinated
manner.
50. In line with requests expressed by Member States (see General Assembly
resolution 67/226), and in order to address the aforementioned challenges, the
United Nations system will endeavour to offer more structured support to Member
States for South-South and triangular partnerships. This may include:
(a)
forms:

Provision of support at the country level, which could take five main

(i) Stand-alone South-South and triangular programmes, such as the IGAD
exchange;
(ii) Incorporation of South-South and triangular exchanges into broader
institution-building projects and programmes financed through the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes;
(iii) Facilitation of sector planning arrangements that involve both Northern
and Southern countries;
(iv) Facilitation of twinning arrangements between agencies in post-conflict
countries and those with relevant post-conflict transition or capacity-building
experiences;
(v) Exploration of the potential for deepening the role of diaspora, the
private sector and private foundations as sources for both resources and
technical expertise to support institution-building;
__________________
4 Institution-building in post-conflict and post-crisis situations: Scaling up South-South and

triangular cooperation, United Nations Civilian Capacity initiative, 2013; and
http://ssc.undp.org.

18/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

(b) Outreach to Member States, in particular Southern providers, on postconflict needs and possible instruments to respond thereto. Where requested by
governments, this may include exchanges on technical issues related to lessons
learned on how to structure, coordinate and prepare the supply of expertise within
broader programmes;
(c) Documentation of Southern experiences in institution-building in the
aftermath of conflict, and exchanges among Member States on lessons learned;
(d) Development of standard operational instruments, such as model legal
agreements.
51. UNDP will play a particularly important role in this area, drawing on networks
of engagement with governments in post-conflict settings and provider countries in
the North and the South, the tools and dialogue forums developed by the United
Nations Office for South-South Cooperation and the partnerships it has established
with organizations such as the International Organization for Migration, the United
Nations Capital Development Fund, UN-Women and the World Bank. Where
additional programmatic resources are required, specific proposals for voluntary
contributions will be presented to interested Member States. The Peacebuilding
Support Office is also well positioned to support, through the Peacebuilding Fund,
priority programmes defined at the country level that include South-South and
triangular cooperation for institutional strengthening in post-conflict settings.
52. A second key partnership is with international financial institutions (see
General Assembly resolution 67/226). Together with the President of the World
Bank, I have made efforts to deepen the partnership between the United Nations and
the World Bank to benefit countries in post-conflict situations. During our joint
visits to the Great Lakes Region and the Sahel, accompanied by other international
leaders, we listened to the views of governments and civil society leaders, and we
have worked together to mobilize much needed resources to support national and
regional peacebuilding.
53. The more detailed operational work to support the partnership between the
World Bank and the United Nations has demonstrated many specific areas of
complementarity. For example, the resources developed to address security and
justice planning and budgeting are a very positive example of using the comparative
advantages of both institutions to address a need which neither would be able to
address alone — for the United Nations, specialized expertise on security, police,
justice and corrections; for the World Bank, detailed technical analysis of public
expenditure. The “menu of options” described above highlights similar
complementarities.
54. As the World Bank establishes its global practices in the coming months, we
are ready to work together to deepen this work on public administration and to
initiate a new partnership on the creation of employment. The United Nations also
stands ready to deepen partnerships with other organizations: for example, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and UNDP are in dialogue with the African
Development Bank, the European Union and the World Bank on transition financing
instruments, and we have consulted with the African Development Bank on the
directions of its High-level Panel on Fragile States.
55. A third key partnership is with regional organizations. There is significant
interest in deepening cooperation on support to national institution-building,

14-20109

19/21

A/68/696
S/2014/5

including in the areas of electoral and rule of law activities. The League of Arab
States framed civilian capacities as the topic of its biennial sectoral meeting this
year and developed an action plan for follow-up. One agreed action, a joint training
on post-conflict needs assessments, is scheduled for January 2014. The African
Union, through the African Solidarity Initiative, has initiated exchanges on the
institution-building needs of a number of its member States, and the United Nations
is committed to supporting this process.
56. There are also untapped opportunities to mobilize regional and subregional
financing partnerships. My recent visits to the Great Lakes Region and the Sahel
have demonstrated that some of the needs of post-conflict countries require action at
the subregional level that provides assistance that builds institutional trust across
borders and links assistance in one country to assistance in their neighbours. This
approach to regional peacebuilding support and the exchange of civilian capacities,
information and knowledge on institution-building in the aftermath of conflict needs
to be strengthened in the coming years under the leadership of regional
organizations and with the active involvement of intergovernmental bodies, the
United Nations and bilateral donors. The Peacebuilding Commission is well
positioned to support those linkages.
57. I urge Member States to support UNDP, in conjunction with other United
Nations entities, in facilitating South-South and triangular partnerships for
peacebuilding.

VI. Conclusions, observations and recommendations
58. The United Nations has made progress on the ground in knowledge products
and through organizational arrangements to support crucial areas of institutionbuilding in the aftermath of conflict. These include: overall guidance on capacitybuilding and integrated planning, and the consolidation of organizational
arrangements in the areas of police, justice and corrections; inclusive political
processes; and core government functionality. Those efforts are showing results in
the field in terms of new approaches to national institution-building in situations
such as in Somalia and the identification of experience and expertise from countries
that have gone through post-conflict and democratic transition, in particular in the
global South.
59. We have not completed everything we set out to do, but have learned lessons
along the way. In so doing, we have had a fruitful dialogue among the Secretariat,
the agencies, funds and programmes, and Member States, which has demonstrated
the continued need for closer collaboration. I view the area of support to civilian
capacities and national institution-building as a crucial area of partnership among
the Secretariat, agencies, funds and programmes, and Member States and other
partners.
60. Building on that dialogue, the present report focuses on a smaller number of
actions to improve delivery at the country level, implemented through existing
mandated structures and processes.
61. National ownership of institution-building: I recommend that the General
Assembly encourage the application of the lessons learned and the measures
described in paragraphs 19 through 33 above. I call upon Member States to

20/21

14-20109

A/68/696
S/2014/5

ensure sustained and predictable financing for the United Nations to support
institution-building in the aftermath of conflict, in particular in supporting
integrated efforts of the Secretariat, agencies, funds and programmes as
outlined above.
62. Outreach: I recommend that the General Assembly support the
strengthening, within existing resources, of the capacity of the Department of
Field Support to carry out workforce planning and outreach. In complement to
those efforts, I recommend that Member States commit additional voluntary
technical and financial resources to increase outreach to the global South
within the United Nations system.
63. South-South and triangular cooperation: I urge Member States to support
UNDP, in conjunction with other United Nations entities, in facilitating SouthSouth and triangular partnerships for peacebuilding.
64. The present report is the final report of the civilian capacities initiative as a
stand-alone initiative and marks the beginning of a concerted effort across the
United Nations system, to apply key lessons on institution-building and deepen our
partnerships with Member States and other key actors.
65. The United Nations remains committed, with the support of the Member
States, to doing more. The pathways to peace are complex, but we must continue to
strive to be more responsive to the citizens of countries emerging from conflict so
that we may help to strengthen national institutions which, in the end, are the only
durable bulwark against the risks of repeated insecurity.

14-20109

21/21
