S/2016/456

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 May 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 17 May 2016 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to Ambassador Liu’s letter of 27 April 2015, I have the honour to
inform you that the members of the Security Council have agreed to send a mission
to the Horn of Africa during the period from 17 to 22 May 2016. The members of
the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission (see annex).
I will lead the mission. The Somalia leg of the mission will be co -led by
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Julio Helder Moura Lucas (Angola)
Ambassador Liu Jieyi (China)
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta (Egypt)
Mr. Alexis Lamek (France)
Ambassador Yoshifumi Okamura (Japan)
Mrs. Siti Hajjar Adnin (Malaysia)
Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen (New Zealand)
Mr. Vladimir K. Safronkov (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Fodé Seck (Senegal)
Ambassador Juan Manuel González de Linares Palou (Spain)
Mr. Yuriy Vitrenko (Ukraine)
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft (United Kingdom)
Ambassador David Pressman (United States of America)
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli (Uruguay)
Mr. Zael Alexis Fernández Rivera (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta
President of the Security Council

16-08036 (E)

200516

*1608036*

S/2016/456

Annex
Security Council mission to the Horn of Africa, 17-22 May 2016
Terms of reference
Mogadishu
1.
To recall the commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political unity of Somalia.
2.
To underline the support of the Security Council to the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia and emphasize the Council’s support to the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS).
3.
To get an update from UNSOM and UNSOS on their respective mandates, and
on stabilization efforts in areas recovered from Al -Shabaab control.
4.
To interact with and express its gratitude to the leadership of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). To receive an update on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2245 (2015), and follow up on the Summit of the Heads of
State and Government of the Troop- and Police-Contributing Countries of AMISOM
held in Djibouti on 28 February 2016. To receive an update on progress in the military
campaign against Al-Shabaab by AMISOM and the Somali National Army. To receive
progress reports on the efforts of AMISOM towards reducing civilian casualties.
5.
To underline the importance of the continuation of o ffensive operations against
Al-Shabaab by the Somali National Army and AMISOM, in a well -coordinated
manner and in line with the qualitative improvements requested in Security Council
resolution 2232 (2015), and in full compliance with applicable internati onal law.
6.
To receive an update from the Government of Somalia on the implementation
of its requirements under the terms of the partial suspension of the arms embargo, as
set out in resolution 2244 (2015).
7.
To reaffirm to the Government of Somalia the expectation of the Security
Council that elections will be held in August 2016, and that the road map towards
universal elections in 2020 will be followed. To reiterate to the Government of
Somalia the urgent need for completion of the federal State format ion process and
constitutional review process.
8.
To reaffirm the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding. To get an update on the impact of the efforts by the
Government of Somalia to promote increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels in Somali institutions, and to commend the Government of
Somalia for its commitment to reserve 30 per cent of seats in the upper and lower
houses of parliament for women.
9.
To receive information on ongoing incidences of sexual violence in Somalia.
To highlight the support of the Security Council for and get an update on the action
plan of the Government of Somalia to end sexual violence as well as on the
implementation plan of the joint communiqué betwee n the Government of Somalia
and the United Nations on the prevention of sexual violence. To get an update on the
wider work of the United Nations on assisting in the prevention and response to
sexual and gender-based violence, including the strengthening of the justice and
security sector in Somalia.

2/3

16-08036

S/2016/456

10. To take stock of progress towards the full implementation of the action plan of
the Government of Somalia to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
by the Somali National Armed Forces as well as the action plan to end the killing
and maiming of children, both signed in 2012.
11. To get a better understanding of some of the challenges in delivering
humanitarian assistance and ways in which the international community can assist.
12. To underline the enduring support of the Security Council for greater peace
and stability in Somalia, and to all actors working on the ground to this end.
Nairobi
1.
To engage with the Government of Kenya on regional issues of interest,
including AMISOM and refugees.
2.
To engage with United Nations entities on humanitarian needs in Somalia, the
effect of El Niño on Somalia and the region, efforts to address the drought in
Puntland and Somaliland and the situation with regard to refugees and internally
displaced persons.
3.
To discuss the current situation and risks of acts of terrorism by Al -Shabaab in
Kenya.

Agenda for the consultations with the Council of the League of
Arab States, to be held in Cairo
The Security Council will engage with the Council of the League of Arab
States at the Permanent Representative level on the issues set out below.
Somalia
• Exchange views on areas of cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States in connection with support for peace and reconciliation
efforts in Somalia.
• Receive an update from the League of Arab States on plans and areas of
existing support to address the humanitarian needs of Somalia.
Libya
• Exchange views on challenges and opportunities for peace and reconcili ation
efforts in Libya.
• Take stock of efforts to support (a) counter-terrorism activities and (b) State
institutions, capacity-building, rebuilding and the revitalization of the economy.
Migrants, refugees and displaced persons
• Exchange views and perspectives on the security challenges resulting from
massive movements of refugees and migrants from the Arab region.
• Exchange views and perspectives on addressing root causes of migration and
regional strategies to combat smuggling and human trafficking.

16-08036

3/3
