Resolutioru1 adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with satisfaction the role played by the Office for Sahelian Relief Operations of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations with
regard to emergency assistance, and the activities undertaken by the United Nations Sahelian Office with a
view to combating the effects of the drought and implementing the medium-term and long-term p_rogramme
adopted by the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the economic and social situation in the SudanoSahelian region stricken by drought and the measures
to be taken for the benefit of that region, 79
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on measures to be taken for the recovery and rehabilitation of the Sudano-Sahelian region stricken by drought; 79
2. Expresses its gratitude for the assistance given
to the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region by
Member States, private organizations and individuals;
3. Urges Member States, the organs of the United
Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations to respond favourably, in an effective and continuing manner, to the requests for assistance formulated by the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel and by Governments, so
as to meet the medium-term and long-term needs of
the Sudano-Sahelian countries;
4. Requests the United Nations Sahelian Office to
continue its close co-operation with the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel
and its efforts to ensure co-operation and co-ordination between United Nations programmes and organizations with a view to the implementation of mediumterm and long-term assistance programmes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
action aimed at obtaining the financial assistance necessary for the implementation of the medium-term and
long-term projects submitted by the States members
of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sabel.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3513 (XXX).

United Nations Water Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1761 C (LIV) of 18 May 1973,
Bearing in mind chapter IV of the report of the
Committee on Natural Resources on its fourth session, 80
which contains the comments made by members of the
Committee at that session,
Taking note of the relevant chapters of the report
of the Economic and Social Council on its fifty-eighth
and fifty-ninth sessions, 81
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 (LIX) of 31 July 1975,

69

l. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social Council to convene the United Nations Water
Conference in Argentina from 7 to 18 March 1977;
2. Endorses the arrangements for the preparations
for the Conference, as set out in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1979 (LIX);
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give ample
support to the Conference secretariat in its preparatory work, including, if necessary, arrangements for
the close collaboration of the relevant organizations
of the United Nations system;
4.. Requests the relevant organizations of the United
Nations system to co-operate closely with the Conference secretariat in the preparatory work;
5. Urges the United Nations Environment Programme to provide financial support for the preparatory work of the Conference in order to ensure its
success;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of Member States the nature and importance
of the water problems to be dealt with at the Conference, to give wide publicity to the Conference through
the Office of Public Information and the Centre for
Economic and Social Information of the Secretariat and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the action taken on the present resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3514 (XXX). Measures against corrupt practices
of transnational and other corporations,
their intermediaries and others involved
The General Assembly,
Concerned by the corrupt practices of certain transnational and other corporations, their intermediaries and
others involved,

Recalling paragraph 4 (g) of the Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Ord~~, 82 which pr4:>V}~es for the regulation and superv1s1on of the actIV1t1es of transnational corporations,
Recalling also the provisions of section V of the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order83 emphasizing, inter alia,
the need to formulate, ad9pt and implement the code
of conduct referred to in the report of the Commission
on Transnational Corporat~ons on its first session; 84
Recalling further the provisions of the Charter of
Ec<;momic Rights and Duties of States, 85 according to
which sue~ corporations should not operate in a manner th~t violates the laws and regulations of the host
countnes,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1721 (LIII) of 28 July 1972, 1908 (LVII) of 2 August 1974 and 1913 (LVII) of 5 December 1974,
Recalling the report of the Commission on Transnational Corporations on its first session,
1. Cond~mns all corrupt practices, including bribery,
by transnatronal and other corporations their intermediaries and others involved, in violatio~ of the laws
and regulations of the host countries;

10 A/10346.

so Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5663).
8 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/10003 ), chap. IV, sect. E, and
chap. VI, sect. G.

82 Resolution 3201 (S-VI).
83 Resolution 3202 (S-VI).
84 Official Records of the

Economic and Social Council
Fift7-ninth ~ession, Supplement No. 12 (B/5655 and Corr.I)'.
Bv Resolution 3281 (XXJX).
