S/PV.8855

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8855

th meeting
Friday, 10 September 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kelly. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ríos Sánchez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Letter dated 6 August 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2021/716)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2021/752)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-24781 (E)
*2124781*

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Letter dated 6 August 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/716)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2021/752)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya;
and Ms. Asma Khalifa, co-founder of Tamazight
Women’s Movement and the Khalifa Ihler Institute.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/716, which contains the text of a
letter dated 6 August 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2021/752, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Kubiš; Ambassador T.S. Tirumurti,
Permanent Representative of India, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya;
and Ms. Asma Khalifa.
I give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: Let me begin by congratulating you,
Sir, and Ireland on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month.
We are just over 100 days from 24 December, the
date of the parliamentary and presidential elections
agreed by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in its
road map and mandated by the Security Council in its
2/24

10/09/2021

resolution 2570 (2021). During my recent visit to Libya,
I met with or talked to major political actors and some
civil-society groups and representatives and urged
them to secure an agreement aimed at protecting the
electoral path and managing the post-electoral situation.
I would like to stress that the holding of elections in
Libya, even in a less-than-ideal situation and with all
the imperfections, challenges and risks, is much more
desirable than no elections at all, which could only
foster division, instability and conflict. As I heard from
my interlocutors, that is the opinion of the majority of
Libyans, notwithstanding all their valid concerns and
fears as well as some contradictions and differences on
the way forward.
In the meantime, the House of Representatives
is in the process of finalizing the electoral law for
parliamentary elections. I was informed by the President
of the House of Representatives, Mr. Agila Saleh, that
the presidential electoral law had already been adopted
as law No. 1/2021, while the parliamentary elections
can be organized on the basis of the existing law, with
possible amendments that could be considered and
approved within the coming two weeks.
The High National Elections Commission has also
already received the presidential election law. The
High Council of State complained that the law was
adopted without consulting the High Council of State.
As stated by the Chair of the High National Elections
Commission at his press conference on 17 August, the
High National Elections Commission was ready to start
implementation upon receipt of the electoral legislation.
The timeline for implementation would be reconsidered
once the parameters defined in the electoral laws were
known. At the press conference, the Chair stated that
the High National Elections Commission would do
everything possible to meet the 24 December timeline.
Therefore, it is for the High National Elections
Commission to establish a clear electoral calendar to
lead the country to elections, with the international
community’s support for the efforts of the Government
of National Unity and all respective authorities and
institutions, and to deliver, to the extent possible, free,
fair, inclusive and credible elections, under demanding
and challenging conditions and constraints.
The international community could help create
conditions that are more conducive for the holding
of elections by facilitating the start of a gradual
withdrawal of foreign elements from Libya without
delay. To help ensure the integrity and credibility
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

of the electoral process and the acceptability of the
results, international and domestic observation of the
whole process is critical. I urge all Member States and
regional organizations to send observation teams, in
coordination with Libyan authorities and institutions,
notably the High National Elections Commission and
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, when the time comes.
The Presidency Council has become active in
proposing a political dialogue to secure a smooth and
peaceful political transition, as well as in considering
ways to facilitate the holding of parliamentary and
presidential elections on 24 December.
Finally, I welcome the action taken by the
Government of National Unity to facilitate preparations
for the holding of elections, especially providing
adequate funding for the High National Elections
Commission as well as for the various security
preparations that are being undertaken, notably by
the Ministry of Interior. The Government held a
conference on 17 August, detailing the preparations
so far, including the unveiling of an elaborate security
plan for securing the elections.
Since mid-August, there have been numerous
calls by the Parliament to question the Government of
National Unity for the lack of performance, and even
calls for a vote of no-confidence against the Government
in the Parliament, as well as in the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum. While firmly acknowledging the right
of the Parliament to exercise its oversight functions, I
have cautioned that attempts to change the interim
executive so close to the date scheduled for elections
only create more uncertainty about the elections and
problems in preparing and securing the elections. It is
the elections that will give Libyans an opportunity to
validate their Government, presidency and Parliament.
The Parliament held a session with Prime Minister
Dbeibah and a number of Ministers on 8 September.
Elections are not just a moral or political
commitment now. They are a political and security
necessity to ensure that the positive developments
achieved in Libya since October 2020 continue and
that Libyans will move beyond the state of paralysing
perpetual crisis and conflict and perennial transition
to complete the political process and enter the phase of
building together sustainable security, stability, unity
and development. The people of Libya must have the
opportunity to express their will to freely elect their
representatives and give them firm popular legitimacy.

S/PV. 8855

For many, aborting the drive for elections will be a
signal that violence is the only path to power in the
country. That cannot be allowed.
The international community must be firm in its
support for elections and, at the same time, be sensitive
to ideas and ways presented by the Libyans on how
to conduct and safeguard the elections. A mixture of
principled firmness and pragmatic engagement, based
on Libyan solutions accepted by the majority, is needed.
I welcome the progress made so far by the High
National Elections Commission on the preparations
for the holding of national elections in December.
I commend the Chair of the High National Elections
Commission for the Commission’s diligent efforts
to plan and prepare for the conduct of elections in
December. During the past two months, the High
National Elections Commission managed to update its
voter registry for in-country voting and launch a voter
registration update for eligible Libyan voters residing
outside of the country, which will continue until
mid-September.
More than half a million new voters have recently
registered to participate in the upcoming elections,
bringing the total number of registered voters to more
than 2.8 million, 40 per cent of whom are women.
Most of the newly registered are under 30 — a clear
testament to the young generation’s eagerness to take
part in determining the fate of their country through
a democratic process. Libyan authorities and leaders
must not let them down. The United Nations has
supported the efforts of the High National Elections
Commission and other Libyan actors in strengthening
women’s participation in the elections.
The country and its people need full clarity that
elections will take place on 24 December. The existing
uncertainty creates fertile ground for spoilers and
sceptics to manipulate the situation against the political
transition, thereby fuelling existing tensions in relations
between diverse Libyan institutions and authorities.
Public exchanges, confrontational statements and
steps add to the tensions and fears that the conflictriddled relationship, without a clear road map towards
presidential and parliamentary elections, will further
deteriorate, with political and security implications that
work against the peace, stability and unity of Libya.
I am dismayed to report that the political stalemate
experienced over this period is already casting a
shadow over the security scene. Several western coastal

21-247813/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

areas continue to be a hotspot of sporadic conflict, not
least due to illegal activities and smuggling networks.
Equally disconcerting, serious fighting among various
units belonging to the security forces, under nominal
control of the authorities, erupted in Tripoli on
3 September, and also later, in particular for control of
some institutions. Both the Presidency Council and the
Prime Minister acted quickly to quell the fighting, and
they are to be commended. However, more work needs
to be done for strategic deconflicting and to ensure
control of the various armed units and militias.
The evidently fragile security situation needs further
attention from the Government and the Presidency
Council, in coordination with the Libyan National
Army general command, to create the conditions
for holding elections in a secure environment and to
provide stability. I also reiterate the need for the Libyan
authorities and institutions to work jointly, including
with the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC), to
tackle all those issues and begin a series of targeted
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and security sector reform programmes.
As a signal of Libyan ownership towards stability
and unity in Libya, Foreign Minister El Mangoush has
proposed the holding of a stabilization conference,
with critical external partners of Libya, as a platform
to implement the decisions of the Berlin Conferences
on Libya, notably to support the withdrawal of
mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces, in a
gradual, measured, balanced and modular way. The
conference will also serve as a platform to prepare
DDR and security sector reform and the unification of
military institutions, all with international assistance,
support and facilitation. The United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) is supporting that fully
Libyan-owned and -led initiative, which nevertheless
requires thorough preparations and substantive and
consistent coordination and integration with the work
of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, the Presidency
Council and all respective institutions and authorities.
The ceasefire continues to hold, and there has been
some progress on the implementation of some elements
of the ceasefire agreement. The persistent efforts
of the 5+5 JMC led to the reopening of the MisrataSirte coastal road, with the support of UNSMIL and
the United Nations Mine Action Service. The people
of Libya warmly welcomed that development, which
brings about clear benefits for all Libyans.
4/24

10/09/2021

Nevertheless,
the
continued
presence
of
mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces
remains a cause of grave concern for Libya and the
international community, including countries of the
region, notably Libya’s neighbours. In the ministerial
meeting in Algeria held from 30 to 31 August, the
timely and needed initiative of our Algerian partners,
in cooperation with other countries and organizations
of the region, including the United Nations, brought
together Libya with its neighbouring countries.
Participants in the meeting stressed the need to
continue efforts aimed at unifying State institutions
and strengthening governance in Libya, achieving
reconciliation and working towards the withdrawal
of mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces.
Participants also emphasized that the withdrawal of
mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces needed
to be handled in a transparent and organized manner
and in coordination with neighbouring countries in
order to prevent it from having a destabilizing impact
on them and to foster cooperation in security, social
and economic areas, including the joint management of
the movement of people and goods across borders.
The ministers also discussed ways and means to
enable neighbouring countries to effectively support
the ongoing efforts under the auspices of the United
Nations and requested their involvement in all regional
and international meetings related to the crisis in Libya.
It is important that Libya and its neighbouring
countries manage and control their borders. Positive
developments in that regard include bilateral agreements
currently being negotiated between Egypt and the Niger
with Libya on the management of migration flows. At
the same time, efforts to sign and operationalize bilateral
and multilateral agreements to promote security and
cross-border cooperation between countries sharing a
common border with Libya are essential in maintaining
regional security, fostering economic development and
building trust for closer cooperation among themselves
and with Libya. The border management Quartet
agreement among Libya, the Sudan, Chad and the Niger
is a positive example of such multilateral cooperation
in securing common borders and tackling transnational
crime, violent extremism and the activities of armed
groups. In a recent visit, I was encouraged to hear about
promising discussions between the Presidency Council
and a number of countries of the region.
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

When in Libya, I am constantly reminded that
Libyans need the help of the international community
in order to better manage the security file. That has
to start with the upholding of the Berlin Conference
commitments and by heeding the calls and obligations
set forth in numerous Security Council resolutions
by halting violations of the arms embargo and the
Libyan ceasefire agreement. In order to support
Libyan authorities in making progress towards the
full implementation of the ceasefire agreement,
preparations continue to deploy the first group of 10
United Nations ceasefire monitors and support staff in
the coming days.
On reconciliation, I highlight that on 5 and
6 September, respectively, Mr. Saadi Al-Qadhafi,
along with several officials of the former regime, were
released after seven or more years in prison. They
were acquitted of the charges against them by a Libyan
court in 2019. As noted by the Presidency Council, the
Government of National Unity and UNSMIL, those
releases represent a positive development that will
contribute to national reconciliation.
Equally important, under the auspices of the
JMC, the unilateral release of 17 prisoners from
Misrata by the Libyan Arab Armed Forces positively
contributes to confidence-building and reconciliation.
That was followed by another unilateral release on
5 September of another eight detainees. The Mission
welcomes those moves and reiterates its goal of the
release of all unlawfully held detainees as part of a
larger reconciliation policy. I was pleased to hear that
the active engagement of the Presidency Council, in
cooperation with the Minister of Justice, in order to
ensure the release of all unlawfully held detainees,
will continue and be accelerated. I call on the Libyan
authorities to expedite their release.
I regret to note that violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law nevertheless continue.
Armed groups across the country and some of the armed
units operating nominally under the State continue
to be involved in serious human rights violations,
including torture, killings, sexual violence, enforced
disappearances and unlawful deprivation of liberty.
By August, there were 7,000 migrants and refugees
arbitrarily held in official detention centres across
the country. Many migrants were held in detention in
inhumane conditions and subjected to abuses, including
those committed by agents of agencies operating

S/PV. 8855

under the authority of the State. I was encouraged to
hear the commitment of the Ministry of the Interior
to investigate and punish such criminal behaviour. I
again urge Member States to revisit their policies, stop
supporting operations to return individuals to Libya
and work to protect the rights of refugees, migrants and
asylum-seekers.
I am dismayed to report that all voluntary
humanitarian evacuation, resettlement and return
flights of migrants and refugees out of Libya were
again suspended by the Minister of Interior’s
Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration. Those
flights and departures, facilitated by the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, are
necessary and urgent, with some 4,300 of the most
vulnerable refugees and migrants awaiting departure.
Considering the human and financial costs of those
repeated suspensions, the IOM and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees have
indicated that they are unable to resume such operations
in the absence of a firm commitment of support from
the Government of National Unity, with clear and
predictable procedures in place that are jointly agreed
and consistently implemented by all.
The members of the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya (FFM) completed their first mission
to Libya from 23 to 27 August 2021. The FFM had
high-level engagement with Libyan governmental and
judicial authorities regarding the situation of human
rights in Libya. The Mission members considered their
mission to have been a positive step in cooperation
with Libya. Several focal points within the Government
were appointed to respond directly to questions and
inquiries from the Mission to facilitate its conduct of
investigations, with full access to the country. That is a
very positive development.
With regard to the implementation of the
recommendations of the audit report on the Central
Bank of Libya, the International Follow-up Committee
economic working group met yesterday with the
Central Bank’s Governor and Vice-Governor. The
meeting participants heard from the two branches of the
Central Bank as to how they intended to implement the
recommendations from the United Nations-facilitated
financial audit review, which was transmitted to them
on 8 July. Both Governors recognized the overriding
need to unify the Bank and expressed their willingness
to do so.

21-247815/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

The healthy performance of the economy is
essential for the country. I welcome the efforts made
by the Prime Minister to ensure the continued smooth
operations of the National Oil Corporation and stability
in the oil sector, which is effectively the only source of
wealth for all Libyans. Any attempts to close oil lines
or disrupt the export of oil or disrupt the water system
in Libya are unacceptable.
During a high-level World Bank mission in August,
led by its Vice-President, ways to manage Libya’s
frozen assets were also discussed. Libya is interested
in how to leverage the frozen assets, in cooperation
with external partners, to manage them so as to achieve
good returns on them.
Libya is at crossroads, where positive or negative
outcomes are equally possible. With the elections, there
is an opportunity for Libya to move gradually and
convincingly onto a more stable, representative and
civilian track. The international community also has a
responsibility to support the positive developments in
Libya and to stand firm to stand firm against attempts
at derailing those developments.
Not holding the elections could gravely deteriorate
the situation in the country and could lead to division
and conflict. I urge all Libyan actors to join forces
and ensure inclusive, free and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections, which are to be seen as the
essential step in further stabilizing a uniting Libya.
The President: I think Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Tirumurti.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 22 May
to 10 September, during which time the Committee
met once in informal consultations and conducted
additional work via the silence procedure.
At the informal consultations held on 25 June, the
Committee heard a briefing by the Panel of Experts on
its work programme under resolution 2571 (2021). The
presentation was followed by an interactive discussion
between Committee members and the Panel. In relation
to the Panel’s final report under the previous mandate
(see S/2021/229), the Committee continued to implement
the remaining agreed follow-up actions. Therefore,
the Committee dispatched letters to Germany and the
6/24

10/09/2021

Netherlands on aspects of the assets freeze in relation
to the Libyan Investment Authority (LIA), a listed
entity, and the Committee wrote to Jordan and Libya
on a separate matter related to the same entity. The
Committee received responses from Jordan and Libya.
With regard to the arms embargo, the Committee
approved a request for exemption under paragraph 9 (c)
of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by the Netherlands.
The Committee also conveyed to Libya and Malta its
determination that the transfer of a certain type of item
to Libya fell under the exception to the arms embargo
set out in paragraph 10 of resolution 2095 (2013), and
hence no approval by the Committee was required. In
view of the establishment of the new Government of
National Unity, the Committee dispatched a letter to
Libya requesting updated information on some aspects
of arms embargo implementation. The Committee
received a notification from Egypt concerning the
transfer of arms and ammunition for diplomatic
protection. During the reporting period, the Committee
also received seven vessel inspection reports, and three
attempted inspection reports, from the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, as well as
a letter from the flag State of an inspected vessel.
With regard to the assets freeze, the Committee
dispatched a letter seeking additional information from
Switzerland on an exemption notification submitted
pursuant to paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Committee also exchanged letters with Bahrain
and the Netherlands on assets freeze-related matters.
The Committee also received four letters from Libya
transmitting communications from the LIA.
With regard to the travel ban measure, the Committee
approved a six-month extension to an exemption
request, granted previously for humanitarian purposes,
to three individuals on the Committee’s list — Safia
Farkash Al-Barassi, Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi. The Committee received an exemption
request for the travel of Mr. Saadi Al-Qadhafi, a fourth
listed individual, the consideration of which is ongoing,
as well as two letters from the Panel of Experts in
that regard.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received a guidance request from Turkey on the
scope of claims provision set out in paragraph 7 of
resolution 1973 (2011). The matter remains under the
Committee’s consideration.
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

The Committee also received a communication
from the focal point for delisting established pursuant
to resolution 1730 (2006), in connection with the
delisting request of one individual inscribed on the
sanctions list of the Committee. The focal point process
is still ongoing.
Lastly, on general implementation matters, on
13 July the Committee dispatched a note verbale to all
Member States in follow-up to paragraph 8 of resolution
2571 (2021), which calls upon all States to report to
the Committee on the steps they take to implement
effectively the travel ban and assets freeze measures
in relation to all individuals on the Libya sanctions list.
The Committee has since received two implementation
reports, from Japan and from the Philippines.
As always, I would like to reiterate the Committee’s
commitment to facilitating the implementation of the
measures and contributing to the promotion of peace
and stability in Libya.
The President: I thank Ambassador Tirumurti for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Khalifa.
Ms. Khalifa: I would like thank the Irish delegation
and presidency for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on Libya. I am a Libyan woman, an Amazigh
and a human rights activist and researcher.
I am speaking to the Security Council today while
millions of Libyans struggle with basic necessities of
life. Not only is there not enough proper testing and
monitoring of the coronavirus disease, but power
cuts occur up to 18 hours a day, if not more, with
temperatures in the vicinity of 40°C. The armed
conflicts over the past decade have ravaged what little
infrastructure existed. People are looking towards
the elections in December, projected to take place in
three months, for solutions. However, as of today there
is no agreement about the legal and constitutional
basis. There is uncertainty about the preparations and
too many conflicting processes involving competing
entities. People are therefore uncertain if the elections
will even take place. There is an urgency for it to
happen because Libyans are yearning for stability, but
directing that yearning towards imminent ill-prepared
elections without a firm democratic foundation and due
process is dangerous.
If the elections do not happen, or if the results are
disputed in a similar scenario to what we saw in 2014,

S/PV. 8855

it would mean a more fractured society and a violent
armed conflict that could destroy whatever is left of the
country. A prerequisite for avoiding that is a solid, and
currently missing, legal and constitutional foundation
for the election. Such a legal foundation must be rooted
in a real constitutional process that is truly inclusive of
all the peoples of Libya, including full recognition and
protection of the rights of Libya’s indigenous peoples.
Without that we are set up for failure, as an election
would hinge on the protection of the future elected
body from disputes and divisions that inevitably will
lead to further violence.
The planned presidential election is at best a flawed
attempt at instating democracy, at worst it leaves
Libya to another despotic dictatorship. Without the
foundation of strong and separate institutions, without
dividing powers and ensuring checks and balances
among the legislative, judicial and executive branches
of Government, Libya is left to corruption and abuses
of power that will be detrimental to human rights, peace
and true democracy. The current constitutional basis,
namely, the temporary Constitutional Declaration and
what has been agreed upon by the process facilitated
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), is not conflict-sensitive and is already
proving very divisive. The current legal documents
are also based on the systematic exclusion and division
of indigenous people in the electoral system, using a
division of Libya into three regions that does not reflect
the demographic realities, and that leads me to highlight
another process that needs to happen in parallel with
the constitutional process: reconciliation.
A truth and reconciliation process is greatly
needed, and it has to be depoliticized, to allow for
greater ownership and acceptance by the people of
Libya. Support for efforts has to be given to Libyanled initiatives, guided by conflict sensitivity and giving
due consideration to inclusion of Libya’s diverse ethnic
groups. Accountability and justice are of the utmost
importance for peace. For the future of reconciliation
in Libya, the truth-seeking mission mandate should be
extended and supported if it is to function properly,
and it should reach to all parts of the country. This
mission must take into account both recent and
historic grievances.
UNSMIL’s mandate must be more clearly defined,
and its role must be effectively communicated. This
role must be centred on mediating a brokered military
unification, be set on a constitutional basis with a

21-247817/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

broad range of respondents and involve a truth and
reconciliation process based on international best
practices. There is a current perception among Libyans
that the Mission is being complicit in allowing corrupt
political elites and spoilers to set the agenda for
peace in Libya. This has to be checked to stop further
disruptions and repair the damage that has been done
to people’s trust in the Mission. The best way to do
this is to be more inclusive and to ensure that space is
also given to the diverse groups representing civil and
civilian society striving for a peaceful future for Libya.
All actors have repeatedly failed women in Libya
over the past decade. Women are punished through
exclusion for being non-violent actors in this conflict.
There is a lack of political will to implement agreements
and policies to integrate women meaningfully and
properly across the various processes. Women are
tokenized, and their work and visions for peace
in Libya are not taken seriously. They have been
disproportionately affected by the conflict. They make
up half of the displaced population and lead more
households owing to the loss of male family members
and their livelihoods. Furthermore, women in Libya
face the systematic violence of governmental bodies,
which treats them as second-class citizens.
The space for civil society has been shrinking over
the years — so much so that any work in relation to
conflict and politics is life-threatening. Women human
rights defenders and activists work every day in Libya at
great risk not only for themselves but for their families
and loved ones. The current road map put forward by
UNSMIL has the question of human rights defenders
and civil society activists as a pillar, but nothing has
been done about it.
In five days, it will be the United Nations
International Day of Democracy. I urge Council
members to consider supporting Libya’s democratic
journey through support in bringing in local and
international legal experts to define the electoral
process and the constitutional basis so that it is linked
to the current process; establishing an independent
body to monitor, evaluate and ensure transparency and
to hold the Government accountable to due democratic
processes in order to minimize corruption and abuses
of power; ensuring the withdrawal of foreign fighters,
international militias and mercenaries, which is
another key priority for efforts aimed at building
stability in Libya; making the ceasefire monitoring
mission under UNSMIL independent of UNSMIL,
8/24

10/09/2021

ensuring that its mandate is made relevant to today’s
problems, rather than the problems that existed prior to
its inception, and taking into account not only power
vacuums but also indirect consequences and conflictinduced vulnerabilities; supporting accountability and
justice for historic and current grievances through a
truth and reconciliation process; and prioritizing the
protection of civil society activists and human rights
defenders, while ensuring broad representation, in all
future programmes.
Libya’s future might seem complicated to some
and uncertain to others but there are some common
sense and simple pillars that solutions should be built
on: a legitimate Government connected to the people’s
desires, real security sector reform leading to the sector
being free from foreign backed militias, and a truth and
reconciliation process that centres on victims.
I thank the Security Council for its support as we
strive towards a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
future for my homeland.
The President: I thank Ms. Khalifa for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by thanking Special Envoy Ján
Kubiš, Ambassador Tirumurti and Ms. Asma Khalifa
for briefing the Security Council today.
I would like to make four points. First, time is
running out to agree a legal and constitutional basis for
elections. We are at a critical point. There is clear demand
from the Libyan people to participate in elections and
have their voices heard. It is essential that those in
authority who represent them reach an agreement on
holding elections and that they commit to accepting
the results of those elections. We welcome the efforts
by the House of Representatives to find a solution to
this issue and encourage further engagement to allow
full agreement on and preparation for presidential and
parliamentary elections on 24 December, as set out in
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map endorsed
by the Council in resolution 2570 (2021).The steps
needed have not changed since the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum road map was agreed. But the task
has become increasingly urgent. The United Kingdom
will not hesitate to act against those who deliberately
attempt to undermine the Libyan political process.
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

Secondly, the United Kingdom remains committed
to championing women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in Libya. In that spirit, we welcome
Ms. Asma Khalifa’s important contribution to
today’s discussion. As Asma said, women have been
disproportionately affected by the conflict in Libya.
Elections due in December offer an opportunity for the
full and meaningful participation of women as voters,
candidates and decision-makers in the political process.
Thirdly, I would like to welcome the opening of the
coastal road last month and congratulate the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission in securing this step towards
building trust between east and west. There is much
more to be done. It is essential now, just over a month
from the anniversary of the signing of the 23 October
ceasefire agreement, that there is a move from words
to action. All foreign forces and mercenaries must
withdraw from Libya without delay. We look forward
to the initial deployment in the coming weeks of the
United Nations ceasefire monitors in support of the
Libyan Ceasefire Monitoring Mechanism. The 5+5
Libyan Ceasefire Monitoring Mechanism, supported
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), has the United Kingdom’s full support in
driving this process forward.
Finally, I would also like to welcome the independent
strategic review of UNSMIL and thank Mr. Bathily and
his team for all their work. The recommendations of the
review must now be implemented so that UNSMIL is
best placed to help facilitate the Libyan-led and Libyanowned political process and build on the gains achieved
by Mr. Ján Kubiš and his team.
Libya is at a critical point. The actions needed
to build a stable, prosperous and inclusive future for
all Libyans are clear and also urgent. The next major
milestone is also clear: presidential and parliamentary
elections on 24 December. The United Kingdom looks
forward to working with international partners, led by
UNSMIL, to support Libya over the months ahead.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ján
Kubiš and Ambassador Tirumurti for their briefings. I
also thank Ms. Asma Khalifa for her briefing.
The Niger commends the tireless efforts of United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in
assisting the Libyan authorities to implement the road
map adopted by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
for the transition under way in Libya. We support it
and welcome the recommendations contained in its

S/PV. 8855

independent strategic review, which will undoubtedly
enable it to be more effective and better in tune with the
current environment.
The Niger reaffirms its steadfast commitment to
working for a political solution to the Libyan crisis and
fully play its role in helping the brotherly Libyan people
recover from the effects of a decade of conflict, which
has scarred their country. My delegation condemns
the persistence of highly objectionable acts of foreign
interference, violations of the arms embargo and the
relevant Security Council resolutions and breaches of
the commitments made at both Berlin Conferences by
some of the actors involved in the war in Libya.
It is clear that the stabilization of Libya will require
the holding of credible, inclusive and transparent
elections on 24 December. We commend the recent
efforts of the House of Representatives to establish the
legal framework for holding the elections. In that regard,
the stakeholders shoulder the historic responsibility to
urgently agree on the effective implementation of the
priority measures contained in the road map. The Niger
commends the 6 September launch of the first stages of
the national reconciliation process. We further welcome
the announcement that the African Union will take
steps to prepare the ground for holding an inter-Libyan
national reconciliation conference in cooperation with
neighbouring countries.
With regard to the security situation, the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission has made tangible progress. The
Niger welcomes the recent reopening of the coastal
road linking the eastern and western parts of Libya. We
encourage pursuing the implementation of the ceasefire
agreements. The violent clashes in Tripoli last week
are a reminder that even progress and gains made with
regard to the cessation of hostilities can be reversed if
we are not vigilant.
It is therefore imperative that we work as a matter of
urgency on unifying the military institutions. That is all
the more crucial given the fact that the areas in closest
proximity to Libya continue to suffer the effects of
insecurity and threats posed to their territorial integrity
as a result of the activities of armed groups of every
stripe. My delegation welcomes the establishment of a
cross-border cooperation framework among Chad, the
Niger, Libya and the Sudan to jointly monitor, secure
and develop border areas. In that regard, we call on the
Nexus Working Group to support the life-saving efforts
of our countries.

21-247819/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

Concerning the humanitarian situation, although
we welcome its improvement in general since the
establishment of the ceasefire, it nevertheless remains
worrisome. Despite recent efforts by the Government,
the provision of basic social services continues falls
short of humanitarian needs in the country. One cannot
address the humanitarian issue without mentioning the
deplorable and inhumane living conditions of migrants
and refugees in Libya. It is high time to take the
necessary measures to end the abuse and violations to
which they are continuously subjected.
The Niger recalls that, given the current situation,
the repatriation and disembarkation of migrants rescued
at sea off the coast of Libya violates international
humanitarian law. Those vulnerable people, who have
been rescued at sea, are in need of protection and should
not be returned to Libya to be subjected to arbitrary
detention and other forms of abuse by their jailers, who
are beyond State authority.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL); the Permanent Representative of India,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya;
and the representative of civil society in Libya for
their briefings. Tunisia also welcomes the last two
reports of the Secretary-General on the strategic
review of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and developments in Libya (S/2021/716, annex and
S/2021/752, respectively).
The presidential and legislative elections that
Libya is preparing to hold this year will be a watershed
along Libya’s political track, as they will symbolize
the beginning towards lasting democracy and the
foundation for the rule of law and State institutions in
Libya. In that regard, Tunisia expresses its satisfaction
that its Libyan brethren have emphasized their
commitment to holding the elections as scheduled on
24 December, in accordance with the road map adopted
in Tunisia and called for in resolution 2570 (2021).
Tunisia encourages the continuing constructive
dialogue and finalizing the constitutional and legislative
arrangements that will ensure the Libyan people
their right to practice democracy and establish their
permanent institutions accompanied with freedom,
transparency and equality.
10/24

10/09/2021

Tunisia appreciates the efforts of UNSMIL within
the framework of its mandate to bring the parties
together and prepare the ground for holding the elections
as scheduled, including facilitating the work of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and its subsidiary
bodies. We also reiterate the importance of the role of
neighbouring countries and regional organizations in
supporting Libyans to promote their national unity and
complete the remaining national issues. In that context,
we also value the outcome of the previous ministerial
meeting of Libya’s neighbouring countries, held in
Algeria from 30 to 31 August.
We also welcome the constructive steps
recently taken in the context of strengthening
confidence-building measures, especially with regard
to the reopening of the coastal road linking the eastern
and western parts of Libya and the formation of a joint
force to secure the water supply, among other things.
Tunisia also stresses the importance of moving forward
with such measures to further consolidate security and
stability and create an environment leading to progress
on the political track.
Maintaining the ceasefire is crucial to the success
of the political process in Libya. Accordingly, Tunisia
renews its call on all parties in Libya to maintain their
commitment to the full implementation of the terms
of the ceasefire agreement, including accelerating the
departure of mercenaries and foreign fighters from
Libya. Their withdrawal is a prerequisite for supporting
stability, given that their presence poses a serious threat
not only to Libya and its transition process but to the
entire region.
In that regard, we stress the need for the withdrawal
to take place in close coordination so as to safeguard
neighbouring countries and the region from any
repercussions that would impact their security and
stability, including the possibility of it being exploited
by terrorist organizations operating in the Sahel and
Sahara region to further spread chaos and violence.
Tunisia calls on regional and international actors,
including UNSMIL, to support the Libyan authorities
and the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in that regard.
We also emphasize the need for all parties to commit
to implementing the arms embargo imposed on Libya
and to respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the country without interfering
in its internal affairs.
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

At the economic level, we welcome the continued
efforts to unify Libyan institutions, as well as the
efforts of the Government of National Unity to advance
the Libyan economy and improve services for Libyans.
We also reaffirm Tunisia’s commitment, under
the directives of the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Kaïs Saïed, to continue providing all
forms of support to sisterly Libya. We are determined
to further strengthen bilateral cooperation for the sake
of the shared future, security, stability and development
of both countries.
In conclusion, we once again express Tunisia’s
readiness to continue actively and constructively
engaging in United Nations and international efforts to
ensure security and stability in Libya, restore its status
as an effective regional Power and promote peace and
security in the region.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Envoy Ján Kubiš, the Indian chairmanship of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, and
Ms. Asma Khalifa for their briefings.
Peace is within reach in Libya. We must remain
mobilized to ensure that the window of opportunity
does not close.
First and foremost, it is imperative that Libyan
actors respect the electoral deadlines that they have set
for themselves. In accordance with the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum road map, endorsed by the Berlin II
Conference, and resolution 2570 (2021), parliamentary
and presidential elections must be held on 24 December.
The expectations of civil society are high. More than
2.8 million Libyans, 43 per cent of whom are women,
have already registered to vote. Any challenge posed
to that deadline could threaten the political transition
process and the relative calm that Libya has enjoyed in
recent months.
France calls on all Libyan leaders to assume their
responsibilities to complete that process in a timely
manner and to rise to the challenges ahead. France will
support any Libyan decision with the backing of the
United Nations to clarify the legal basis for the holding
of elections.
In that connection, France welcomes the adoption
by the House of Representatives of the electoral law
for the presidential election and its transmission to the
High National Elections Commission. We encourage

S/PV. 8855

the House of Representatives to transmit the electoral
law for the parliamentary election to the High National
Electoral Commission without delay. That is essential
for the Commission to be able to quickly launch the
organization of the two elections in accordance with
the expectations of the Security Council and the
Libyan people.
The second priority is to make rapid progress in
the implementation of the 23 October 2020 ceasefire
agreement. France welcomed the announcement by
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission of the reopening
of the Sirte-Misrata coastal road in late July. That is
an essential step forward in the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement, as it allows for the free movement
of thousands of Libyans and facilitates the delivery
of aid. It is also a symbolic measure that underlines
the determination of the armed forces to act together
and, eventually, to reunite. Finally, it is proof of the
effectiveness of the 5+5 Commission on security issues.
Those efforts must now be intensified so that all
the provisions of the ceasefire agreement endorsed by
resolution 2570 (2021) be implemented. The clashes
between militias in recent weeks in Tripolitania serve
to remind us of how fragile the situation on the ground
remains. The deployment of observers from the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya will be an essential
step in ensuring the implementation of the ceasefire.
We hope that they can be deployed on the ground and
call for the establishment of a monitoring mechanism.
The withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries
is another essential condition for restoring a stable,
united and sovereign Libya. France fully supports the
work of the 5+5 Commission, which will soon meet
in Geneva to agree on a phased operational plan for
the withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries,
which should be implemented as soon as possible.
A disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme must accompany that process so as to avoid
jeopardizing the stability of the region and the Sahel.
Finally, the unification of Libya’s economic and
financial institutions must be achieved without further
delay. A fair, equitable and transparent distribution
of resources must be guaranteed for the benefit of the
entire Libyan population. We reaffirm our commitment
to the independence of the National Oil Corporation.
Only a stable and sovereign Libya will make it
possible to put an end to the trafficking of migrants
and the serious human rights violations to which they

21-2478111/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

continue to be exposed in Libya. The fight against
impunity must continue. The Libyan authorities must
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court,
as provided for in the relevant Council decisions.
France will continue to contribute, with its European
partners, to the neutral and impartial implementation of
the arms embargo decided by the Council through the
European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI. We will spare no effort in the coming months to
accompany Libya on the path to peace. We call on the
Council, as well as on regional and international actors,
to work with us, the United Nations and Libyan actors.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Envoy Kubiš
for his briefing and Ms. Asma Khalifa for her insightful
contributions. She has provided a powerful reminder of
the significant ongoing work by Libyan women towards
achieving reconciliation and sustainable solutions
in Libya, as well as why women must participate
fully, equally and meaningfully in the design and
implementation of the ongoing political processes,
including monitoring the ceasefire agreement.
Let me also highlight the conclusions from
the independent strategic review. Such concrete
recommendations are valuable and provide helpful
input to the current process of renewing the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) mandate.
Norway fully supports the recommendations and their
implementation through the UNSMIL mandate renewal.
As expressed clearly by the Security Council, the
presidential and parliamentary elections should be held
as planned on 24 December this year. That is not only
the expectation of the international community, but
also, as we have heard, of the Libyan people themselves.
Free, fair, and inclusive elections are essential for Libya
to move forward and to avoid further destabilization of
Libya as a whole.
We welcome the House of Representatives’ adoption
of the presidential electoral law and urge that the
framework for the parliamentary elections be finalized
as soon as possible. It is critical that the High National
Election Commission be provided with the necessary
legislation to continue its preparations for elections.
Much has been achieved, as illustrated by the
ceasefire agreement in October 2020 and the formation
of the Government of National Unity this year. It is
critical now that those gains be preserved and that
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map of
12/24

10/09/2021

November 2020 be implemented. We hope to see
progress in the establishment of a ceasefire monitoring
mechanism, including the deployment of ceasefire
monitors as mandated in resolution 2570 (2021). Let me
also reiterate the importance of all foreign forces and
mercenaries leaving the country, as Libyans themselves
have called for in the ceasefire agreement.
Finally, we are worried by the targeting and
destruction of civilian objects, and in particular the
lack of humanitarian access. As of Wednesday, there
were only 23 active visas for the 180 international staff
requiring access to the country. We urge the Libyan
authorities to ensure full, safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian workers and to improve the civic
space in Libya.
Let me conclude by reiterating Norway’s support
for Special Envoy Kubiš and UNSMIL, especially in
their efforts to support preparations for the Libyan
elections to be held later this year.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing on the situation
in Libya. We also thank the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, Ambassador Tirumurti,
for his briefing on the work of that subsidiary
body of the Council. We also listened carefully to
Ms. Asma Khalifa.
We have been cautiously monitoring potential
developments in the military and political situation
in Libya. On the one hand, the situation in the former
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has improved remarkably
as compared with the previous period. Thanks to the
signing of an agreement on the cessation of hostilities
in October last year, a general ceasefire has been
maintained, which has made it possible to move
forward on the political settlement track. The necessary
conditions were created for the formation in February
and March of joint transitional authorities. Libyans
have begun gradually to overcome the mutual mistrust
caused by the protracted conflict and to take joint steps
to unify State structures and institutions.
At the same time, we cannot but be concerned at
the fact that the implementation of the road map for the
settlement endorsed by the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum has begun to falter.
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

During the Forum meetings held in July and August,
participants were not able to reach a consensus on the
adoption of a legislative framework for organizing the
national elections that are scheduled for December. At
the moment, discussions continue within the framework
of the Forum. We hope that the Libyans will be able to
overcome the differences that have accumulated and to
find common ground, because the future of the Libyan
people is at stake.
It is regrettable to hear that some are already
advocating postponement of the presidential and
parliamentary elections or of their division into
two stages. Such a development could nullify all the
cumulative progress made in recent months.
We are convinced that the success of the future
elections and the political process as a whole will
directly depend, among other things, on the degree of
inclusiveness, which implies the involvement of all the
leading political forces of the country, representatives
of all regions and the former authorities.
We note, on the military track, that the cessation
of hostilities more than a year ago was a major
achievement. However, further progress towards a
comprehensive and final settlement of the armed
conflict in Libya requires active efforts. The decisions
taken within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission, which plays an important role in unifying
the country’s armed forces and generally stabilizing
the security situation, remain largely on paper. The full
opening of the coastal route between the west and the
east of the country is also awaiting final agreement.
Meanwhile, the parties are blaming each other
for any failure to meet obligations. That precarious
situation is directly related to the unresolved issue of
the foreign military presence in Libya. We support an
incremental and time-synchronized withdrawal of all
non-Libyan armed groups and divisions. At the same
time, it is important to maintain the current balance of
power on the ground, thanks to which no new threat of
a fresh cycle of confrontation has emerged. It is also
important not to overlook the interests and experience
of Libya’s neighbours when it comes to the repatriation
of foreign combatants.
We are convinced that there is no alternative to
a comprehensive, peaceful settlement of the Libyan
crisis under the auspices of the United Nations. We
welcome the initiatives of Special Envoy Kubiš and
Libya’s Minister for Foreign Affairs and International

S/PV. 8855

Cooperation of the State of Libya, Mrs. El Mangoush,
aimed at stabilizing the security situation in the country.
We are ready to interact constructively with our
international partners. We also believe the humanitarian
initiative of the President of the Presidency Council,
Mr. Mohamed Al-Menfi, to be important. That
initiative involves launching a comprehensive national
reconciliation project in the framework of which some
concrete steps have already been taken to restore trust
among Libyan forces. We trust that this initiative will
make a significant contribution to Libyan reconciliation.
In conclusion, I would like to note that we continue
to be concerned by the problem of illegal migration and
the proliferation of weapons in Libya, which affects
security in both the country itself and the SaheloSaharan region overall. We hope to see more effective
inspection efforts off the coast of Libya, which should
be carried out in strict observance of international
law. At the same time, we would like to underscore
that international restrictions should help the political
process and the return of stability in Libya rather than
harm it.
Work is currently under way to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL). We will be careful about revising
the objectives and the structure of UNSMIL. We are
convinced that the most important thing right now is to
preserve all the progress made to date and the capacity
of the Mission, especially during the pre-election stage,
which is so important for the country. We believe that
the United Nations should focus its efforts on this very
track instead of spreading itself too thin.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Special Envoy
Ján Kubiš and Ms. Asma Khalifa for their thoughtful
briefings. We also express appreciation to Ambassador
Tirumurti, Chair of the Security Council Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, for his forty-first periodic report
and welcome the representative of Libya, Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, to today’s meeting.
Since our most recent meeting (see S/PV.8820) and
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2021/12,
our sister nation, amid its many challenges, has
made meaningful headway towards restoring peace
and stability.

21-2478113/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

We maintain our unwavering support for the United
Nations multitrack process in Libya, particularly the
vital role of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) in facilitating the Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process.
Likewise, we laud the very important work of the
African Union, the League of Arab States, the European
Union and the other international partners in advancing
the political process and underscore the importance
of respecting Libya’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
In approximately three months, Libya is
expected, as we have heard, to hold critical national
parliamentary and presidential elections, as set out
in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map.
We note the lingering impediments and welcome the
efforts to finalize arrangements in the electoral legal
framework. We also stress the urgency of clarifying
the constitutional basis. We emphasize that elections
are key components of representative democracies and
essential to Libya’s democratic transition.
Advances on the security front such as the creation
of a new joint force, from both sides of the demarcation
lines, comprising the 116 Battalion for Protection and
Security and the Tarik ibn Ziyad Brigade, as well as the
opening of the Misrata-Sirte coastal road, are indeed
timely and welcomed.
We are pleased that the ceasefire agreement
continues to hold but note the reported limited
tangible progress in its implementation. We repeat
our call for strict compliance, including the overdue
and unconditional withdrawal of foreign fighters and
mercenaries from Libya, as well as full adherence to
the Security Council’s arms embargo.
The withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries
must be conducted in a supervised and orderly manner
so as to avoid grave ramifications for the Sahel and
the wider region. It must also be accompanied by
proper planning for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security-sector reform. We look
forward to a properly coordinated and supervised
approach, with neighbouring and influential States to
assist in that regard.
Confidence-building measures, including the
release of former officials, are positive and will augur
well for the political process, national reconciliation,
unity, peace and stability. The African Union’s
14/24

10/09/2021

supportive role in assisting with the comprehensive
national
reconciliation
process
would
also
be instrumental.
Libya’s socioeconomic, security, humanitarian
and human rights situations are closely interlinked
and mutually reinforcing and must be simultaneously
addressed to achieve stability and development. My
delegation remains concerned about the human rights
situation, especially the challenges facing the groups
made most vulnerable, specifically refugees and
migrants, internally displaced persons, youth, women
and girls. We reiterate our call for their full protection
and safety, especially for those in detention centres,
and repeat our persistent message that Libya remains
an unsafe port of disembarkation for migrants and
refugees. We also echo calls for the swift adoption of
the draft law on combating violence against women and
for the completion of the national action plan on women
and peace and security.
Furthermore, the need to prioritize the unification
of Libya’s institutions cannot be overstated. We are
satisfied with the completion of the international
financial audit of the Central Bank of Libya. We
believe that effort will serve to unite Libya’s Central
Bank and restore its integrity, which remains
crucial to addressing socioeconomic difficulties and
humanitarian challenges, now exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
Of equal importance is the need to resolve the
impasse on the budget in order to enable the Government
to execute its duties, especially the delivery of basic
services to the Libyan people.
Libya’s existing realities demand the consolidated
efforts of all Libyans. Standing together at this critical
juncture will only redound to their benefit. The onus
is on all Libyans to build on the positive momentum,
forge a path forward, exhibit compromise and
settle differences.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its
solidarity with the Government and the people of
Libya and will continue to work with the international
community to assist with its restoration, stability and
sustainable development.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Kubiš and Ambassador Tirumurti,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

and Permanent Representative of India, for their
briefings. I also welcome the representative of Libya
to today’s meeting. In connection with the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/752), I would like to make
several points.
At present, Libya’s political process is at a critical
stage, and Libya has started the process of national
reconciliation. Various parties have held several
rounds of consultations on the preparations for the
general election. It is hoped that all parties will fully
demonstrate political will, reach consensus on the
electoral constitutional basis and electoral law as
soon as possible, in accordance with the requirement
of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map,
as well as ensure that the general election will be
held as scheduled and promote a comprehensive and
inclusive political transition process. China supports
the continued key role of the countries of the region,
welcomes Algeria’s convening of a meeting of Foreign
Ministers of neighbouring countries and looks forward
to injecting new impetus into Libya’s political process.
Maintaining the ceasefire and achieving security
and stability are the cornerstone of Libya’s national
reconstruction. With the promotion of all parties,
especially the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, positive
results have been achieved in deploying local ceasefire
monitors and opening the coastal road. The United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) should
deploy the ceasefire monitoring component as soon as
possible and encourage regional organizations, such as
the African Union (AU) and the League of Arab States,
to actively participate.
The withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries
is the core issue for security in Libya. Any plan to that
end should ensure a balanced and orderly withdrawal,
so as to avoid risks and challenges for domestic stability
and guarantee the security of neighbouring countries.
China encourages Libya to cooperate with neighbouring
countries on border management; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, counter-terrorism
and the prevention of illegal cross-border movement of
armed elements and weapons, with the coordination of
the AU and other regional organizations, so as to jointly
safeguard regional security.
China attaches importance to the key role played by
UNSMIL in ensuring peace and stability and supports
the extension of its mandate. It is hoped that UNSMIL
will fully respect Libya’s sovereignty and the wishes

S/PV. 8855

of the people, pursuant to the Council’s mandate,
support the Libyan-owned and -led political process
and provide support for the preparation of general
elections and national reconstruction. China has taken
note of UNSMIL’s strategic review report, submitted
by the Secretary-General, and hopes that the UNSMIL
adjustment plan will meet the needs on the ground and
those of the political transition.
At present, the humanitarian situation in Libya
is grim. The negative impact of the Security Council
sanctions on civilians should be reduced. The Council
should improve communication with the Libyan
Government and explore the use of humanitarian
exemptions and other means in order to use Libya’s
frozen assets for national reconstruction and to improve
people’s lives. We hope that the Sanctions Committee
will earnestly pay attention to the Libyan Government’s
concern about the loss of frozen assets and come up
with a solution as soon as possible.
Libya is in a crucial period of national
reconstruction. The international community should
actively lend a helping hand to Libya and provide more
assistance and support for the country’s economic
development and pandemic response. China is ready
to work with the rest of the international community
to further contribute to lasting peace and development
in Libya.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Envoy Ján Kubiš for his informative
briefing. I also thank Ms. Asma Khalifa for her insights,
and I welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya
to this meeting.
There has been a sense of cautious optimism
with regard to the situation in Libya over the past few
months, especially since the signing of the ceasefire
agreement on 23 October 2020. The Security Council
witnessed and welcomed the political progress achieved,
including the establishment of the Government of
National Unity charged with the conduct of elections
on 24 December 2021.
However, as we heard from the Special Envoy and
noted from the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/752),
despite the progress achieved, there are still causes for
concern. The security situation remains fragile, the
involvement of external forces in the internal affairs of
Libya has negatively impacted progress on the political
track, and terrorist forces have been raising their heads
once again in Libya.

21-2478115/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

We are not far from December, when all the
stakeholders in Libya agreed that elections should be
held. As Libya embarks on its journey towards peace
and stability, it is incumbent upon the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
continue to provide support to the country so that the
political progress achieved does not whittle away. In
that regard, I would like to make several suggestions.
First, elections need to be held as planned on
24 December 2021 in a free and fair manner. That point
cannot be overemphasized, since the very essence of
Libya’s political progress hinges on that aspect. In
order to achieve that, it is vital that the constitutional
and legal basis for conducting elections be agreed upon
early. We are happy to note the reports that the House of
Representatives is in the progress of finalizing electoral
law. We call upon all the parties concerned to work
together to arrive at a mutually acceptable solution at
the earliest date so that the elections can be held as
scheduled. At the same time, we encourage the High
National Elections Commission to continue to prepare
for the upcoming elections.
Secondly, the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Libya needs to be safeguarded.
The peace process must be fully Libyan-led and
-owned, with no imposition or external interference.
We also encourage all Libyan parties to continue to
make concerted efforts towards the unification of all
national institutions.
Thirdly, the provisions of the ceasefire agreement
and successive Security Council resolutions need
to be respected. Unfortunately, those provisions, in
particular those related to the withdrawal of foreign
forces and mercenaries, continue to be violated. It is
equally alarming that the arms embargo continues
to be blatantly violated, as repeatedly reported by
the Panel of Experts on Libya. There needs to be a
serious discussion within the Council on what further
measures could be taken to ensure that its decisions on
the withdrawal of foreign forces are implemented so
that sustainable peace and stability prevails in Libya.
Fourthly, we must ensure that terrorist groups
and affiliated entities are not allowed to operate
unchallenged in Libya. The continued presence and
activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in Libya is of serious concern, as highlighted by the
Secretary-General’s recent report. This is a matter of
grave concern due to the potential cascading effect it
16/24

10/09/2021

could have throughout the Sahel region. It is unfortunate
that the issue is not drawing the attention it deserves.
The international community must speak in one voice
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Fifthly, we need to plan for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups and
non-State armed actors. We appreciate the fact that the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) is
prepared to render assistance to Libya in that process.
Sixthly, an inclusive and comprehensive national
reconciliation process is the need of the hour. We hope
that all the parties concerned will engage sincerely
in that endeavour. We also urge the international
community to support such a process.
We are working closely with other Council members
on the renewal of the UNSMIL mandate. In that regard,
we note the report of the independent strategic review
of UNSMIL and its recommendations, which will,
among other things, guide our thinking on the mandate.
In conclusion, India has traditionally enjoyed close
and mutually beneficial bilateral ties with Libya. We
remain committed to supporting Libya and the Libyan
people in their endeavour to bring about lasting peace
in the country.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Envoy Kubiš for his briefing today and
for his team’s efforts to guide the Libyan people on
the road to elections on 24 December. As well, I thank
Ms. Asma Khalifa and Ambassador Tirumurti for
their presentations. Today I would like to discuss three
aspects of the situation in Libya: the threats to progress
and free and fair elections, the need to address human
rights violations, and the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
First, we are deeply concerned by the outbreak of
violence in Tripoli. That return to hostilities threatens
the progress made since the 23 October ceasefire
agreement. The people of Libya deserve a sovereign,
stable and unified Libya with no foreign interference
and a State that is capable of combating terrorism
within its borders. That progress is critical for regional
security. And it is necessary for the people of Libya. For
that progress to happen, national elections must be held
in December. Therefore, parties need urgently to agree
on a constitutional and legal framework for elections.
Fortunately, the Special Envoy’s report indicates that
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8855

that work is progressing. We urge maximum efforts to
consult and secure broad consensus.

And the authorities must facilitate the swift and orderly
closure of migrant detention facilities.

The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum must
resist polarization and cynical politicking. And the
House of Representatives must adopt the necessary
constitutional and legislative arrangements straight
away. Unfortunately, the foreign forces and mercenaries
who remain in Libya embolden those who obstruct
progress towards free and fair elections. Those forces
remain despite the ceasefire agreement, which was
endorsed by the Security Council. And arms continue
to flow into the country, despite a Council-imposed
arms embargo.

We are pleased that the Human Rights Council
Fact-Finding Mission members were recently able
to visit Tripoli. We hope that their important work in
support of a durable political agreement can continue.

It is time for the Security Council to live by its words.
Council members must support the implementation of,
and abide by, the ceasefire agreement and facilitate the
withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries from
Libya without delay. Those who obstruct or undermine
the successful completion of Libya’s political transition
may be subject to sanctions.
In the meantime, the Panel of Experts has worked
diligently to expose violations of the sanctions regime.
Its work shows that some Member States have imported
weapons and armed personnel to Haftar-aligned forces,
in violation of the arms embargo, and that others have
done similarly for the Government of Libya and aligned
forces. Those actions fuel conflict. They threaten
stability. And they prolong the suffering of the Libyan
people. It is time for them to end.
We also welcome the Panel’s investigation into
potential violations of the travel ban and assets freeze.
That includes most recently their investigation into
allegations that Saadi Al-Qadhafi departed Libya
without any prior notification or exemption from the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
Secondly, the human rights violations and abuses
committed by all parties in Libya are unacceptable. We
are disturbed in particular by the reports of the arbitrary
detention of politicians and Government officials,
human rights defenders and migrants. The authorities
must desist from arbitrary arrests and abide by Libya’s
international obligations. Everyone is guaranteed a fair
trial. Detainees, including vulnerable migrants and
refugees, cannot be treated inhumanely. Migrants and
refugees are afforded protections under international
humanitarian law; those protections must be enforced.

Thirdly, and finally, we commend the work of the
United Kingdom in drafting the new draft resolution
to renew UNSMIL’s mandate. And we credit the work
of Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily and his team to produce an
independent strategic review of UNSMIL. We share its
clear conclusion: the situation on the ground in Libya
has changed since the UNSMIL mandate was last
renewed. The October 2020 ceasefire agreement has
created an opportunity for UNSMIL to engage directly
with stakeholders on the ground in Libya to move the
process forward.
We therefore support the review’s recommendation
that the Head of Mission relocate to Tripoli to intensify
that engagement. Such engagement will be critical.
We need progress towards a consensus framework
for presidential and parliamentary elections on
24 December. We will continue to engage Council
members with the goal of providing a mandate that
empowers UNSMIL, which has a vitally important role
in supporting those who act in the interests of Libya,
including those who are working to implement the
ceasefire and achieve peace and stability for all.
Mr. Ríos Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative Kubiš for his briefing on
the fragile situation in Libya, and I acknowledge the
hard work that he has done at the helm of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). I also
would like to express appreciation for the briefings by
Ambassador Tirumurti, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, and of Ms. Asma Khalifa.
I also recognize the presence of the representative
of Libya.
Having listened to the briefers, it is crucial that
Libyan political actors act responsibly, consolidate
the achievements made in bringing about peace in the
country and make progress in unifying State institutions.
In accordance with the road map of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum, it is more urgent than ever
that the legal basis for organizing the 24 December
elections be adopted swiftly. The support of the

21-2478117/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

international community for the reconciliation process
is also necessary, but always bearing in mind that it is
solely up to Libyan citizens to decide on the future of
their country.
In that context, I would like to draw the attention of
the Security Council to three points.
First, Mexico believes that, given the upcoming
date for the parliamentary and presidential elections,
the efforts of UNSMIL should be focused on building
bridges among the different political groups to achieve
an inclusive, free and credible electoral process.
We welcome the progress made in the negotiation
of the legal basis and the allocation of a budget to
organize the elections, while we call on the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission to agree on a security operation
that allows for the mobilization of voters throughout
Libyan territory. In that regard, Mexico calls for
the timely deployment of the ceasefire monitoring
mechanism, including the United Nations component
authorized by the Security Council. Similarly, the
widespread availability of weapons and the presence of
foreign fighters and mercenaries pose a clear risk to the
electoral process. With regard to the latter, we insist
once again on their prompt and coordinated departure
from Libya. The Security Council should provide full
support to the Libyan authorities through UNSMIL to
fully meet the objectives agreed in Tunis, including the
equal, full and meaningful participation of women in
the political process, in conditions of security.
Secondly, Mexico recognizes that, thanks to the
ceasefire agreement, humanitarian needs have been
reduced. We highlight, for example, that the number
of internally displaced persons was reduced by
approximately 180,000 people from November 2020 to
July 2021. This is undoubtedly one of the most important
dividends of the peace process. However, half a million
people in vulnerable situations still depend on the
work of humanitarian organizations to be able to feed
themselves or have access to housing, drinking water or
health services, which are particularly necessary in the
context of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We therefore reiterate our call to the Libyan
authorities to facilitate the operations of humanitarian
actors. Mexico expresses its concern, in particular,
about the difficulties international non-governmental
organizations have recently faced in obtaining the
necessary visas for their personnel.
18/24

10/09/2021

In addition, Mexico renews its request to UNSMIL
for the rapid deployment of protection advisers for women
and children. There is an urgent need to strengthen the
Mission’s capacity to address the needs of these two
particularly vulnerable groups. The deployment of
advisers is part of the recommendations emanating
from the independent strategic review of the Mission
that my country supports and considers relevant.
Thirdly, I wish to emphasize the urgency of
providing an effective response to the situation of
migrants. It is unacceptable that year after year there
are repeated images of shipwrecks and reports of such
tragedies as the explosion that occurred at the Abu
Rashada detention centre in the face of the international
community’s inaction. Mexico calls on the countries of
origin and destination to coordinate a strategy with the
Libyan authorities that addresses the structural causes
of the migratory phenomenon and guarantees the
protection of the rights of migrants.
For all the foregoing reasons, I would conclude by
affirming the importance of the renewal of UNSMIL’s
mandate and the constructive participation of my
delegation in the corresponding negotiations.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I think Special Envoy Kubiš
and Ambassador Tirumurti for their comprehensive
briefings. I also thank Ms. Asma Khalifa for her
briefing. I welcome the Permanent Representative of
Libya to today’s meeting.
Viet Nam continues to closely follow the
developments in Libya. We share the concerns of other
Security Council members with regard to the limited
progress on the political and security tracks in the
past months. It is imperative to maintain the positive
momentum achieved at the beginning of the year and
address current challenges in a comprehensive manner.
In the light of the current situation, I wish to
highlight the following three points. First, it is of utmost
importance that preparations be completed to enable
the holding of national elections at the end of the year in
line with the agreed road map. We call on the relevant
parties in Libya to resolve outstanding differences and
expedite all necessary legal and logistical arrangements
for the elections. We also underline the importance of
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women and youth in this process.
Accordingly, the role of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), neighbouring countries
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

and regional and international partners will remain
crucial to supporting the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political process. UNSMIL and the international
community should continue to foster support, dialogue,
confidence-building measures and reconciliation
efforts among the relevant parties.
Secondly, it is imperative for all relevant parties
to fully uphold the provisions of the October 2020
ceasefire agreement, including the implementation of
the ceasefire monitoring mechanism, with the support
of UNSMIL. This must also be in line with upholding
the arms embargo in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions on Libya.
We share the concerns expressed by many Council
members about the impact that some aspects related
to Libya have on the security situation in the region.
We reiterate our support for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces and mercenaries from the territory
of the country, in line with ceasefire agreement and
resolution 2570 (2021). This process must be carried
out in a timely, orderly and comprehensive manner and
not translate into instability in neighbouring countries
and the region.
Thirdly, strengthened efforts are needed to further
tackle the economic and humanitarian challenges
in Libya. We commend continuing efforts aimed at
facilitating the unification of Libya’s economic and
financial institutions. We call on international partners
to continue to provide support to Libya, especially in
order to address the needs of and challenges faced by
vulnerable groups, particularly women, children, and
migrants. We welcome the efforts of United Nations and
other partners in supporting the coronavirus disease
vaccination process in Libya and wish to see further
assistance to the country in this regard.

S/PV. 8855

Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I would also like to thank
the briefers for their comprehensive overviews on the
latest developments.
Libya has made great strides forward on the
political, security and economic tracks over the past
year. It is now important not to let the progress stall.
The tasks ahead for the coming months are clear.
All preparations need to be made to hold free, fair,
inclusive and credible elections on 24 December, as
set out in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road
map and in resolution 2570 (2021). In that regard, we
are encouraged by yesterday’s announcement that the
House of Representatives has adopted draft legislation
for the upcoming presidential elections. We call for
further engagement of all relevant authorities and for
urgently establishing the legal basis for the upcoming
parliamentary elections.
With regard to political processes, we have to
reiterate the crucial importance of ensuring the full,
equal, and meaningful participation of women and the
inclusion of youth at all stages and levels. Women must
be able to participate in all aspects of political life — as
candidates, as activists and as voters — without fear
of retaliation.
We very much welcome the participation of
Ms. Asma Khalifa at today’s briefing and thank her for
her insightful comments.
Estonia is encouraged by the progress in the
implementation of the 23 October ceasefire agreement,
especially the opening of the Misrata-Sirte coastal
road. It is of utmost importance to continue with the
full implementation of the agreement, in particular, the
swift removal of all foreign fighters and mercenaries.

In addition, it is greatly encouraging that the coastal
roads have been fully reopened. We commend efforts to
clear the coastal roads in Libya of mines and explosive
remnants of war with the support of the United Nations
Mine Action Service.

Another essential element of the ceasefire agreement
is implementing the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
ceasefire monitoring mechanism. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s assurances that the United Nations
is urgently proceeding with the initial deployment of a
scalable ceasefire monitoring component of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, and we look forward
to a swift deployment of the international support team.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
work of UNSMIL and Special Envoy Kubiš in this
critical period. We support the renewal of the Mission’s
mandate at this crucial time and will continue to engage
actively with Council members in this process.

Estonia remains alarmed at the humanitarian
situation in the country, in particular, the lack of
access for humanitarian aid and humanitarian workers.
The situation of migrants and asylum seekers also
continues to be of great concern. Arbitrary detention

21-2478119/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

and exposure to violence, including sexual and genderbased violence, needs to end.
All alleged human rights violations, mass
killings, torture and enforced disappearances must be
thoroughly investigated. It is crucial to continue the
fight against impunity and ensure accountability.
Lastly, Estonia reiterates its full support for the
work of UNSMIL. The United Nations-led mediation
efforts in the framework of the Berlin process remain
the basis for international efforts in support of achieving
peace and stability in Libya.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I wish to thank Mr. Ján
Kubiš and Ms. Asma Khalifa for their briefings and
insights. We also thank Ambassador Tirumurti,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for his periodic report. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya.
Peace processes often entail a delicate balance
between the urgency of decisions and the need to
secure a level of inclusivity that guarantees ownership
and sustainability. That requires patience and careful
nurturing of the process, whose wheels often turn
slowly. For that reason, Kenya applauds the people of
Libya for each positive step they take towards peace
and stability. Notably, the landmark reopening of the
Misrata-Sirte coastal road, the registration of voters,
including for Libyans abroad, and the continued
dialogue within all the tracks are continued steps in
that direction.
However, we note that there are critical elements
in the peace process that are pending and creating a
barrier to its progress. We believe that the desire and
decision of the Libyan people to hold elections on
24 December can be better actualized if there is in place
an appropriate legal framework and adequate budgetary
provision. It is also imperative to ensure the equal, full
and meaningful participation of women, not only in the
preparatory process but also in the actual elections.
Kenya urges the Libyan people to consider how
far they have come and how near they may be to the
momentous end of the transition. We particularly call
on the members of the political class to consider one
another as fellow countrymen and countrywomen and
exercise flexibility and compromise for the collective
gains of their nation and their future generations. In
that regard, we welcome the official announcement of
20/24

10/09/2021

the launch of the comprehensive national reconciliation
project by the President of the Presidency Council earlier
this week. We appreciate the support of the African
Union in that connection and are fully persuaded that
national reconciliation is a necessary component that
will contribute significantly to the holding of peaceful
and credible elections.
The Security Council has repeatedly called for
commitment to the ceasefire agreement and adherence
to the arms embargo, including through resolutions
2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021) as well as presidential
statements and other products. The need for all the
parties to heed that call cannot be over-emphasised.
The Council has also been seized of the destabilizing
effect of the continued presence of foreign forces and
mercenaries — not only on Libya but also the region,
especially the Sahel. Their long-overdue exit should
happen without further delay for the desired truly
Libyan-led and -owned peace process to be achieved.
It is important that regional and international
attention be paid to the need for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. In that regard, we
urge that the impending mandate renewal of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya acknowledge that, so
as to help prevent the possible cyclical conflict in the
Sahel region and beyond.
A regional perspective in the management of
the peace process will be necessary to tackle the
continued illegal migration challenge. We therefore
encourage continued consultations between Libya and
neighbouring states, with the support of the United
Nations, and initiatives such as the quadripartite
agreement among Libya, Chad, the Niger and the Sudan.
Kenya is concerned about increased reports
regarding the activities of terrorist groups in Libya,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levan and
Al-Qaida. Urgent counter-terrorism measures must be
undertaken in order to sustain the peace process and
protect the gains that have been made.
We note that Libyan assets are to be preserved for
the future return to, and the benefit of, the people of
Libya, in accordance with resolution 1970 (2011). We
therefore urge that the implementation of the assets
freeze always be done in liaison with Libyan authorities.
A periodic review of the assets freeze will serve to
ensure that its purposes are served, especially as Libya
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

looks towards the elections and for unified institutions
and national processes.
To conclude, I reiterate Kenya’s support for the
tireless efforts of the Special Representative and the
United Nations Mission in support of the peace process.
And I reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with the people of
Libya in their quest for sustainable peace and stability
through a truly Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
peace process.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I thank Special Representative Kubiš for his briefing
and Ambassador Tirumurti for his report. Let me also
thank Ms. Asma Khalifa for her powerful contribution.
Her insights and testimony have informed and enriched
our discussion, and her personal commitment to
inclusive and enduring peace in Libya will inspire the
Security Council. Her eloquent words on the need for
depoliticized reconciliation resonate strongly with us
on the island of Ireland.
This is a pivotal moment for Libya and its people.
The independent strategic review of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) paints a sobering
picture of its challenges and constraints. Meeting those
challenges will require leadership on the ground, and
we therefore support the review’s recommendation to
relocate the Head of Mission to Tripoli.
The holding of national parliamentary and
presidential elections on 24 December is vital to a
successful, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
transition. We were pleased that the House of
Representatives recently adopted a law allowing for
presidential elections. We call on the relevant authorities
to urgently resolve outstanding disagreements to ensure
that parliamentary elections also take place on schedule.
Asma’s words to the Council today underline
the indispensable role played by women, youth and
broader civil society in building inclusive and peaceful
communities. Seventeen members of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum are women, and Ireland
warmly welcomes their important contributions. We
also welcome UNSMIL’s efforts to empower women
further, including through assisting the Libyan Ministry
of Women’s Affairs in the development of a national
action plan on women and peace and security.
However, we are appalled at reports of violence
targeted at politically active women, including human

S/PV. 8855

rights defenders, and we strongly condemn all such
incidents. The strategic review’s recommendation
to implement a surge capacity in UNSMIL’s gender
advisory and human rights units must be implemented
urgently, in particular the swift deployment of women
protection advisers.
Reports of conflict-related sexual violence against
women, including migrants in detention, are deeply
disturbing. More must be done to combat those most
heinous crimes. UNSMIL human rights officers must
be able to carry out their critical work in safety and
security, and to have the resources necessary to combat
all forms of sexual violence.
Ireland welcomed the opening of the coastal road
on 30 July, and we look forward to the forthcoming
deployment of the first United Nations ceasefire
monitors to Libya — important steps in implementation
of the ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
The withdrawal of all foreign forces and
mercenaries, as stipulated by resolution 2570
(2021), must be completed as soon as possible and in
consultation with all stakeholders.
We are very concerned that the number of people in
need of humanitarian assistance has increased this year,
compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We are also concerned by reported visa backlogs
for aid workers, whose work is crucial to providing
humanitarian relief.
We call on the House of Representatives and the
Government of National Unity to prioritize agreement
on a national budget. That is vital for the provision of
services, which is hampered further by fuel shortages
and disruptions in water and electricity supply.
Finally, we continue to call for the upholding of
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. Rule of law
institutions and transitional justice mechanisms must
be strengthened, and human rights officers must not be
constrained in their ability to move freely across the
country and adequately monitor human rights violations.
Ireland unequivocally condemns the smuggling,
trafficking and arbitrary detention in inhumane
conditions of migrants and refugees, where they are at
heightened risk of sexual violence and exploitation.

21-2478121/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

10/09/2021

We support the renewal of resolution 2546 (2020)
and commend the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI for its important work.

take this opportunity to thank friendly countries and
international organizations that recently contributed to
providing support.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

As part of the Government’s work to deliver
services to all parts of the country and establish the
principle of decentralization and non-marginalization,
the activation of the local administration law and
the start of the national programme for transferring
competencies to municipalities, enabling them to collect
local revenues, and supporting municipalities in their
service and development projects were announced.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Republic of
Ireland on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank Mr. Ján Kubiš
for his briefing; Ambassador T.S. Tirumurti, Permanent
Representative of India, for his briefing on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya; and
Ms. Asma Khalifa for her briefing — not only about
women but also about young people of Libya, who have
suffered over the years. We call on the Security Council
to expand future participation in these meetings to
include other sectors of Libyan society, including civil
society, so that the Council may hear all views.
Our discussion today comes at an important and
critical time in my country’s crisis, one in which we
have started to see some breakthroughs and real
steps towards reconciliation among Libyans since the
declaration of the ceasefire in October 2020 and the
consensus that resulted in choosing the Presidency
Council and the Government of National Unity through
the Political Dialogue Forum, held in sisterly Tunisia,
which we thank once again for everything it has done to
support the Libyan people throughout the years.
Despite all the challenges facing the Presidency
Council and the Government since its establishment,
as well as the delay in consolidating the positions of
the House of Representatives and the High Council
of State, given the available capacity and the pending
approval of the general budget, executive institutions
have been largely unified and consolidated, while
some basic service projects have also been launched.
There is an urgent need to start addressing the most
important issues that affect citizens, such as those
having to do with energy and electricity and some
important economic reforms. The coronavirus disease
pandemic has been accorded special importance, by
providing nearly 3 million vaccines, while 3 million
more vaccines are on the way, in addition to preparing
vaccination centres in several regions of the country.
Work is under way to improve medical services to
address the consequences of this global pandemic. We
22/24

In the same context, in order to fulfil the
obligations of the executive authority towards the road
map for general elections, a ministerial committee was
formed to support and make the elections successful,
so as to provide the necessary technical, logistical
and material assistance to support the work of the
High National Elections Commission and educate and
encourage citizens to register for the elections at home.
The Ministry for Foreign Affairs also supervised the
process of registering nearly 2.8 million voters abroad
to date. A comprehensive plan was also prepared for
securing polling stations by training more than 30,000
officers of the Ministry of the Interior.
In that regard, we call upon the bodies concerned
to expedite consensus and properly complete the tasks
entrusted to them according to what is set out in the
political agreement and the road map adopted by the
Security Council, so as to guarantee genuine national
reconciliation and the non-recurrence of past conflicts
and divisions, as well as to ensure that all parties accept
the results of the elections scheduled for the end of this
year without deviating from the democratic path that
Libyans are searching for. We also call upon the United
Nations once again to expedite the deployment of an
elections needs assessment team to Libya to determine
the technical and security preparations needed and the
necessary support for State institutions to ensure a
transparent and fair electoral process.
There is no doubt that national initiatives to resolve
the crisis in Libya constitute the basis on which we
can work to achieve stability. Through the statements
of its members, the Security Council has repeatedly
highlighted the importance of Libyan ownership and
leadership of any political process that leads the country
to stability and Libyan State sovereignty over the whole
of the country’s territory. Accordingly, the Government
of National Unity has announced the launching of
21-24781

10/09/2021

The situation in Libya

the Libya Stability Initiative, an exclusive national
initiative that aims to achieve sustainable stability
and is based on two important and interlinked tracks,
namely, security and economic tracks. To that end, all
need to come together in order to consolidate military
and security institutions under civilian authority,
integrate combatants, ensure the State’s monopoly
over weapons and launch a comprehensive economic
strategy based on social justice, equitable distribution
of wealth and reconstruction.
In that context, we invite the Council to provide
support for that national initiative, especially as it is
based on the outcomes of the two Berlin Conferences
and resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021). We also
invite the Council to participate in the international
conference called by the Government for next month,
which will be hosted by Libya and in which the United
Nations, regional organizations and brotherly and
friendly countries that wish to contribute effectively to
supporting Libya and its stability will participate.
We extend our hand to the Council and welcome
everyone to support the stability of Libya and
rebuild confidence between the Libyan people and
the international community, which had direct
responsibility for the situation in Libya since 2011. This
is an opportunity to prove good intentions, which the
Council itself has recognized. We take this opportunity
to welcome the recent international reconciliation
and the review by several countries of their previous
policies, as everyone is now convinced that there is no
military solution to the Libyan crisis. Undoubtedly,
all of this has a positive impact on the situation in
Libya. We will not accept any kind of negative foreign
intervention in our affairs again. We invite members to
assist us in rebuilding, not destroying.
The Government of National Unity stresses the
pivotal role of Libya’s neighbouring countries in
helping to achieve security and stability in our country
and the region. We thank brotherly Algeria for hosting
the ministerial meeting of neighbouring countries held
a few days ago. We look forward to the second meeting,
which will be hosted by our neighbour Egypt, to follow
up on the dialogues that were held and during which
there was emphasis on support for the initiative to
achieve stability in Libya, support the political track
and the outcomes of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission,
and the inevitable need that there is only a Libyan-led
solution to the Libyan crisis, as well as to address the
need to respond to the Libyan people’s uncompromising

S/PV. 8855

sovereign demand that all fighters, mercenaries and
foreign forces leave the country at the same time and
under the direct supervision of the Libyan State. That
includes sitting together at the negotiating table and
developing a joint mechanism to ensure that the conflict
is not transferred to neighbouring countries, which
would threaten the security of the region, especially
African coastal States, of which the best example is
what happened in neighbouring Chad. In that context,
it has been announced that the joint quadripartite
agreement among Libya, the Niger, Chad and the Sudan
on achieving security in various dimensions along our
common borders has been activated.
In referring to neighbouring countries and their
roles, we cannot fail to thank brotherly Morocco for its
ongoing efforts and its hosting of many Libyan political
parties, on several occasions, to create the conditions
conducive to finding peaceful and consensual solutions
to the current crisis.
With regard to the human rights issue, my
Government reaffirms that it is working seriously
to ensure respect for human rights and that, after
more than 10 years of conflict, no new violations be
committed. The Government also stresses that the
competent national authorities, working in cooperation
with the United Nations and the Human Rights Council
Fact-Finding Mission, have conducted several meetings
and field visits, in particular to inspect the mass graves
that are still being discovered in Tarhouna, as well as
to meet the families of the victims. The Government
is working to complete the necessary investigations
of the war crimes committed and revealing the fate of
the missing persons and those detained without legal
reasons throughout the country, so as to establish the
principle of no-impunity and bring criminals to justice.
There is no statute of limitation for those crimes.
On the issue of migration, we reaffirm the
importance of finding a solution to this international
phenomenon and of working to establish comprehensive
international cooperation mechanisms that contribute
to the development of countries whose citizens are a
source of international migration. We also reiterate that
Libya is a transit country, not a destination country.
Nevertheless, Libya’s stability can contribute to dealing
with this phenomenon, especially by virtue of its
historical relations with its neighbours.
On every occasion, we cannot fail to recall the
importance of the issue of comprehensive national

21-2478123/24

S/PV.8855

The situation in Libya

10/09/2021

reconciliation, which has been absent for the past
years. That clearly has had a direct impact on the
failure of dialogue and many initiatives, although it is
undoubtedly the basic building block for the success and
sustainability of any political consensus and settlement.

of everyone, and reiterate our call to the African Union,
which has experience and expertise in that regard, to
support Libya on its national path. Coincidentally,
yesterday marked the establishment of the African
Union in the Libyan city of Sirte in 1999.

In that regard, everyone has been following the first
tangible steps of the path towards reconciliation and
rebuilding confidence among Libyans. Thanks to the
efforts of the Presidency Council and the Government
of National Unity, in coordination with the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, the exchange of prisoners and
detainees has continued and the coastal road between
the east and west of the country was reopened.
Moreover, a joint force was set up to secure several
strategic locations. In addition, in compliance with the
provisions of the judiciary and in coordination with the
Attorney General’s Office and the Ministry of Justice,
many prisoners who had been previously acquitted and
whose legal conditions required it were released

In conclusion, I call upon our Libyan people,
whatever their affiliation or views, and whatever the
wounds might be, to shake hands, forgive and stop
ruminating on the past. I invite them to raise the torch
of justice, reconciliation, peace and forgiveness when
possible. As Nelson Mandela said when launching
national reconciliation in South Africa, “Courageous
people do not fear forgiving for the sake of peace”.

We invite the Security Council from this rostrum
to support the national reconciliation commission
announced recently by the President of the Presidency
Council, as well as to support the efforts of the
Prime Minister to start an integrated project for
complete national reconciliation. As members know,
the reconciliation journey is long and its paths are
numerous and interconnected. It begins with activating
the judiciary and implementing transitional justice. It
begins with frankness, disclosure, acknowledgment
of error, apology and reparation. It begins with the
release of forcibly imprisoned people throughout the
country. It begins with the return of the displaced and
the disclosure of the fate of the missing. With those
steps, we can achieve national harmony and genuine
national reconciliation. We therefore need the support

24/24

We are going through a critical stage in the history
of the Libyan nation. It is imperative that we work
to make consensus among Libyans succeed and to
overcome any obstacles. It is a stage in which we must
support our youth, who have been wronged and pushed
to take up arms and provided the fodder for war and
conflict. Together we must end all kinds of destructive
foreign interference and push back those who stand in
the way of realizing the ambitions of the Libyan people
in expressing their free will and self-determination. We
assure everyone that Libya has begun to recover and
will come back strong. It has not been, and will not be,
broken, because the Libyan people have become aware
of everything that has been put up against them in an
attempt to weaken them and rob them of their will.
But that will never happen; it has become impossible
and unimaginable.
Long live Libya as a one, unified and civil State
that is free and proud.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

21-24781
