276

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

4. Appeals to all States, institutions, organizations and
individuals to offer greater financial and other support to
the Programme in order to secure its continuation and
steady expansion.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/55. Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolution 39/45 of 5 December 1984,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities
for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 50 prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Considering that more scholarships should be made
available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories in all parts of the world and that steps should be
taken to encourage applications from students in those
Territories,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
50 A/40/718.

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants
of those Territories that have not yet attained self-government or independence and, "'herever possible. to provide
travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective
measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of
information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
99th plenary meeting
2 Decemher 1985
