SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2482’d

MEETING:

NEW

21 OCTOBER

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*................

1

...............................................

1

agenda (WAgenda12482)
of the agenda

The situation

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);

(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/ 15943) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2482

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol .S/ . . .) are normally published in ‘,
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjciaal Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.

_: :
.:: :

The resolutions’of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2482nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 21 October 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH

(Jordan).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 248 1st meeting, I
invite the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of the
Council to take places at the Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of ‘the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Notihern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2482)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Namibia:
(a)
Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b)
Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c)
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the
question of Namibia (S/15943)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
place at the Council table.
4. The .PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the representatives of Angola, Canada, Cuba, Ethiopia, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Oramas Ofiva (Cuba),
Mr. Wolde (Ethiopia), Mr. Krishnan (India). Mr. Treiki
Adoption of the agenda
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr.
Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa),
i’he agenda was adopted.
Mr. Rupia (United Rep&c of Tanzania), Mr. Golob (Yugo: slavia) and Mr. Kunda (&mbia) took the places reservedfor
” them at the side of the Council chamber.
Tbe situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permandnt Re$‘t:: I
5. The PRESIDENT
(interoretation
from Arabic): I
resentative of Senegal to the United Nations addressed.
to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
should like to inform the’ meibers of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Botswana,
(S) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from tbe Permanent Repthe Federal Republic of Germany, Mozambique and Veneresentative of India to the United Nations addressed to
zuela in which they request to be invited to participate in
the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning tbe
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
Namibia (S/15943)
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Legwaila (Boinvite the representative of Senegal to take a place at the
Council table.
tswana), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr.
dos Santos (Mozambique) and Mrs. Coronel de Rodrkuez
(Venezuela) took the places reserved for them at the side of
At the invitation of the President, Mr. SarrP (Senegal)
the Council chamber.
took a place at the Council table.
Xke meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

1

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arubic): I
should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/16056, which contains the text of a
note verbale dated 20 October from the Mission of Guinea
to the President of the Council.

13. Whenever all outstanding issues have been settled,
Pretoria invents new ones to take their place. My delegation does not believe that the apartheid regime will end its
illegal occupation of Namibia unless it is forced to do so.
International consensus, pressure or censure will not force
South Africa to move towards genuine independence for
Namibia. If the implementation of Council resolution 435
(1978) is not set in motion in the very near future, there
will be only two options available to the international
community-the
peaceful one, through imposition of
sanctions and the withdrawal
of Western political, economic and military support for the Pretoria regime, or a
long-drawn-out
armed struggle by SWAP0
and the
people of Namibia, with support of every type by their
friends.

7. The first speaker is the representative of Angola,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
8. Mr. FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): On behalf of my delegation, Sir, I ask you to accept our best wishes on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I also take
this opportunity to commend Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana
on his work as President last month.

14. The nosition of Angola on Namibian independence
has been &ted succinctly on numerous occasions. The
people, the Party and Government of Angola offer their
total solidarity with, and support for, the people of Namibia and SWAPO, in keeping with the principles of our
revolution and the spirit of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the
Organisation of African Unity (OAU), and in keeping
with our commitment to freedom from imperialism, colonialism and racism, all of which are embodied in the Pretoria regime, which seeks to terrorize not only its own
majority inhabitants but also much of southern Africa.

9. The general debate in the General Assembly has just
ended. We have heard the enunciation of high principles,
noble sentiments, profound beliefs, sacred creeds. We have
heard rhetoric, shibboleths and dogma. We have also
heard words of wisdom, solidarity and support. We have
been presented with a number of documents and reports
on various international problems and sources of tension
and conflict.
10. However, crises continue to exist all over the world
and show no sign of abatement. Many are, if anything,
worse. One of the most serious problems threatening international peace and security is also one of the oldest before
the United Nations-the
illegal occupation of Namibia by
the racist armed forces and Administration
of South
Africa. This occupation of the Territory of Namibia, this
oppression of the people of Namibia, this exploitation of
the human and natural resources of Namibia has, in recent
years, undergone various processes and has been given
different labels by the apartheid occupation regime of
South Africa, all designed to make the occupation more
palatable to the majority inhabitants of Namibia and more
acceptable to critics. But the people of Namibia, led by
their liberation movement, the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO), have rejected these attempts at
deception, and progressive forces all over the world have
denied the legitimacy sought by the apurrheid regime for its
illegitimate offspring-an
extension racist regime in
Windhoek.

15. We reject manufactured and irrelevant demands, artificial linkages between completely unrelated issues and
attempts to give the Pretoria regime precious time under
the rubric of “constructive engagement”, which, in fact,
has enabled South Africa to become more belligerent in
carrying out acts of armed aggression in Mozambique,
Zimbabwe, Lesotho and other southern African States.
This “constructive
engagement” has allowed the racist
armed forces of South Africa to engage in a destructive
engagement in Angola and to extend Pretoria’s illegal
occupation of Namibia to parts of southern Angola.
16. The position of my Government on the problems in
southern Africa has been stated on a number of occasions,
most recently in the general debate, at the 27th meeting of
the General Assembly. However, for the record in the
Council I should like to reiterate the four points made on
that occasion by President Jose Eduardo dos Santos; they
represent the position of the MPLA-Workers
Party (Movimemo Popular de Libertacao de Angola-Partido
de Trabalho) and of the Government of Angola. The first
requirement is the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of South African troops occupying our territory.
Secondly, Council resolution 435 (1978) must be speedily
implemented in order to steer Namibia to real independence. Thirdly, South Africa’s attacks on Angola must
cease. Fourthly, all logistic and military support given to
the gangs of UNITA (National Union for the Total Independence of Angola) puppets terrorizing our towns must
cease.

11. Since 1978, the South African Administration
has
manipulated the situation in other, intricate ways: by giving false promises to the United Nations and false assurances to the international community, meanwhile remaining intransigent,
buttressing its military presence in
Namibia, increasing its economic power at home, acquiring a nuclear capability, and threatening the sovereign
countries in southern Africa with acts of aggression and
military adventurism and expansionism aimed at destabilizing their legitimate Governments.
12. An impartial look at the issues relating to Namibian
independence also shows the almost limitless subterfuge
and deception employed by the racist South African
regime to buy time and acquire more sympathetic friends
and administrations overseas.

17. If Namibia is to win independence peacefully, the
next and only step is the immediate implementation of
resolution 435 (1978), starting with a cease-fire, the
emplacement of the United Nations Transition Assistance
2

Group (UNTAG), the withdrawal of South African troops
and elections under United Nations supervision. As part of
this process, the Pretoria regime should immediately
announce its choice of electoral system and hold talks to
fix a date for the cease-fire so that implementation of resolution 435 (1978) can commence.

23. The racist South African armed forces have mounted
brutal attacks on all front-line States. Was that indeed also
because of a Cuban presence in those countries? Were
there Cuban troops in Lesotho? The racist regime has as
many pretexts, excuses and rationales as there are upartheid laws.

18. The armed forces of South Africa must also immediately withdraw from all Angolan territory, part of which
they have occupied since 1981, and pay compensation for
the damage and destruction they have wrought-most
recently in Cangamba, a town 400 kilometres inside AngoIan territory.

24. The real reason is contained in the phrase used by the
South African representative himself in referring to the
inexcusable South African terrorist attack on Maputo
recently. The representative referred to “the pre-emptive
operation”. And that is the key to all the racist rkgime’s
acts of aggression and terrorism both inside South Africa,
against its majority inhabitants, and across its borders in
Namibia and in other front-line States-pre-emptive
operations against the genuine independence of Namibia; preemptive operations against the spread of freedom and
liberation, even as former colonies regain independence;
pre-emptive operations against the granting of the inalienable rights of the South African majority inhabitants; preemptive strikes against anything at all that threatens the
racist apurrheid State and structure of South Africa. The
racist regime attempts to deceive the international community; yesterday it actually attempted to insult the intelligence of the Council members by presenting specious
arguments.

19. I have been speaking thus far on the issue of Namibian independence, which is the issue before the Council.
However, the representative of South Africa yesterday
[248Zsr meeting’3 made an attempt to turn his statement
into a discussion on what can be termed the South African
occupation of parts of southern Angola.
20. The rules .of procedure limit Council debates to the
matter at hand but, since no one has raised a procedural
objection, permit me to respond to some of the points
raised in the statement of the representative of South
Africa despite the fact that these clearly come under the
mandate of another question of which the Council has
been seized since 1978-that is, the question of South African aggression against Angola.
21. In 1975, even as our late President, Mr. Agostinho
Neto, was announcing independence to a jubilant civilian
crowd in Luanda, South African guns could be heard not
too far from our capital. It was in response to the South
African military invasion of Angola within hours of our
birth as an independent Angola that we invited our
friends, among them our Cuban friends, to assist us in
fighting this fresh onslaught of imperialism. Thus, South ’
Africa’s racist attacks on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola have nothing to do with the presence of
Cubans in Angola or the question of Namibian independence, as the racists would have us believe. There has never
been a single Angolan soldier on non-Angolan soil. Are we
being told that we have no right to self-defence within our
own borders and to be assisted by friends of our own
choice at our own invitation? What about the preimplementation talks held at Geneva in 1981, which also
broke down because of Pretoria’s intransigence? There was
no reference to a Cuban presence in Angola at that time. It
was not until mid-1981, after collusion between Pretoria
and its Western allies, that the linkage was manufactured.
22. As for the Cuban presence in Angola being a cause
for the gravest concern not only to South Africa but to “all
the countries of the region*‘, as the South African representative mentioned yesterday in his statement, perhaps he
has not really understood the cause of the gravest concern
in the region. It is the militarist and terrorist policies and
actions and the genocide of the apartheid South African
regime itself that are constantly referred to by every State
in southern Africa in every forum, including the Council.
If it is otherwise, I should certainly like to hear those countries speak for themselves.

25. The issue is not the Cuban presence. Angola is indeed
an independent State. Certainly, the issue here is the independence of Namibia. The issue is not SWAP0 bases, it is
the continued illegal occupation of Namibia and its exploitation as the fifth province of South Africa. The issue is
not support for the freedom fighters of the African
National Congress of South Africa (ANC); it is the denial
of human, civil, political and economic rights of South
Africa’s oppressed majority.
26. Those are the issues South Africa seeks to deny,
reject or camouflage, as witness the statement yesterday by
the representative of the racist regime.
27. To return to the issue before the Council, namely, the
question of Namibia: as long as South Africa continues to
get political and economic support from its friends, it will
feel free to undertake with impunity acts of armed aggression in southern Africa and continue its occupation and
exploitation of Namibia.
28. The Council must reject South Africa’s intransigence
in linking the independence of Namibia to irrelevant
extraneous issues, and if South Africa fails to comply with
relevant resolutions the Council should consider the adoption of appropriate measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
A luta continua: a vitoria e certa.
29. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

3

30. Mr. RUPIA (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr.
President, I wish first, on behalfof my delegation, to thank
you and the other members of the Council for giving us an
opportunity to participate in the Council’s deliberations
on the question of Namibia. We are confident that your
rich personal experience in the diplomatic field and your
well-recognized talents will be put to full use in guiding the
deliberations of the Council to a successful conclusion.
Coming from a region so rife with conflict arising from the
denial of a people’s freedom and its right to a homeland,
you are personally well aware of the magnitude of the
suffering which can be imposed on a struggling people.

of the parties to those negotiations would have chosen to
turn its back on the agreement and hence on the independence of Namibia.
36. If the United Nations plan embodied in resolution
435 (1978) is still unimplemented it is because of a policy
that has come to be known as “linkage’? or “parallelism”.
Inherent in that policy are considerations which are inimical not only to the independence of Namibia but to the
Charter of the United Nations. Indeed, they are inimical to
the independence of Namibia because the policy seeks to
link that independence to issues totally irrelevant to that
purpose and outside the context of resolution 435 (1978),
approving the United Nations plan. Apart from the rights
of the Namibians, the insistence on linking the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) to the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola is an interference in the internal affairs
of Angola.

31. I should like also to join those who have spoken
before me in paying a well deserved tribute to Mr. Noel
Sinclair of Guyana, who presided over the Council during
the month of September, for a job well done.
32. Allow me also to express my Government’s appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General in seeking a
peaceful resolution of the Namibian problem. His visit to
the region in fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to him by
the Council in its resolution 532 (1983), gave him the
opportunity to come in contact with the vivid realities and
the human tragedy attendant on the continued occupation
of Namibia. In particular, the visit vindicated our longstanding position that there can be no substitution for the
central role of the United Nations in the search for a solution to the Namibian question nor can it be relegated to a
secondary position.
:

37. The decision of Angola regarding those troops is a
sovereign prerogative of that State. It is consistent with the
Charter and international law. No country has any right to
violate the norms of international law. It is extortionist to
make the implementation of Council resolutions contingent upon the satisfaction of geo-political preoccupations
of any Member of the Organization, especially a permanent member of the Council. Council resolution 435 (1978)
was negotiated and adopted as a framework
for the
achievement of the independence of Namibia. That and
that alone, was its sole purpose. It did not and was not
meant to encompass issues irrelevant to that objective and
certainly not to be a vehicle of any Power or group of
countries to obtain, by extortion, national foreign policy
objectives otherwise unobtainable.

33. The report of the Secretary-General
[S/Z.59431
equally confirmed what has always been our understanding of the current status of the negotiations in the context
of Council resolution 435 (1978). The visit, therefore,
thrashed out some of the positions which were hitherto
muted.

38. There can be no doubt that those who seek to pervert
logic, falsify the truth and trample on the rights of peoples
for ideological expediency, do not want peace in southern
Africa. Those who go to great lengths to manufacture for
South Africa excuses with which to justify aggression, even
more than the apartheid authorities themselves, cannot
claim to be agents of stability in the region. Rather, their
actions seek to perpetuate instability and violence.

34. This series of Council ineetings has been convened in
order to consider the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 532 (1983). In May this year,
the Council met under very uncertain circumstances. It
was convened in an attempt to salvage a great opportunity
to bring to an end the colonization of Namibia, an opportunity that was gradually slipping away. Hence we saw the
need for the Council to revive its resolve speedily to implement its plan for the independence of that Territory. The
international community was trying to find ways to break
the impasse which had been, and continues to be, imposed
on the liberation of Namibia. It therefore saw fit to mandate the Secretary-General to initiate consultations with a
view to securing the implementation of the plan. Considering that resolution 435 (1978) has been accepted by the
parties involved, one would have expected these meetings
to be convened for the purpose of triggering the implementation of the resolution. But to date, it is painfully clear
that our realization of that objective is not so imminent.

39. South Africa is occupying Namibia illegally. It occupies parts of Angola. Yet an attempt is being made to
obscure the fact of the occupation of Namibia and Angola
and instead to propel into predominance considerations
that do not relate to the independence of Namibia or even
to the security of the region, but seek to advance global
cold-war ambitions. Why do we not hear condemnation of
South Africa for its occupation of Angola? Why is it so
difficult for the same friends of South Africa even to condemn apartheid, the real cause for the tension in that
region?
40. We have repeatedly sought to impress upon the
authors of the policy of linkage the fallacy of their position. In doing so, we have pointed out irrefutable facts in
order to expose the fallacy of their position. Perhaps for
emphasis it is worth while recalling certain incontrovertible facts.

35. When my delegation spoke before the Council in
May [244&h meeting], we devoted our attention to showing why we thought it was regrettable that, after the extensive and exhaustive negotiations that had taken place, one
4

45. South Africa has escalated its violence. Apart from
its occupation of Angolan territory, it has mounted a campaign of destabilization of other neighbouring independent
African States. Lesotho is today a victim of economic sabotage and blockade for giving humanitarian assistance to
the refugees of apartheid, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Swaziland,
Botswana and even far-removed countries like Seychelles
have fallen victim to South African aggression. South
Africa recruits, trains and finances bandits and mercenaries to carry out its military incursions into these countries.
As recently as Monday, 17 October, the capital of Morambique, Maputo, was attacked in what has become a pattern
of destabilization contemptuously
aimed at coinciding
with any action by the international community to censure
the apartheid regime. Every series of Council meetings to
consider the question of Namibia has been accompanied
by an act of aggression by South Africa. The adoption of
resolution 435 (1978) was preceded by the Cassinga massacre on 4 May 1978; the Cuamato attack was timed to
coincide with the disruption of the pre-implementation
meeting in January 1981; the Maseru raid was timed to
deflect the attention of the international community from
South Africa’s non-implementation of the United Nations
plan on Namibia.

41. When, in 1975, the apartheid regime invaded Angola
to prevent the assumption of leadership of Angola by the
Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA),
there were no Cuban forces in Angola. Then, as it is the
case now, we did not hear any concerns about the security
of, Angola. Angola’s appeal for help went largely unanswered. The Cuban Government was prepared to help. It
is, therefore, a fact that the stationing of Cuban troops in
Angola was precipitated by South African aggression.
Their presence is made more necessary today by that continuing aggression.
42. Between 1975 and 1982 eight years elapsed. During
that period a series of diplomatic initiatives to secure the
peaceful independence of Namibia were launched. These
initiatives culminated in the adoption of Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978) and the convening of the
ill-fated pre-implementation meeting at Geneva in 1981, as
well as the proximity talks in 1982. South Africa participated fully in all these negotiations, and all this time the
Cuban troops remained in Angola. Yet, as my delegation
has had occasion to observe before in the Council, at no
point did South Africa raise the question of those troops,
let alone link them in any manner to the negotiations on
the independence of Namibia. The regime itself was aware
that its armed aggression against and occupation of
Angola necessitated that presence. Instead, linkage-a
product of the policy of constructive engagement-was
introduced and quickly attributed to South Africa.

46. There cannot possibly be in this regard any legitimate
concern of the apartheid regime or of any other country to
which the international community must address itself.
There can be no consideration of any so-called regional
issues outside the context of the independence of Namibia,
the ending of acts of destabilization by South Africa and
the abolition of the diabolical system of apartheid, for it is
these issues which inherently pose threats of peace and
security to the region and the world as a whole.

43. Even if we were to accept that it is South Africa that
now insists on linkage, there-can be no doubt whatsoever
that this policy, while conveniently embraced by that
r&gime, was engineered by the United States. In this
regard, even those other members of the contact group
that have failed to disassociate themselves from this policy
of linkage are accomplices in this scheme to deny freedom
to the people of Namibia. For it is this insistence on linkage, and this alone, which has deadlocked progress on the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978). It is thus unfair,
and the ultimate in insincerity, for, any party to the negotiations on the independence of Namibia to attempt, even
remotely, to ascribe responsibility to Angola. Above all, it
is futile to try to exonerate the apartheid regime of ,its
culpability, or to create justification for it.

47. If we speak in those terms, it is to underscore the
indignation of the international community.
It is to
underscore the pain of seeing a people colonized, part of a
country occupied, and the victims being told that freedom
cannot come, sovereignty and territorial integrity cannot
be restored, unless the perpetrator of the very vile crimes is
rewarded; of their being told that, though all issues relating
to Council resolution 435 (1978) have been resolved, implementation of that resolution cannot commence.
48. The Council, therefore, must be categorical in condemning and rejecting linkage. It cannot afford to equivocate on such a diversionary idea, which seeks to undermine
the authority and integrity of this body. Above all, the
Council cannot afford to equivocate on the independence
of Namibia.

44. It is important that the Council not be derailed into
consideration of fictitious issues. That is a diversionary
ploy aimed at deflecting the international focus from the
real issues. The issues at hand are those of apartheid in
South Africa, the illegal occupation of Namibia, and the
acts of destabilization against the independent African
States neighbouring the apartheid regime, including the
occupation of Angola’s territory. No one can seriously
claim the existence of any other relevant issue. While this
series of Council meetings is called to consider the issue of
the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa, we
hope that those who champion security in southern Africa
will participate fully in convening other meetings of the
Council to consider those other problems which are threatening international peace and security.

49. It is clear that it is South Africa that poses a threat to
international peace and security, and continued insistence
on linkage will have the effect of perpetuating the threat.
TO buy time for South Africa to entrench its illegal occupation of Namibia, to create excuses for that regime to continue its occupation of parts of Angola, will only poison
the possibility of bringing about peace and security in the
region. It is a matter of public record that the international
community has rejected and condemned the policies of
parallelism or linkage. the General Assembly, the NonAligned Movement and the OAU have all rejected outright
5

.

the premise and content of the policy of linkage. The least
the Council can do is also to reject linkage.

jointly at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983. At the 2446th meeting of the Council, the Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, emphasized that the question of
Namibia is not only an African problem but a global problem as well, one involving the basic principles on which
international relations are founded. He further stated that
foreign domination in Namibia, as anywhere else, poses a
direct threat to international peace and security, and he
concluded by saying that resistance of foreign domination
in Namibia and elsewhere is a pre-condition for safeguarding peace and security.

50. Likewise, the Council must reaffirm both the central
role of the United Nations in the search for a settlement of
the question of Namibia and the continuing validity of
resolution 435 (1978) as the only framework for such asettlement. These two factors remain central to any action
that may be taken on Namibia.
51. Similarly, it is clear that no issue relevant to resolution 435 (1978) remains outstanding. The report of the
Secretary-General is very clear on this. The Council must,
therefore, require South Africa to communicate, within a
prescribed time-frame, its choice of the electoral system to
be used in the election of the Constituent Assembly so that
the Council can proceed with the adoption of the enabling
resolution triggering the implementation of its resolution
435 (1978).

58. In resolution 532 (1983) adopted on 3 1 May 1983, the
Council mandated the Secretary-General to resolve, in
direct consultations with the parties in conflict, the outstanding questions relevant to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and to report to the Council within the
prescribed time-frame.

52. The Council must also be categorical in its resolve to
ensure that its resolutions are implemented. It should send
clear signals to the uparrheid regime that it must either
co-operate and facilitate the implementation of resolution
435 (1978) ‘or face the institution of appropriate measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

59. The Secretary-General, acting in a dedicated manner,
fulfilled his mandate promptly and ‘reported that all the
outstanding issues relevant to resolution 435 (1978) had
been resolved. The sole undetermined issue has been the
choice of the electoral system, and since it has been left to
South Africa to choose either one of the two systems proposed, it is not the issue where agreement is pending. It
must therefore be considered resolved.

53. I cannot conclude without paying a well-deserved
tribute to SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative
of the Namibian people. Its sense of statesmanship, enduring even the prevarication of the apartheid regime, attests
to its commitment to peaceful settlement. Africa’s resolve
to see Namibia free is irrevocable. No threat, of whatever
magnitude, can deter Africa from that objective. We
pledge our unflinching support to the combatants of
SWAP0 in the prosecution of the struggle.

60. The report of the Secretary-General has shown, however, that South Africa continues to insist on linkage
between the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and
an irrelevant and extraneous issue-the
withdrawal
of
Cuban troops from Angola. South Africa is thereby
obstructing the independence of Namibia and imposing a
condition upon it that was never contemplated by the
Council when it adopted resolution 435 (1978).

l

54. The PRESIDENT
(interprerurion from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

61. What is then necessary is that the Council resolutely
and categorically reject linkage or any other condition
alien to resolution 435 (1978). We believe it is the Council’s
duty to do so in order to remain faithful to its own decision
and to deny South Africa the opportunity of insisting on
something that is in no way whatsoever connected with the
United Nations plan. The Council should, we believe, confirm that the plan is the only basis for a peaceful settlement
of the Namibian problem, thus removing any grounds for
any present or future attempts of the racist regime to find
excuses for its obstruction of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

55. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): I wish first of all to
extend to you, Sir, my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the high office of President of the Council
for the month of October. We are happy to have you, the
representative of a friendly and non-aligned country and a
man of diplomatic experience and skill, at the helm of the
Council during its consideration of the question of Namibia. Under your wise guidance the Council will, we
believe, be able to address itself to this important question
in a constructive and decisive manner.

62. That done, and bearing in mind that all outstanding
issues germane to that resolution have been resolved, the
Council should finally set in motion the United Nations
plan. It is our opinion that the request to make known its
choice of electoral system promptly should be addressed to
South Africa, after which the envisaged procedure of
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) could begin.

56. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor as
President of the Council for the month of September, Mr.
Noel Sinclair of Guyana, on the exemplary manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council.
57. These meetings of the Council are in our view, a
logical, necessary and timely sequel to the meetings held in
May and June of this year. Those meetings were attended
by a number of ministers for foreign affairs of non-aligned
countries who expressed in the Council the position taken

63. We believe that it is the responsibility of the Council
to act promptly and decisively for several compelling reasons. First, it has to avert the mounting threat to security
6

including the appropriate measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is our opinion that an
economic boycott of South Africa on the basis of the relevant General Assembly resolutions should be applied by
all countries. May I remind the Council that such a measure was helpful in the struggle for independence of Zimbabwe, and there is no reason to believe that the same would
not hold true for Namibia?

in southern Africa brought about by the racist regime’s
constant policy of aggression against the destabilization of
neighbouring African States. from the Territory of Namibia before the point of explosion is reached and international peace and security at large are endangered. There
could not be any better example, to our mind, of the oftensuggested preventive functioning of the Council than a
ptompi implementation of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia.

69. In all regions of the world independence is the overriding request. In a growing number of countries there is
an ever-stronger resistance to foreign domination and
occupation, so much so that it is becoming an ever more
essential element of the present state of affairs of the
world. No authentic liberation struggle has ever been
defeated, and the Namibian people will win their struggle
and achieve their independence.

64. Secondly. the international community, and therefore the Coundil, has a responsibility to bringto an end the
long suffering and the sacrilices of the Namibian people
and its sole and authentic representative, the liberation
movement, SWAPO. The demand that freedom finally be
given to Namibia is universal, and the Council has the duty
to act in accordance with it.
65. Thirdly, the victims of the constant aggressive actions
of the Pretoria racist rkgime-in
particula;ngola,
as well
as Lesotho, Mozambique and other front-line Statesshould finally be enabled to live in peace and security so
that they can turn to the pressing problems of their economic and social development. It is impermissible that the
independence and sovereignty of those countries should be
permanently violated. It is indeed impermissible that
South Africa should be left to continue to occupy parts of
Angolan territory, to kill Angolan people at will and to
destroy the infrastructure of that country with total impunity and then even attempt to shift to Angola the heavy
responsibility for preventing the implementation of the
United Nations plan that South Africa itself bears. The
international community must not allow that situation to
continue and must urgently create the conditions in which
the unbearable aggression against Angola would cease.

70. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
71. Mr. DOS SANTOS (Mozambique): Allow me, Sir,
to begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month. I am sure that under
your leadership our discussions will be very successful and
bring nearer the day when the people of Namibia will be
able to enjoy, like the peoples of many independent countries, including your own, its birthright: freedom, independence, justice and democracy.
72. I should like to take this opportunity also to congratulate your predecessor for the able and serene manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council during the
turbulent month of September.

66. For all those reasons, there is the greatest urgency in
the request heard at this table for the Council to proceed
with the implementation of the United Nations plan.
South Africa should be called upon to communicate to ihe
Secretary-General its choice of electoral system without
any further delay; and the Secretary-General would then
report to the Council as soon as possible, after which the
Council would proceed with the adoption of the enabling
resolution for the imolementation of the United Nations
plan.

73. Similarly, the Secretary-General deserves my appreciation for his untiring dedication to the Organization.
74. The adoption of Council resolution 435 (1978) meant
for the people of Namibia, and indeed the world at large,
that Namibia’s independence was just around the comer,
that it was just a matter of a few months. The cheese of
hope has been and continues to be deliberately dangled
near the nose of freedom-loving people in such a way as to
make them think that sooner rather than later they will be
able to eat it. But is was never meant to be eaten. This is
how we should interpret the situation we are facing now.
Lengthy and protracted discussions ensued after the adoption of resolution 435 (1978). At one point during the
nursing period, and later, as time went by, it became
abundantly clear that the child’s father-or
mother, if you
wish-not
only was unprepared to feed him or her but was
also ready to abandon the child to his or her fate. The
five-year-old negotiation was marked by a process whereby road-block after road-block was erected by the father
on the child’s way to the dining room. But when the child,
under the care of his or her stepmother, grew strong-to
the chagrin of his or her father-the
latter attempted to
inject a lethal fluid into the child’s body, although the
father continued publicly to claim that he loved his child.

67. The importance of a prompt decision along these
lines also resides in the message that the Council would
thus be sending to South Africa-that
is, that the Council
would no longer tolerate South Africa’s obstruction of the
implementation of the resolution. By so doing, the Council
would be acting in accordance with the pressing need to
safeguard the prestige and effectiveness of the world
Organization and its central role on the question of Namibia.
68: In the event that South Africa should continue to
flout the will of the international community, and if the
report of the Secretary-General confirms that fact, my
delegation will, as it has done in the past, support any
measure aimed at exerting pressure on South Africa,
7

This fluid goes by the name of “linkage” or “parallelism”.
Let me say it as bluntly as I can: In legal terms, this is
called attempted murder. The accused is generally known
as the contact group. Africa-and,
indeed, the whole
world-is being invited to be an accomplice to this dastardly act.
75. Appeasing and embracing South Africa has only
increased its stubbornness and brought untold suffering
not only to the people’ of Namibia and South Africa itself
but also to all independent neighbouring countries. Within
the framework of this policy, we have seen increased diplomatic, political, economic, military and even nuclear cooperation between some Western countries and apartheid
South Africa. Far from inhibiting racist South Africa and
increasing its isolation, this policy has allowed it to attack
its neighbours, with little reaction from the international
community of nations.
76. Having assured itself of diplomatic cover in intemational forums, the licences and patents necessary to manufacture weapons, and supplies of war mattfriel, the racist,
South African r&ime has been able, through a belligerent
and expansionist policy, to arrogate to itself the right to
carry out repeated acts of aggression against its neighbours, to attack militarily any country in Africa, to continue its illegal occupation of Namibia, to obstruct
Namibia’s independence, to strengthen its repugnant and
obnoxious apartheid system, to destabilize front-line States
and to invade and occupy part of Angolan territory.

South Africa has shown in the past that it is not in favour
of peaceful relations with its neighbours, and I am convinced that the international community will take the
necessary steps to stop South African aggression.
81. Yesterday [2481st’ meeting] a racist South African
spokesman ,made allegations too wild to deserve any
serious consideration. Since I harbour the ‘greatest respect
for the Council, I shall not waste its valuable time in trying
to comment on all those allegations. I should like just to
touch in passing upon some facts..
82. Apartheid South Africa is fond of alleging the existence of ANC military bases in Maputo, and of launching
attacks against them. On. a number of occasions when
those attacks have occurred, members of the diplomatic
corps accredited in Mozambique and journalists from all
over the world have immediately been shown the attacked
places, and the so-called bases have turned out to be a
nursery school, a fruit-juice and jam factory, and some
houses. Despite these facts, the Pretoria regime’has continued, as in the past, to label these places as military
bases, and it will continue to do so tomorrow and the day
after tomorrow. Allegations or insinuations about ANC
military bases existing in Mozambique represent nothing
but a sad concoction of a sick mind.

83. My Government has the right and, indeed, the duty
to take all-1 repeat, all-necessary measures to preserve
Mozambique’s national independence, territorial integrity
and sovereignty and to defend its people from these murderous acts. The Council may wish to take good note of
that.

77. Only a few days ago Mozambique was once again a
victim of this aggressive nature of apartheid South Africa,
when explosive devices placed by racist South African
agents in an apartment building in Maputo went off,
wounding five people. This was a barbaric, unprovoked
attack against innocent people who were resting after a
hard week’s work, and constitutes a blatant, gross violation both of Mozambique’s sovereignty and of intemational law and practice.

84. An obvious attempt is clearly being made to turn
accepted, normal moral values upside,down. Those who
deliberately try to reward the aggressor and punish the
victims, to glorify the illegal and vilify the legal, will have
to accept responsibility for whatever may happen, and will
have no one to blame but themsetves.

78. The attack came at a time when racist South Africa
was under increasing pressure both at home and abroad
on account of its criminal and abominable policy of apartheid and racial discrimination., At home the struggle
against apartheid is being successfully intensified, but there
is also growing dissension within the ruling party. The
so-called constitutional reforms will shortly be brought to
a vote, so the faction espousing them would like to take a
firm stand and thus bolster its position. If South Africa
can blame outsiders for its problems, so much the better.

85. Namibia’s independence and the presence of any foreign forces in Angola at the invitation of a legal and recognized Government are two separate and unrelated issues.
Any insistence on relating the two issues constitutes a fla-;
grant, gross and, grotesque interference in the internal
affairs of a free, independent and sovereign State, Angola.
Any fraternal forces now present in Angola-and
I say it
time and again-are there at the invitation of the Angolan
Government, to help it defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity, as envisaged in Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations. They are not there for any offensive purpose whatsoever.

79. In the rest of the world, South Africa’s position is not
a rosy one. During the general debate in the General
Assembly, for instance, speaker after speaker condemned
South Africa’s policy. This will later be repeated in meetings of the Assembly and its main Committees, and is
taking place now in the Council, as was only to be
expected.

86. On the other hand, Namibia’s independence is an
issue: it is a colonial question. Namibia must be decolonized, and its people must regain their freedom and independence without any impediment or hindrance. We who
claim to be democracies must not, under whatever pretext,
deny the Namibian people their right to exercise democracy lest we jeopardize and place a big question mark over
our own democracies.

80. It should be remembered that whenever South Africa
is under great pressure its response is always the same.
8

87. Linkage is a clumsy fabrication, deliberately presented in order to create a vicious circle: “Namibia”, they
say, “cannot be allowed to attain its independence until
some forces are removed from Angola. On the other hand,
we are doing everything possible to maintain those forces
by attacking and occupying parts of Angolan territory, so
that we can justify the denial of independence to Namibia.” The vicious circle is drawn. Namibia, remains
unfree.

94. In 1983, the Council on many occasions, as required
in the defence of the loftiest principles of mankind, had to
deal with the question of Namibia in view of the lack of
results achieved in that regard. Once again this United
Nations body is dealing with this question and discussing
the illegality of South Africa’s continued possession of the
Territory of Namibia and the negative consequences of its
occupation.
95. Perhaps never before has world public opinion confronted with so much persistence, moral grandeur and political realism the task of achieving such an obviously just
and necessary goal as the independence of Namibia, which
is called for by resolution 435 (1978). Perhaps never before
has the international community been so consistently
flouted and the resolutions of the Council and the General
Assembly spurned in such open violation of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations as by
the racist regime of apartheid.

88. South Africa aims to create and maintain a cordon
sanitaire around its borders. It will continue trying to demonstrate to its own people that all the woes resulting from
apartheid policies actually stem from nothing but outside
interference. What South Africa fears most is the example
an independent Namibia could constitute for the people of
South Africa,. by way of encouraging them in their struggle
for the total eradication of the apurtheid system.
89. In the light of the foregoing, I remain convinced that
the Council will: denounce and reject linkage, as it is
deeply repugnant and offensive, and completely extraneous to resolution 435 (1978); demand the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of racist South African troops
from Namibia; immediately take the necessary steps leading to Namibia’s independence; and secure the conditions
that will make apartheid South Africa relinquish its stranglehold on Namibia, through such steps as rigorous application and extension of the arms embargo, comprehensive,
mandatory sanctions, denial of nuclear assistance, and
disinvestment,

96. As is clearly stated under item 36 in the annotated
preliminary list of items to be included in the provisional
agenda of the thirty-eighth regular session of the General
Assembly:
“Since the adoption by the General Assembly at its
first session, in 1946, of resolution 65 (I), the question of
Namibia (formerly South West Africa) has been on the
agenda of every regular session, of the fifth and ninth
special sessions and of the eighth emergency special session of the Assembly. During the period, several subsidiary bodies of the Assembly have examined the
situation relating to the Territory, including the AdHoc
Committee on South West Africa, the Good Offices
Committee on South West Africa, the Special Committee for South West Africa and the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. The question has also
been the subject of a number of resolutions of the Security Council . . . In addition, the International Court of
Justice has examined and delivered opinions on related
aspects of the question . : .‘*I

90. It is not enough to condemn apartheid as morally
wrong. The international community should be prepared
to take concrete steps to show its aversion and opposition
to the racist doctrine’of the South African regime. It is
high time we backed up our opposition to apartheid with
deeds as well as words and distanced ourselves from this
abominable policy.
91. Whether we like it or not, the’people of Namibia will
be free. The Council can, and indeed must, do a great deal
in that process. The train of freedom and independence is
moving on to freedom and independence. The overwhelming majority of mankind is on board. I hope that no one
will wish to jump out. Should there be a few who would
like to do that, they are free to do so as long as they make
no effort to derail the train. Let Namibia be free today, not
tomorrow.

97. As far back as 1966, the Assembly, in its resolution
2145 (XXI), terminated South Africa’s Mandate over South
West Africa, which is now called Namibia, the name
adopted by the Assembly, in its resolution 2372 (XXII), in
accordance with the desires of,the Namibian people.

92. ‘The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the Deputy Minister for External Relations
of Cuba.,? invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.

98. It is now 17 years since that decision was taken by the
General Assembly but, in spite of the many resolutions that
have been adopted in the interim, the question of Namibia
seems to be in a state of stagnation.

93. Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): First of all, Sir, I should like to extend to you the
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council, which once again falls to a
country that is a friend of ours and is non-aligned. At this
time I also wish to express our appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana, for the wise manner
in which he conducted the proceedings of the Council.

99. In spite of the existence of Council resolution 435
(1978), which offered prospects for the long-awaited independence of Namibia, and in spite of the reaffirmation by
the General Assembly in 1981, at its eighth emergency
special session [resoWon ES-84
that that resolution was
“the only basis for a peaceful settlement” and that it was
necessary to begin immediately the unconditional implementation of that resolution “without any prevarication,
9

qualification or modification”, the present situation with
regard to Namibia is rather sombre.
100. The racist regime of Pretoria stubbornly refuses to
implement the decisions of the international community
and grant independence to Namibia. Can it be that for the
people of Namibia, who have suffered so much, there are
no human rights? Or is it that complicity in this crime
requires an ambivalent attitude and requires that the clamouring of a people yearning for freedom be silenced? How
much longer can South Africa continue to impose its racist
order on Namibia?
101. The stubborn persistence of the racist &me
of
South Africa and its defiance of the Organization and of
the States belonging to it are supported by the encouragement it receives from the Government of the United States
as it endeavours to delay independence for the people of
Namibia.

not new, as we know: it is an old plan. For this purpose
they train and give logistic suppbrt to the bandits of
UNITA and of the mis-named Mozambique Movement
of National Resistance. They wish to destabilize the progressive countries of southern Africa, and they will use any
means to this end.
j
108. South Africa’s advanced state of nuclear development, achieved with the help of Western capitalist countries and the United States, is a serious potential threat to
the countries of Africa, principally those of southern
Africa. It is no mere coincidence that when the General
Assembly considered the question of Israeli nulcear armament at its thirty-seventh session it called on the SecretaryGeneral, in co-operation with the OAU and the League of
Arab States, in resolution 37182, to follow closely the
nuclear and military collaboration between Israel and
South Africa.
r
109. There remain on the conscience of mankind the terrible massacres perpetrated by the South African criminal
hordes in Cassinga in 1980; in Cangamba in 1983; in
Angola, in Niazonia in 1976 and in Chimolho in 1977; the
brutal aggressions in Matola, in Maputo itself, the capital
of the sister republic of Mozambique, in 1982 and 1983;
and the massacre in Lesotho in 1983, in the capital of that
small, fraternal kingdom, carried out on the pretext of a
punitive action against ANC militants. In the past few
days these cowardly
actions have been repeated in
Maputo. They are clear expressions of the way in which
international responsibility .is regarded by the repudiated
apartheid rigime, whose ferocious, primitive claws were
shown yesterday in the outrageous statement of its representative to the Council.

102. To what is this stubborn resistance due? What reasons, interests and strategies comprise the intransigent
position of the racist regime? What forces make it possible
for it to defy the Organization and ignore with impunity
international agreements?
103. Namibia is a vast Territory with bountiful natural
resources and a strategic geographical location, which
explains the long history of colonial occupation and
oppression of the Namibian people and its territory, considered one of the richest of the African continent.
104. Another of the factors that have made Namibia
very valuable in the imperialist- strategy is that it has rich
uranium resources, whose extraction and consumption are
managed by transnational corporations, which, together
with South Africa, have been using it to develop their
nuclear industry for military purposes. According to the
1980 report of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
Namibia’s uranium production is 5,000 tons a year.

110. Namibia’s independence” process is again at an
impasse, caused by the obstinacy of the United States
Administration and the South African rCgime, The recent
journey to South Africa of the Secretary-General, within
the framework of his mandate to consult the parties, conferred on him by r&olution 532 (1983), made clear the
South African Government’s insistence on making the
beginning of the process of Namibian independence
dependent on the question of the presence of Cuban
troops in Angola-that
is, on the so-called linkage. But
this is not the sole link; it has two more in hand: that
MPLA should negotiate with UNITA and that the frontline countries should cease supporting ANC. These are
sophistries, pretexts, which betray greed and an urge to
impose its own order-the
new order of Hitler’s Mein
Kampf.

105. It is interesting that the main limitation on the development of mining in Namibia is the lack of water. In this
land of scanty and irregular rainfall, water is costly and its
supply is uneven. When Angola was still a Portuguese
colony, South Africa signed an agreement with the
Government in Lisbon in 1969 to build hydra-electric
complexes in Calueque and RuacanS.
106. The two Governments wanted to bring in thousands of Portuguese and white Namibian or South African
settlers, with a twofold objective-economic
and political.
The presence of the white settlers in those vast, thinlypopulated lands would make difficult the actions of the
revolutionary movements in Angola against Portuguese
colonial domination and the actions of SWAPO, the sole
and authentic representative of the Namibian people.

111. In 1974, 1973, 1972, 1971 and even before that,
there were no Cuban internationalists in Angola. The
country was controlled by the Portuguese colonial army,
which was certainly a close friend of the Pretoria racists.
What was there then to prevent South Africa’s withdrawal
from the Territory of Namibia, occupied then, as today,
illegally? This question should be put to the Pretoria racists
in any future consultations.

107. What are the Nazi racists in Pretoria and their allies
in Washington trying to do? To try to overthrow the revolutionary processes in Angola and Mozambique and to
bind the countries of the area to their economic interests is

112. Cuba vigorously rejects the attempt to link the presence of its troops on Angolan territory with the independ10

ence of Namibia and, like the overwhelming majority of
States represented at the United Nations, considers that
the presence of Cuban troops in Angola results from a
sovereign agreement between two independent States and
is therefore not a matter to be negotiated with third
parties.

Populares de Libera@n de Angola), three air attacks on
the defenceless civilian population and two criminal
attacks on SWAP0 refugee camps. During the same
period there were helicopter drops in Angolan territory
and two land attacks. Many of these criminal actions were
shamelessly carried out by the South African army from
the illegally occupied territory of Angola.

113. United States imperialism has tried in vain to present this just position of principle, based on international
law, as an obstacle to Namibia’s independence, attempting
to conceal the fact that what is an obstacle to Namibia’s
independence and a threat to international peace is the
occupation of part of Angolan territory by South African
troops, in open, flagrant violation of the principles of
respect for national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the independence of a State legally constituted and recognized by the international community under international
law and the Charter.

117. Not satisfied with those direct attacks against
Angola, with the open and brazen support of the Reagan
Administration,
South Africa continues to support the
criminal activities of counter-revolutionary
bands of
UNITA. The strategic objective of this policy of force is to
delay the process of Namibian independence as long as
possible in order to strengthen the puppet parties of Namibia and thus undermine the position of SWAP0 in any
future Government.
118. All these manoeuvres were supported by a strong
diversionary campaign against our military presence in
Angola, and the repeated statements by the spokesmen of
the State Department and the Prime Minister of South
Africa, all reaffirming the policy followed by the Reagan
Administration
of portraying the solution of the conflict
within the general framework of East-West confrontation.

114. The declaration signed on 4 February 1982 by the
Ministers for Foreign Relations of Cuba and Angola sets
forth, in its first paragraph, defence of the principle of
sovereignty, as reflected in agreements between Cuba and
Angola, based on Article 51 of the Charter, In its article 9
it clearly states that:
“If the self-sacrificing struggle of SWAPO, the sole
legitimate representative of the Namibian people, and
the demands of the international community succeeded
in bringing about a genuine solution of the problem of
Namibia, based -on strict compliance with United
Nations Security Council resolution 435 (1978), and led
to a truly independent Government and the complete
withdrawal of the South African occupying troops to
the other side of the Orange River, thus considerably
diminishing the danger of aggression against Angola,
the Angolan and Cuban Governments would consider
the resumption of the implementation of the programme for the gradual withdrawal of the Cuban forces
within a time-frame to be agreed upon by both
Governments.”

119. America’s stubbornly
held position, which has
received strong support from South Africa, has repeatedly
been rejected by the Heads of State and Government of
the front-line States and by SWAPO, as was reflected in
the final communiqui of the Lusaka meeting on 4 September 1982, which revealed distinct differences of opinion
on the subject among the members of the Western contact
group.
120. The firm rejection by the front-line States was
expressed emphatically in the meeting of the Liberation
Committee in Harare on 20 February 1983, during the
visit of the Secretary-General, and by other African countries too, which have reiterated that the solution of the
problem of Namibia falls within the sole jurisdiction of the
United Nations.

115. No one is unaware that United Nations resolutions
would have been implemented and the suffering of the
Namibian people would have ended long ago if South
Africa did not enjoy the political, economic, military and
diplomatic support of the main capitalist Powers, first and
foremost, the United States, whose transnational corporations play a major role in the exploitation of Namibia.
Without that support South Africa could not maintain its
undeclared war against the front-line countries, especially
against Angola. For that reason, the South African
Government has been carrying out a policy of genocide
and destruction, of economic sabotage and indiscriminate
bombing of the peace-loving peoples of southern Angola.
In a most brazen manner, the South African racist troops
continue to occupy parts of Angolan territory, in open
defiance of the agreements and appeals of the United
Nations and world public opinion.

121. In turn, by a broad consensus, the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983,
clearly reaflirmed that position of the African countries.
122. Other important events occurred in the first half of
1983. Various governmental bodies, progressive organizations and committees throughout the world, as well as the
International Conference in Solidarity with the Front-line
States, held at Lisbon from 25 to 27 March, and the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence held in Paris from 25 to
29 April, all confirmed that the position of the African
countries enjoys broad representative support.
123. In expressing our profound concern over the situation that has been created in Namibia and in the front-line
countries by racist South Africa, Cuba believes that it is
the duty of the United Nations to assume its full responsibility so as to prevent the outbreak of a catastrophe in

116. In just 10 months of 1983, the brutality of the apartheid regime has led to 323 violations of Angolan air space,
seven air attacks on units of FAPLA (ForGas Armadas
11

southern Africa. South Africa must be forced to abide by
international law, and there is no alternative but to apply
broad, binding sanctions, as provided for in Chapter VII
of the Charter.

Council must not by its inaction continue to be an accessory to the crime that has been committed against Namibia.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

124. We take our responsibility very seriously, and by
our determined action we wish to prevent the continuation
of a process that has already caused death, suffering and
misery. “To view a crime calmly is to commit that crime”,
declared the forger of our independence, Jose Marti. The

NOTE
' See

A/38/100.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT
SE PROCURER
LES PUBLICATIONS
DES NATIONS
UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ies librairies et Ies agences dtpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprhs de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

HOJIYYElTb

kI3flAHMFI

OPI-AHH3AUMM

OBlmHHEHHbIX

HAUMR

ki3naHer
OpraHH3amiu
O6aenHHeHxbtx
Haunt4 hioxHo XynaTb n X~micHbtX hrara3riHax
u areHfcTI?ax
BO Bcex paifoHax Mapa. HaBOnHTe CnpaBKlr 06 W3naHHxX B BatueM KHIIX~HOM
Mara3riHe
HIIH mimPTe no anpecy: OpraHssauHr
O6’beLtHHeHHbIX
Haueft,
CexuHn no
nponame
H35aHHfi, Hbio-Ropx
WIIH XeHeBa.
COMO
CONSEGUIR
PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consuite a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccih de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

00300

90-60205-February

1992-2.050
