United Nations

A/RES/61/149

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 February 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 65 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2006
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/61/441)]

61/149. Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/144 of 16 December 2005, in which it reiterated its
firm commitment to continue its global efforts towards the total elimination of the
scourges of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and
towards the effective and comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference
against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in
Durban, South Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, 1
Recalling also its resolution 59/177 of 20 December 2004, in which it firmly
consolidated the global drive for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and recognized the absolute
necessity and the imperative nature of the political will for the achievement of the
commitments undertaken in the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
Recalling further its resolution 58/160 of 22 December 2003, in which it
decided to place emphasis on the concrete implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action as a solid foundation for a broad-based
consensus for further action and initiatives towards the total elimination of the
scourge of racism,
Recalling its resolution 57/195 of 18 December 2002, in which it outlined the
important roles and responsibilities of the various organs of the United Nations and
other stakeholders at the international, regional and national levels, including, in
particular, the Commission on Human Rights, and its resolution 56/266 of 27 March
2002, in which it endorsed the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action as
constituting a solid foundation for further action and initiatives towards the total
elimination of the scourge of racism,

_______________
1

06-50337

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

A/RES/61/149

Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights
and have the potential to contribute constructively to the development and wellbeing of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial superiority is scientifically
false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must be rejected,
together with theories that attempt to determine the existence of separate human
races,
Convinced that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance manifest themselves in a differentiated manner for women and girls and
may be among the factors leading to a deterioration in their living conditions,
poverty, violence, multiple forms of discrimination and the limitation or denial of
their human rights, and recognizing the need to integrate a gender perspective into
relevant policies, strategies and programmes of action against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in order to address multiple
forms of discrimination,
Taking note of Human Rights Council resolution 1/5 of 30 June 2006, 2
Taking note also of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2002/68 of
25 April 2002, 3 2003/30 of 23 April 2003, 4 2004/88 of 22 April 2004 5 and 2005/64
of 20 April 2005, 6 by which the international community put into effect mechanisms
for the effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action,
Underlining the primacy of political will, international cooperation and
adequate funding at the national, regional and international levels for the successful
implementation of the Durban Programme of Action,
Alarmed at the increase in racist violence and xenophobic ideas in many parts
of the world, in political circles, in the sphere of public opinion and in society at
large, inter alia, as a result of the resurgent activities of associations established on
the basis of racist and xenophobic platforms and charters, and the persistent use of
those platforms and charters to promote or incite racist ideologies,
Underlining the importance of urgently eliminating continuing and violent
trends involving racism and racial discrimination, and conscious that any form of
impunity for crimes motivated by racist and xenophobic attitudes plays a role in
weakening the rule of law and democracy, tends to encourage the recurrence of such
crimes and requires resolute action and cooperation for its eradication,
Welcoming the determination of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to profile and increase the visibility of the struggle against racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and her intention to make
this a cross-cutting issue in the activities and programmes of her Office,

_______________
2
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/61/53), part one,
chap. II, sect. A.
3
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
4
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II, sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
6
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.

2

A/RES/61/149

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 7 the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance 8 and Human Rights Council decision 1/102 of
30 June 2006, 9
I
Basic general principles
1.
Acknowledges that no derogation from the prohibition of racial
discrimination, genocide, the crime of apartheid or slavery is permitted, as defined
in the obligations under the relevant human rights instruments;
Expresses its profound concern about and its unequivocal condemnation
2.
of all forms of racism and racial discrimination, including related acts of racially
motivated violence, xenophobia and intolerance, as well as propaganda activities
and organizations that attempt to justify or promote racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance in any form;
Expresses deep concern at recent attempts to establish hierarchies among
3.
emerging and resurgent forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, and urges States to adopt measures to address these scourges
with the same emphasis and vigour with a view to preventing this practice and
protecting victims;
Stresses that States and international organizations have a responsibility
4.
to ensure that measures taken in the struggle against terrorism do not discriminate in
purpose or effect on grounds of race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin,
and urges all States to rescind or refrain from all forms of racial profiling;
Recognizes that States should implement and enforce appropriate and
5.
effective legislative, judicial, regulatory and administrative measures to prevent and
protect against acts of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, thereby contributing to the prevention of human rights violations;
Also recognizes that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
6.
related intolerance occur on the grounds of race, colour, descent or national or
ethnic origin and that victims can suffer multiple or aggravated forms of
discrimination based on other related grounds, such as sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, social origin, property, birth or other status;
Reaffirms that any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
7.
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by
law;
Emphasizes that it is the responsibility of States to adopt effective
8.
measures to combat criminal acts motivated by racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including measures to ensure that such
motivations are considered an aggravating factor for the purposes of sentencing, to
prevent those crimes from going unpunished and to ensure the rule of law;

_______________
7

A/61/337.
See A/61/335.
9
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/61/53), part one,
chap. II, sect. B.
8

3

A/RES/61/149

9.
Urges all States to review and, where necessary, revise their immigration
laws, policies and practices so that they are free of racial discrimination and
compatible with their obligations under international human rights instruments;
10. Condemns the misuse of print, audio-visual and electronic media and
new communication technologies, including the Internet, to incite violence
motivated by racial hatred, and calls upon States to take all necessary measures to
combat this form of racism in accordance with the commitments that they have
undertaken under the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,1 in particular
paragraph 147 of the Programme of Action, in accordance with existing
international and regional standards of freedom of expression and taking all
necessary measures to guarantee the right to freedom of opinion and expression;
11. Encourages all States to include in their educational curricula and social
programmes at all levels, as appropriate, knowledge of and tolerance and respect for
all cultures, civilizations, religions, peoples and countries;
12. Stresses the responsibility of States to mainstream a gender perspective
in the design and development of prevention, education and protection measures
aimed at the eradication of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance at all levels, to ensure that they effectively target the distinct situations
of women and men;
II
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
13. Reaffirms that universal adherence to and full implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 10
are of paramount importance for the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including contemporary forms of racism and
racial discrimination, and for the promotion of equality and non-discrimination in
the world;
14. Reiterates the call made by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, in paragraph 75 of the Durban
Programme of Action,1 to achieve universal ratification of the Convention by 2005
and for all States to consider making the declaration envisaged under article 14 of
the Convention, and endorses the grave concern expressed by the Commission on
Human Rights in its resolution 2005/646 to the effect that, with one hundred and
seventy-three ratifications and only forty-nine declarations, the deadline for
universal ratification decided by the World Conference has, regrettably, not been
realized;
15. Urges, in the above context, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to maintain and issue regular updates on its
website of a list of countries that have not yet ratified the Convention and to
encourage such countries to ratify it at the earliest;
16. Expresses its concern at the serious delays in the submission of overdue
reports to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which
impedes the effectiveness of the Committee, makes a strong appeal to all States

_______________
10

4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.

A/RES/61/149

parties to the Convention to comply with their treaty obligations, and reaffirms the
importance of the provision of technical assistance to the requesting countries in the
preparation of their reports to the Committee;
17. Invites States parties to the Convention to ratify the amendment to
article 8 of the Convention on the financing of the Committee, and calls for
adequate additional resources from the regular budget of the United Nations to
enable the Committee to discharge its mandate fully;
18. Urges all States parties to the Convention to intensify their efforts to
implement the obligations that they have accepted under article 4 of the Convention,
with due regard to the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 11
and article 5 of the Convention;
19. Welcomes the work of the Committee in applying the Convention to the
new and contemporary forms of racism and racial discrimination;
20. Recalls that the Committee holds that the prohibition of the
dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or racial hatred is compatible with
the right to freedom of opinion and expression as outlined in article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in article 5 of the Convention;
21. Welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on the importance of
follow-up to the World Conference and the measures recommended to strengthen
the implementation of the Convention as well as the functioning of the Committee; 12
III
Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action
22. Acknowledges that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance is on an equal footing
with the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special
sessions in the human rights and social fields;
23. Also acknowledges that the World Conference, which was the third world
conference against racism, was significantly different from the previous two
conferences, as evidenced by the inclusion in its title of two important components
relating to contemporary forms of racism, namely, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
24. Emphasizes that the basic responsibility for effectively combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance lies with States,
and to this end stresses that States have the primary responsibility to ensure full and
effective implementation of all commitments and recommendations contained in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;1
25. Also emphasizes the fundamental and complementary role of national
human rights institutions, regional bodies or centres and civil society, working
jointly with States towards the achievement of the objectives of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action;

_______________
11

Resolution 217 A (III).
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/57/18),
chap. XI, sect. E.
12

5

A/RES/61/149

26. Welcomes the steps taken by numerous Governments, in particular the
elaboration and implementation of national action plans to combat racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and steps taken by national
human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations, towards the full
implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, and affirms
this trend as a demonstration of commitment for the elimination of all scourges of
racism at the national level;
27. Calls upon all States that have not yet elaborated their national action
plans on combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance to comply with their commitments undertaken at the World Conference;
28. Calls upon all States to formulate and implement without delay, at the
national, regional and international levels, policies and plans of action to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their
gender-based manifestations;
29. Urges States to support the activities of existing regional bodies or
centres that combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in their respective regions, and recommends the establishment of such
bodies in all regions where they do not exist;
30. Recognizes the fundamental role of civil society in the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular in
assisting States to develop regulations and strategies, in taking measures and action
against such forms of discrimination and through follow-up implementation;
31. Decides that the General Assembly, through its role in policy
formulation, the Economic and Social Council, through its role in overall guidance
and coordination, in accordance with their respective roles under the Charter of the
United Nations and Assembly resolution 50/227 of 24 May 1996, and the Human
Rights Council shall constitute a three-tiered intergovernmental process for the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action;
32. Stresses and reaffirms its role as the highest intergovernmental
mechanism for the formulation and appraisal of policy on matters related to the
economic, social and related fields, in accordance with Chapter IX of the Charter,
including in the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the goals and
targets set at all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special
sessions;
33. Decides to convene in 2009 a review conference on the implementation
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action to be conducted within the
framework of the General Assembly, and, to this end, requests the Human Rights
Council to undertake preparations for this event, making use of the three existing
and ongoing follow-up mechanisms, and to formulate a concrete plan and provide
updates and reports on this issue on an annual basis starting in 2007;
34. Reaffirms that the Human Rights Council shall have a central role in the
monitoring of the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action within the United Nations system and in advising the General Assembly
thereon;
35. Expresses its appreciation for the continuing work in follow-up to the
World Conference undertaken by the Intergovernmental Working Group on the
Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the
6

A/RES/61/149

group of independent eminent experts on the implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action and the Working Group of Experts on People
of African Descent;
36. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations agreed upon by the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action at its fourth session, 13 and welcomes in
particular the identification and/or consideration of substantive and procedural gaps,
as well as the request for the nomination of five highly qualified experts to further
study the content and scope of those gaps, including but not limited to the areas
identified in the conclusions of the Chair of the high-level seminar, and, in
consultation with human rights treaty bodies, the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and other relevant mandate-holders, to produce a base document that
contains concrete recommendations on the means or avenues to bridge those gaps,
including but not limited to the drafting of a new protocol to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination or the
adoption of new instruments, and for the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination to conduct further study on possible measures to strengthen the
implementation of the Convention and its proposals regarding the assessment and
evaluation of the implementation of existing international human rights instruments
by States parties, and to this end encourages the Intergovernmental Working Group
to continue its work related to the preparation of complementary international
standards in accordance with the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
37. Acknowledges the centrality of resource mobilization, effective global
partnership and international cooperation in the context of paragraphs 157 and 158
of the Durban Programme of Action for the successful realization of commitments
undertaken at the World Conference, and to this end emphasizes the importance of
the mandate of the group of independent eminent experts on the implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, especially in mobilizing the
necessary political will required for the successful implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary resources for the
effective fulfilment of the mandates of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the
Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the
Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent and the group of
independent eminent experts on the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action;
39. Expresses its concern at the increasing incidence of racism in various
sporting events, while noting with appreciation the efforts made by some governing
bodies of the various sporting codes to combat racism, and in this regard invites all
international sporting bodies to promote, through their national, regional and
international federations, a world of sport free from racism and racial
discrimination;
40. Invites, in this context, the Fédération internationale de football
association, in connection with the 2010 soccer World Cup tournament to be held in
South Africa, to consider introducing a visible theme on non-racism in football,
_______________
13

E/CN.4/2006/18, sect. VI.

7

A/RES/61/149

requests the Secretary-General to bring this invitation to the attention of the
Fédération and to bring the issue of racism in sport to the attention of other relevant
international sporting bodies, and, in this regard, appreciates the joint efforts of the
Government of Germany, the Secretary-General and the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance during the 2006 World Cup;
IV
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and follow-up to his visits
41. Expresses its full support and appreciation for the work of the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, and encourages its continuation;
42. Reiterates its call to all Member States, intergovernmental organizations,
relevant organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur, and calls upon States
to consider responding favourably to his requests for visits so as to enable him to
fulfil his mandate fully and effectively;
43. Recognizes with deep concern the increase in anti-Semitism,
Christianophobia and Islamophobia in various parts of the world, as well as the
emergence of racial and violent movements based on racism and discriminatory
ideas directed against Arab, Christian, Jewish and Muslim communities, as well as
all religious communities, communities of people of African descent, communities
of people of Asian descent, communities of indigenous people and other
communities;
44. Encourages closer collaboration between the Special Rapporteur and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in particular
the Anti-Discrimination Unit;
45. Urges the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
provide States, at their request, with advisory services and technical assistance to
enable them to implement fully the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
all the necessary human and financial assistance to carry out his mandate efficiently,
effectively and expeditiously and to enable him to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
47. Takes note of the recommendations contained in the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur,8 and urges Member States and other relevant stakeholders to
consider implementing those recommendations;
48. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue giving particular attention to
the negative impact of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance on the full enjoyment of civil, cultural, economic, political and social
rights by national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, immigrant
populations, asylum-seekers and refugees;
49. Invites Member States to demonstrate greater commitment to fighting
racism in sport by conducting educational and awareness-raising activities and by
strongly condemning the perpetrators of racist incidents, in cooperation with
national and international sports organizations;

8

A/RES/61/149

V
General
50. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
51. Decides to remain seized of this important matter at its sixty-second
session under the item entitled “Elimination of racism and racial discrimination”.
81st plenary meeting
19 December 2006

9
