General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

98

3. Calls upon all States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to offer all possible assistance to the People's Republic of Angola, the People's Republi~ of Moza~biq1;e_ and _the African co_untries surroundmg the racist regimes m southern Af~ica,
so that they may continue to apply fully the sanctions
against these regimes;
4. Urges all States to co-operate loyally and fully
in achieving the goals a1:1d objectives _of th~ D~c~de ~or
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discnmmat10n
by taking actions and measures called for by the Programme for the Decade at the national, regional and
international levels and, in particular:
(a) To ensure the immediate termination of all
measures and policies, as well as military, nuclear, economic and other activities, which enable racist regimes
in southern Africa to continue the repression of the
African people;
( b) To provide full support and assistance, morally
and materially, to the peoples which are victims of
apartheid and racial discrimination and to the liberation movements;
(c) To cease emigration to South Africa;
(d) To ensure the release of political prisoners in
South Africa and of those subjected to restrictions for
their opposition to apartheid;
(e) To formulate and execute plans to realize the
policy measures and goals contained in the Programme
for the Decade, and to consider the advisability of establishing national arrangements to follow up the implementation of the Programme;
(f) To review internal laws and regulations with
a view to identifying and rescinding those which provide for, give rise to, or inspire racial discrimination
or apartheid;
(g) To ensure the cessation of all discriminatory
measures against migrant workers and extend to them
treatment equal to that provided for nationals of the
host country with regard to human rights and the provisions of their labour legislation;
(h) To sign and ratify the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,23 the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid24 and all
other relevant instruments;
5. Also urges Member States which are parties to
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to comply fully with
their obligations under the Convention and, in particular, to submit their reports in accordance with the
time-table laid down in article 9 thereof;
6. Further urges United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to ensure the continuation of
their activities related to the Decade with emphasis on,
inter alia:
(a) Providing moral and material support to the
national liberation movements and the victims of apartheid and racial discrimination;
(b) Assisting and conducting vigorous educational
and information campaigns to dispel racial prejudice
and to involve public opinion in the struggle against
racism and racial discrimination;
23 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
24 Resolution 3068

(XXVIII), annex.

(c) Examining the socio-econ01:nic ~nd_ c?lo~ial
roots of racism, apartheid and racial d1scnmmation
with a view to eliminating them;
7. Appeals to Member States which have not yet
done so to forward the reports called for under paragraph 18 (e) of the Programme for the Decade;
8. Welcomes any contributions and suggestions related to the Programme for the Decade by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the
Special Committee against Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Commission on
Human Rights, its Ad Hoe Working Group of Expefts
and its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, especially with regard
to the preparations for the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to draw on the
expertise of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities while
undertaking the relevant activities of the Decade;
10. Reiterates the oall in paragraph 18 (g) of the
Programme for the Decade to make adequate resources
available to the Secretary-General to enable him to undertake the activities entrusted to him under the Programme;
11. Appeals to Governments and private organizations to make voluntary contributions which would
make it possible to carry out all of the activities provided for in the Programme for the Decade;
12. Decides to consider at its thirty-second session,
as a matter of high priority, the question entitled "Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
97 th plenary meetin&
13 December 1976
31/78.

World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it reaffirmed its resolve to
achieve the total and unconditional elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Recalling also its resolution 3378 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1990 (LX) of 11 May 1976,
Having considered the request of the Government
of Ghana that the United Nations defray half of the
additional cost involved in holding the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
at Accra, and the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council in this regard,
Recognizing that Ghana is one of the countries most
seriously affected by the current world economic crisis
and that, despite this, the Government of Ghana is
making a substantial financial contribution towards the
Conference,
1. Welcomes again with appreciation the offer of
the Government of Ghana to act as host to the World

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and takes note of the measures contemplated by
that Government aimed at ensuring the success of the
Conference;
2. Decides, in conformity with paragraph 13 of
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,25 to convene the
Conference in Ghana in order to mobilize world public
opinion and adopt measures likely to secure the full
and universal implementation of United Nations decisions and resolutions on racism, racial discrimination,
apartheid, decolonization and self-determination;
3. Decides to make exception to its resolution 2609
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969 on the pattern of conferences and agrees that half of the additional cost involved in holding the Conference in Ghana shall be
defrayed from the regular budget of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to maintain his
contacts with the Government of Ghana concerning
future arrangements for holding the Conference at
Accra;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session, as a matter of high priority,
an item entitled "World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination".
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976

31/79.

Status of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3225 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974 and 3381 (XXX)
of 10 November 1975,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General26 on the status of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;27

2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention
or acceded thereto;

3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on a universal basis and implementation of its
provisions are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination;
4. Appeals to States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of making the declaration provided
for in article 14 of the Convention;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance
2 5 Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), annex.
26 A/31/201.
2 7 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

99

with Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/80.

Status of the International Convention on
the Suppression an<l Punishment of the
Crime of A partheicl

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and ratification the International Convention on
the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its resolution 3380 (XXX) of 10 November
1975,
Expressing its appreciation to those States which have
become parties to the Convention,
Convinced that ratification of or accession to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis
and implementation of its provisions are necessary for
the achievement of the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Reiterating its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime against
humanity seriously disturbing international peace and
security,
Underlining Security Council resolution 392 (1976)
of 19 June 1976, in which the Council condemned the
Government of South Africa for its resort to massive
violence against and killings of the African people,
including schoolchildren and students and others opposing racial discrimination,
Noting that the legitimate struggle of the oppressed
African peoples against apartheid demands all necessary
assistance by the international community,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid ;28
2. Welcomes the entry into force on 18 July 1976
of the above-mentioned Convention;
3. Appeals to all States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to accede thereto;
4. Invites the Chairman of the thirty-third session
of the Commission on Human Rights to appoint a
group consisting of three members of the Commission
as provided for by article IX of the Convention;
5. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to
undertake the functions set out in article X of the Convention, in particular to prepare a list of individuals,
organizations, institutions and representatives of States
which are alleged to be responsible for the crimes
enumerated in article II of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary~General to include in his
i:ext annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380 (XXX) a special part concerning the implementation of the Convention;
7. Decides to consider annually starting with its
thirty-second session, the question ~ntitled "Status of
28 A/311209.
