United Nations

S/PV.6485

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6485th meeting
Tuesday, 22 February 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Li Baodong
Ms. Duarte-Rodriguez
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (for the period from 21 September 2010 to 7 January 2011)
(S/2011/32)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-24004 (E)

*1124004*

S/PV.6485

Ramos-Horta and other leaders, Timor-Leste has
continued to make progress, both in advancing peace
and stability and in promoting development. I would
also like to acknowledge the presence of Vice-Minister
for Foreign Affairs Alberto Carlos and of Secretary of
State for Security Francisco Guterres.

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (for the period from 21 September 2010
to 7 January 2011) (S/2011/32)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the representatives of Timor-Leste, Japan, New
Zealand, the Philippines and Australia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I wish
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana
Gusmão, Prime Minister and Minister of Defence and
Security of Timor-Leste.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the Council decides to
invite Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
It is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/32, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ameerah Haq.
Ms. Haq: Thank you, Madame President, for the
opportunity to introduce the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/32) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which covers the
period 21 September 2010 to 7 January 2011.
I would like to acknowledge the presence in the
Chamber of Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão.
Under his leadership, as well as that of President José

2

The Secretary-General’s report notes that the
security and political situation in Timor-Leste
continues to be stable. With the responsibilities of the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) gradually
increasing, overall crime rates have remained low and
do not indicate any politically related violence, thus
reflecting a general desire for peace, stability and unity
at all levels of society. While the Alliance for a
Parliamentary Majority Government coalition and
opposition parties have their differences, as is common
in any multiparty democracy, they continue to channel
those differences through established democratic
institutions and processes. Timorese leaders at the
national, district and community levels and across the
political spectrum, while recognizing that there are still
significant challenges ahead, including the presidential
and parliamentary elections planned for 2012, are
optimistic that the current peaceful situation can be
maintained through the end of 2012 and beyond.
I share this optimism that Timor-Leste’s progress
can be maintained if all political leaders and the
broader public continue to act in a responsible manner
and the security situation remains stable. This is a
sentiment that I hear voiced by people residing in the
neighbourhoods of Dili, as well as in villages outside
the capital. They have concerns, of course, particularly
regarding unemployment and poverty, which remain
high and widespread. But there is hope that ongoing
socio-economic development efforts will help tackle
those conditions. Meanwhile, the capital, Dili, has
become a city bustling with commercial activity, which
is in stark contrast to just two or three years ago. I
would like to congratulate the leaders and people of
Timor-Leste for these positive developments.
With regard to policing, the completion of the
resumption of primary policing responsibilities by the
PNTL in all districts and units is on the horizon. I am
confident that this process can be finalized in the
coming months, given the continuing commitment of
the Government and the PNTL. Since the report’s
closing date of 7 January, the joint GovernmentUNMIT team that reviews the readiness of districts and
units has recommended for resumption the districts of

11-24004

S/PV.6485

Bobonaro and Covalima, as well as three additional
units, including the Department of Justice, which is
responsible for police disciplinary investigations. Only
Dili district, which continues to face challenges in
meeting the mutually agreed criteria, and three other
units are pending further assessment.
Once the PNTL has resumed primary policing
responsibilities in all districts and units, responsibility
for the conduct and the command and control of all
policing operations in Timor-Leste will move from the
UNMIT Police Commissioner to the PNTL General
Commander. That will signal a new phase in the
development of PNTL — the beginning of the
reconstitution phase, during which UNMIT police will
primarily focus on further institutional strengthening
and capacity-building of the PNTL. This phase will be
critical to ensuring the readiness and ability of the
PNTL to guarantee public security throughout the
country in advance of the eventual withdrawal of
UNMIT. The reconstitution phase will be governed by
arrangements set out in an exchange of letters, the
broad principles of which have been agreed to and
which will be signed by the Prime Minister and myself.
As I mentioned earlier, the reconstitution phase
will mark a shift in the responsibilities of the UNMIT
police. One of the critical tasks for UNMIT will be to
help ensure that the PNTL establishes itself as a
professional and impartial national police service that
enjoys the trust of the Timorese people and is capable
of guaranteeing public security, with due respect for
human rights and the rule of law. The performance of
the PNTL during the reconstitution phase, including
the crucial period of national elections in 2012, and
future assessments will determine when full
reconstitution can be declared.
It is indeed promising that, to date, there have
been no significant spikes or increases in incidents of
violence in districts where PNTL has already resumed
its role. However, I remain concerned about the
continued high levels of domestic violence and
sporadic fighting incidents among youth groups and
martial arts groups in the country. As the report of the
Secretary-General notes, UNMIT and the country team
are actively supporting the efforts of the Secretary of
State for the Promotion of Equality and others to raise
awareness of the law against domestic violence among
all segments of society. We also continue to emphasize
the importance of a community policing approach in
addressing these issues.

11-24004

Working jointly with PNTL counterparts and
relevant Government authorities, UNMIT police are
already planning for the reconstitution phase to ensure
that its support focuses on the five priority areas for
further strengthening outlined in the strategic
development plan of the PNTL for 2011-2012. Those
are legislation, training, administration, discipline and
operations. As I conveyed in my address to the
Security Council on 19 October 2010 (see S/PV.6405),
I once again appeal to and encourage policecontributing countries to provide officers to UNMIT
who can effectively transfer skills to PNTL
counterparts in those focus areas. With regard to the
additional 19 civilian expert posts within the UNMIT
police component, I am pleased to report that 18
candidates have already been selected.
One concern noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral regards the final certification of the 199 PNTL
officers with pending criminal or disciplinary issues.
The report notes that, in a letter of 28 December 2010
to the Prime Minister and the Minister for Defence and
Security, the Secretary of State for Security
communicated his decision to certify those 199
uncertified PNTL officers, a significant number of
whom face serious disciplinary and criminal charges.
While the letter also stated that those officers would
not be exempt from any criminal or disciplinary
liabilities if found guilty at the outcome of the
proceedings, I submitted a letter to Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão on 3 February in which I expressed
the concerns of the United Nations about the
Government’s decision, noting its possible negative
impact on the overall integrity of the PNTL. I also
urged the Government and judicial authorities to take
the necessary measures to resolve expeditiously all
outstanding cases involving suspicions of human rights
violations or criminal conduct. In making those
appeals, I am convinced that the Government of TimorLeste and UNMIT share the same goals for a
professional PNTL that operates with due respect for
the rule of law.
The Falintil-Forças de Defesa de Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL) also continued to make further progress in
the development of their human resource and
institutional capacities, as reflected in the draft
F-FDTL force development plan for 2011-2015 and the
new F-FDTL force structure, which envisages the
recruitment of an additional 600 members, which is
currently ongoing. The F-FDTL has also reached an

3

S/PV.6485

understanding with the Government of Portugal to
deploy officers to serve as part of a future Portuguese
contingent to peacekeeping operations. Similarly, two
PNTL officers have been selected for deployment to
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau. Those are laudable commitments by
Timor-Leste to contribute to United Nations work to
ensure peace and stability in other parts of the world.
In addition, the UNMIT Military Liaison Group will
continue to provide support to the F-FDTL in preparing
officers for future liaison officer assignments.
One of the three F-FDTL members granted
commutations of sentences relating to involvement in
the 2006 shooting deaths of eight PNTL members
resigned in January. I am concerned that the remaining
two continue to serve. Now that the F-FDTL plans to
participate in international peacekeeping, it has an even
greater responsibility to ensure the integrity and
accountability of the force.
With regard to the wider security sector, TimorLeste, as a sovereign country, continues to make
advances in further developing the overarching
legislative and policy framework for the sector, as well
as various regulations. Subject, of course, to further
discussions with the Timor-Leste Government and the
concurrence of the Security Council, I propose that,
over the next two years, UNMIT concentrate on
supporting the further strengthening and development
of security institutions, in particular with regard to
training on human rights and gender issues, technical
legislative
drafting,
strengthening
disciplinary
mechanisms and facilitating sharing of best practices. I
propose that continued assistance be provided to
support civilian oversight institutions, which are
responsible for ensuring that the sector meets the needs
of the people of Timor-Leste, such as the National
Parliament, the Ministry for Defence and Security and
the Office of the Provedor for Human Rights and
Justice.
In the context of the joint transition process,
UNMIT and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) are also exploring, together with
the Government, possible joint programmes to support
various areas of the security sector, which would
depend on funding becoming available.
On 28 January, the National Parliament approved
the 2011 State budget after two weeks of debate, which
was attended in its entirety by the Prime Minister. It

4

includes various amendments proposed by members of
Parliament and totals $1.3 billion. After having
referred the proposed budget for judicial review and a
Court of Appeal opinion upholding its constitutionality
and legality having been issued, the President
promulgated the State budget law on 12 February. The
$1.3 billion budget represents a nearly 10-fold increase
over the budget for the 2005-2006 fiscal year.
The increasing amounts available to the State
from its petroleum resources are one of the most
striking changes that Timor-Leste has experienced over
the years. They are a huge State resource available for
investment in the future of the people of Timor-Leste.
However, as the State budget increases, there is a
need to ensure adequate governance practices to ensure
effective budget implementation, including in such
areas as procurement and auditing. It is also important
that adequate resources are allocated in critical social
sectors, such as education and health, and for
vulnerable groups, including women and children.
Investment in human capital, particularly in young
people, will improve the lives of the population and
provide greater economic dividends down the road.
Adequate investment in rural areas, where about 80 per
cent of the population resides, and a focus on
increasing employment opportunities for young people,
will bring more equitable benefits and increased
stability.
I welcome that the National Parliament increased,
by $1 million, allocations to the 2011 State budget for
various initiatives to combat domestic violence,
including support to vulnerable persons and victims of
domestic violence. The Government readily agreed to
these proposed increases, demonstrating the widely
shared commitment to addressing this troubling issue.
The Government is aware of the challenges
associated with an expanding budget and continues
efforts to address them. I hope that new and ongoing
initiatives, such as the National Development Agency
and programmes focused on district-level development,
will further Government efforts to guarantee
responsible spending. I also hope that investment in
social and rural sectors will be taken into consideration
by the National Parliament when it examines the draft
National Strategic Development Plan. Increased focus
on these areas will also facilitate achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). This year,
the Government will initiate the MDG suco fund, an

11-24004

S/PV.6485

innovative approach of delegating to and empowering
people at the village level to assist in achieving the
MDGs. Preparations are under way for the next
national MDG steering committee meeting scheduled
for early March.
I hope that these measures will contribute to
enhancing strategies to meet MDG targets, particularly
those relating to nutrition, child health and maternal
mortality. At the same time, significant progress has
been achieved in other areas, with Timor-Leste having
already met MDG targets for a reduction in infant and
under-five mortality and to ensure antenatal care
coverage. The country is also on track to achieve the
MDGs in such areas as primary school enrolment, the
proportion of births attended by skilled health
personnel and access to safe drinking water.
As already mentioned, some of the main political
challenges ahead are the national presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2012. Electoral management
bodies have demonstrated increasing capacity over the
years. However, the Government has indicated that it
would require continued United Nations electoral
support through the 2012 elections, although less
support would be needed than in 2007. The nature and
extent of this support was reviewed by a needs
assessment mission conducted by the Department of
Political Affairs Division of Electoral Affairs and
UNDP from 7 to 17 February. Continued electoral
support through the integrated UNMIT and UNDP
election support team will contribute to credible
elections, as has been discussed in the context of the
joint transition strategy. Such assistance will require
further donor support.
On 14 February, the National Parliament once
again voted to postpone discussion of the two draft
laws on reparations and on a follow-up institution to
the
Commission
for
Reception,
Truth
and
Reconciliation (CAVR) and the Commission of Truth
and Friendship (CTF), to be called the institute of
memory. I encourage Parliament to resume discussions
on these important initiatives as soon as possible. In
that connection, I note that the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, which
concluded an official mission to Timor-Leste at the
invitation of the Government on 14 February, referred
to these draft laws as important steps in the
implementation of the CAVR/CTF recommendations. It
also considered the proposed establishment of the

11-24004

institute of memory as a major step forward in truth
recovery.
On 27 and 29 January, Timor-Leste successfully
hosted the fifth meeting of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum of Experts
and Eminent Persons, co-chairing the forum with
Thailand. In his keynote address to the meeting, TimorLeste’s Foreign Minister indicated that the country was
in the process of making a formal application to
become a member of ASEAN. Indonesia’s support for
Timor-Leste’s desire to join ASEAN during its
presidency in 2011 reflects the continuing good
relationship between the two countries. I would also
like to recognize the continuing contribution of the
international security forces of Australia and New
Zealand, with which UNMIT continues to enjoy good
cooperation.
On 1 February, the meeting of the High-Level
Committee on Transition, hosted by the President, was
attended by UNMIT and Government delegations, led
respectively by the Prime Minister and myself. The
Government designated the Deputy Prime Minister as
its overall focal point for the transition, as well as its
other focal points for the seven technical working
groups. As agreed at that meeting, a transition plan is
being jointly drafted with the Government. Discussions
at that meeting focused on justice, the rule of law and
human rights, as well as on the economic impact of
UNMIT’s withdrawal and on training programmes that
UNMIT established for its national staff. The
Committee agreed on the technical assistance from
UNMIT desired by the Government over the next two
years.
The Government also agreed that a session of the
next Timor-Leste development partners’ meeting in
July will be devoted to a discussion of the transition
plan. This will be an important opportunity for bilateral
and multilateral partners to present their views on the
plan as well as to obtain further information on TimorLeste’s requirements through the transition period and
following UNMIT’s departure, which can feed into
their own assistance plans.
The focus of the transition period is on capacitybuilding and other measures to support the further
strengthening
and
development
of
Timorese
institutions, particularly with regard to the priority
areas of UNMIT’s mandate — democratic governance,
the rule of law, justice and human rights, the security

5

S/PV.6485

sector and socio-economic development. UNMIT is
also redoubling its efforts to further develop the
capacities of its own national staff and staff in key
offices within State and Government institutions to
further enhance their capacities to make continued
meaningful contributions to the development of TimorLeste. Given the strong commitment of the
Government of Timor-Leste to the transition, our aim
is ensure a smooth and successful UNMIT withdrawal,
which hopefully can also serve as a best practice for
other peacekeeping missions.
Let me recap by saying that Timor-Leste is now
entering a period that will be an important indicator of
the durability of advances made since 2006,
particularly in the security sector as PNTL becomes
responsible for its own command-and-control
arrangements. However, there will also be other tests in
the run-up to the 2012 elections. Leaders of political
parties will need to continue to responsibly express and
deal with their differences through democratic
institutions and processes. Access to the justice system
needs to improve so that all segments of the population
will be able to benefit, especially those in rural areas
and women. The Government will have to continue
efforts to ensure effective and transparent use of the
increased budgeted resources available to it. All
institutions and leaders will need to continue to show
that progress to date results from measures, processes
and commitments that can be sustained in the long
term. Considering current circumstances, I am hopeful
that, with the combined efforts of the Government, all
political parties and leaders and all communities and
people of Timor-Leste, these remaining challenges can
be met.
In conclusion, let me thank my two deputies, Finn
Reske-Nielsen and Shigeru Mochida, and all of the
United Nations personnel in Timor-Leste. I would also
like to thank the leadership of Timor-Leste and, again,
Prime Minister Gusmão, with whom I am here today.
Finally, allow me to pay tribute to and to thank the
people of Timor-Leste for their resilience and
determination to establish a stable and enduring peace
and sustainable development for their country.
The President: I thank Ms. Ameerah Haq for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kay
Rala Xanana Gusmão.

6

Mr.
Gusmão
(Timor-Leste)
(spoke
in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
First and foremost, on behalf of the people I represent,
please allow me to thank the Security Council and its
permanent members, as well as all others who have
walked in the Chamber, for the generosity and concern
that they have shown in their resolutions on TimorLeste. After more than five years, I must say that it is a
great pleasure to be back here at United Nations
Headquarters.
I must also recall that in May 2006 then Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste Ramos-Horta came
before the Council to plead for the support that our
people needed, at a time when intolerance trumped
constructive dialogue, so that we might find proper
solutions. My presence here today follows that SOS we
sent out five years ago.
I am also pleased to be accompanied by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq.
It is thanks to her commitment and dedicated
leadership of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) that the relationship between
Timor-Leste and the United Nations remains as strong
as ever.
I am also honour-bound to thank my good friend
Mr. Atul Khare for everything he did, in very trying
circumstances, both for the Timorese and for the
Mission he led. He always showed great responsibility
and care in his work, as well as great understanding
and cooperation, so that together we could achieve our
duty of restoring confidence in the Timorese society.
Since UNMIT’s establishment, in 2006, both President
Ramos-Horta and Vice-Prime Minister José Luís
Guterres, as well as Mr. Atul Khare and Ms. Ameerah
Haq, have reported to the Security Council on the
progress achieved in Timor-Leste.
I would like to highlight a few of the steps we
have taken since the five-party coalition Government I
lead entered office on 8 August 2007. For the first two
years, we focused our efforts on restoring peace and
stability and on solving most of the social and political
problems created by the 2006 crisis, which continued
up to 2008. We have been implementing structural
reforms with regard to the management of State
administration. We are also creating systems and
structures to ensure good governance and continuing to
provide support for building the capacity of both
institutions and justice sector personnel. We are

11-24004

S/PV.6485

implementing social policies in order to reduce the
imbalances in our society, taking into account the
physical, moral and psychological damage caused by a
war that lasted 24 years. We are nurturing structured
policies on education, health and agriculture. And we
are promoting a coherent economic policy throughout
the country with regard to our nascent national private
sector.
The restoration of peace and stability in the
country was primarily a result of the reforms started in
the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the
Falintil-Forças de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL),
which by 2008 finally ended the cycle of friction,
overcoming the petty differences that divided both
institutions. Since the joint operation in 2008, the
PNTL and F-FDTL have been activated here and there
to continue the exercise to restore normality in the
country, in full compliance with the values of a
democratic State under the rule of law.
While one of the main factors in the 2006 crisis
was the inability of State bodies to manage problems
collectively, in February 2008, at a time of extreme
gravity and threat against the constitutional order, we
saw all State institutions working in a coordinated
manner and in close collaboration, thereby meeting all
legal and constitutional requirements for overcoming
that prolonged crisis. The result was the creation of a
political precedent of enormous significance and scope,
which shows to the Timorese that there are proper
instruments that they can use to save the country from
anarchy and disorder.
Nevertheless, I must acknowledge the extremely
important role played by civil society, including the
Church and non-governmental organizations, as well as
political parties, youth and, most of all, our people, in
this process of consolidating national unity and
stability. In 2009, the year that marked the tenth
anniversary of the referendum, this enabled the
Government to issue a new motto, namely, “Goodbye
Conflict, Welcome Development”, which the people
embraced with all their hearts.
Thus, on 31 December 2010, after the first decade
in which the Timorese people were truly free, we bade
farewell to the year in a festive atmosphere, knowing
that we were on our way to becoming a friendly and —
most of all — tolerant and, of course, peaceful society.
It was against that backdrop that fireworks displays
were held in Dili to greet the 2011-2020 decade, during

11-24004

which we will be strengthening those values and
launching a bolder development period.
I did not come here to praise the progress made
by my Government in an effort to correct some reports
on Timor-Leste that tend to sound more like verdicts.
We regret those reports, but we try to understand the
respective rationales behind them. I also did not come
here to underestimate the difficulties and the
challenges that still lie ahead of us.
We are aware that we still have many needs as a
nation. We are fully aware of the efforts that we will
have to make in order to build State and country. Still,
we have not been alone in meeting those challenges,
for we have benefited from the generosity and support
of nations from all over the world. The members of the
Council represent that generosity and support, as you
represent the countries from throughout the world. We
therefore continue to strengthen and gradually expand
our ties of solidarity with friendly countries from
various continents and with different histories, beliefs
and ethnicities.
Most of all, we are taking our due place in our
region. We are currently formalizing our application
for membership in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) during the Indonesian presidency of
that regional forum. We believe that having TimorLeste join ASEAN during the Indonesian presidency
will have great symbolism, not only for Timor-Leste
and Indonesia but also for all the members of the
Association.
We are continuing to strengthen our relationship
with other friends in the Asia-Pacific region, including
China, Japan, South Korea, Australia and New
Zealand. Timor-Leste is also strongly committed to the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, which
has members around the world.
We also have ties of cooperation with India,
where dozens of Timorese are studying in the areas of
information technology and oil.
We are also fortunate to have strong support and
assistance from the European Union and its member
States. After this important visit to the United States, I
will also be travelling to Cuba, where over 700
Timorese are studying medicine, and to Brazil, a
country with which we are also cooperating in several
areas.

7

S/PV.6485

Timor-Leste is truly committed to engaging in
dialogue with several countries so as to enable a
critical review of its processes. As a nation, we have
received much from the international community.
Currently, we hope to be able to reciprocate in a
genuine manner and with the same spirit of solidarity
by sharing experiences, both sweet and sour, with other
fragile countries throughout the world.
As such, in April 2010, we had the honour of
hosting the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding, with the participation of the least
developed countries of the Group of Seven Plus (g7+),
which is currently chaired by Timor-Leste. The general
goal of the g7+ is to awaken leaders and peoples so
that they may reacquire ownership of their processes
over the long term, without losing sight of each
country’s characteristics and priorities, and without
forgetting to focus on the need for better control over
and adjustment to outside help. That would require
greater transparency from donors and beneficiaries,
which would in turn ensure that external support has a
real impact on the development of the countries
concerned.
The g7+ is enabling fragile and conflict-affected
countries to gather together and speak about
themselves, to learn from their mutual experiences and
to create new opportunities for facing the future with
determination and optimism. The g7+ currently has 17
member countries, representing 350 million people
from Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and the Pacific.
For the third consecutive year, Timor-Leste has
been involved in the Bali Democracy Forum, which has
been gaining participants every year. Such countries as
India, Iran, Bangladesh and others have also chosen to
make important contributions to the Forum, which
shows that the world wants to discuss the subject of
democracy. I would like to convey my respect and
admiration for my friend Mr. Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono, the President of the Republic of Indonesia.
Under his leadership, the largest Muslim country in the
world is taking steady steps towards consolidating
democracy and has managed to bring together, in Bali,
representatives of various Governments to discuss the
values of peace, non-violence and tolerance, and
particularly the connection between democracy and
development.
Today, we are witnessing an inevitable movement
by societies and peoples who demand freedom of

8

expression and fundamental rights. In the context of
current events, the g7+ and the Bali Democracy Forum,
people are becoming aware that they must be sovereign
in terms of the decisions that concern them, rather than
remaining subject to the imposition of the programmes
of others and, worse still, to interests that are not their
own.
While we Timorese fought alone for 24 years, we
never lost sight of what was going on in the world. The
objective awareness that the world was changing, both
in our region and others, was something that nurtured
our aspirations to be free, even in extreme situations.
And the world continues to change, fortunately.
Against that backdrop, the most important thing is that
people are the masters of their own fate.
Changing topics now, but remaining in this world
in which we live, the least developed countries, of
which Timor-Leste is one, are concerned by the
continuous indecisiveness of the large economies in
establishing a new economic order. As time passes, that
indecisiveness at best generates anxiety, if not despair.
And that is the truth: time goes by, as it has done
ever since the first alarms were sounded on climate
change, decades ago. Today, all over the world, it is
meaningless to talk about preventive measures, since
all that can be done is invariably to bury the dead and
assess the amount of damage in order to establish funds
to alleviate the suffering of people. Thus, countries
such as Timor-Leste that yearn for development so as
to improve the living conditions of their peoples face
one of the worst challenges, namely, uncertainty in
view of the adverse effects of the world economic
recession and the lack of coherence with regard to
measures to save humankind from hunger, disease,
poverty and all their consequences.
Accustomed to huge challenges during their
lengthy struggle for liberation, the people of TimorLeste are determined to focus on their development.
After a thorough review of the needs and challenges,
we are drafting the National Strategic Development
Plan, which will be submitted to Parliament for
approval. We hope to launch it at the next meeting with
our development partners, to take place in Dili in July.
In macroeconomic terms, the National Strategic
Development Plan is based on the following paradigm:
production, production capabilities and productive
employment
opportunities.
Only
by
creating
employment can we improve the social and economic

11-24004

S/PV.6485

situation of our people, since only employment can
generate income, and income results in the eradication
of poverty. For that, the Timorese State will have to
invest boldly in basic infrastructure and human capital
development.
With the Council’s permission, I will again go
back to the reasons that brought me here to New York.
On 25 August 2006, in response to a request by
the then-Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, the
establishment of UNMIT was approved for an initial
period of six months, with the possibility of renewal.
In December 2006, an additional agreement was signed
on the restoration and maintenance of public order. It
regulated the relationship between UNMIT and the
State of Timor-Leste, transferring leadership of the
national and international police to the United Nations
police (UNPOL). In parallel, support for the reform,
restructuring and rebuilding of the national police of
Timor-Leste was also defined. That enabled the
registration and certification programme of all PNTL
elements to begin, which facilitated the final
certification of all members of the police who did not
have trials pending for crimes or human rights
violations.
Meanwhile, the PNTL promotions system was
approved, which established a promotions committee
to select PNTL officers and recommend them for
promotion. The committee was supported by senior
police officers from friendly countries, which made
possible the creation of an international jury to give the
process greater credibility.
On 14 May 2009, the transfer of executive
responsibility from UNPOL to the PNTL began in the
various districts. We expect that process to be complete
by 27 March — the date of the PNTL’s eleventh
anniversary — with the handing over of the Dili
district command and the PNTL general command.
From then on, the PNTL will be responsible for
conducting, leading and monitoring all police
operations in Timor-Leste.
I acknowledge the concerns stated in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2011/32) with regard to
completing certification of the remaining PNTL
elements. Here, I only wish to underline the
Government’s commitment to strengthen command and
control and to resolutely implement disciplinary
procedures so as to ensure the integrity of our police.

11-24004

Next year will be very important in the
consolidation of the process of building our young
State. It will thus be the year when we will hold
presidential and parliamentary elections — the third
democratic elections in our country. I am confident that
they will take place in an atmosphere of calm, as in
2007, when, despite the recent crisis and a few isolated
events, the elections took place in full normality
throughout the entire territory.
For that, we are ready to continue ensuring the
stability of our country. Also to that end, the PNTL will
continue to require the assistance of their colleagues at
UNPOL, who will undertake only advisory and
capacity-building functions in various areas, in
accordance with the needs of the Timorese police and
the plan already drafted by its general command. That
issue should, however, continue to be subject to
consultation and coordination with the relevant
Timorese authorities.
Allow me to recall that, with regard to legislation,
training, administration, discipline and operations, it
would of course be ideal if the advisers to the PNTL
have technical and professional skills in these fields. If
possible, we would like to see the advisers already
cooperating in these areas to remain until the end of
their mandates.
Under the leadership of our President of the
Republic, at high-level meetings involving UNMIT and
the Government we will continue to study the postUNMIT period, that is, the period after the 2012
elections, when UNPOL may start to withdraw.
For the election period — March and April for
the presidential elections and June for the
parliamentary elections — we seek to draw up a
special agreement with UNMIT so as to enable
UNPOL to participate jointly with PNTL in the
maintenance of public order in our country. In addition,
a year in advance, I would like to recall that UNMIT
will be requested to provide logistical support to the
elections, as it has always done, most recently in the
elections for local leaders in 2009. We count on the
presence of the international community through
international observers, who, we hope, will be present
in sufficient numbers to cover the 700 polling stations
in order to anticipate any irregularities that may
emerge and that we want to avoid.
The United Nations has been present since the
start of our nation-building . Therefore, I urge it to

9

S/PV.6485

remain in solidarity with us in fulfilling the dreams of
our people, which today are for peace and
development. I thank the United Nations, the Security
Council and the entire community of nations for their
efforts and support for State-building in Timor-Leste.
The Timorese people vow to continue to work hard
towards peace and stability in our country. Only by
doing so can we help the United Nations to provide due
assistance to other countries in crisis that have a
greater need for aid than Timor-Leste.
On behalf of all Timorese, I thank all those men
and women who have left their families and their
countries to be part of the noble mission to assist in the
building of Timor-Leste throughout these five long
years. I also thank all Governments that were part of
the Council during those years and deliberated on the
support to Timor-Leste in a spirit of true friendship and
solidarity among peoples and nations.
I cannot conclude without congratulating the
Governments and peoples of the Sudan for their
intelligent embrace of non-violence during the recent
referendum process. We know that significant
challenges remain in that process. The people of
Timor-Leste, who have experienced the devastation of
destruction and violence, hope that their Sudanese
brothers and sisters, from both the North and South,
will continue to engage in dialogue towards a peaceful
solution, which is the only way to ensure the integrity
and survival of both peoples.
The year 2012 will also mark the tenth
anniversary of the restoration of our independence and
the realization of our sovereignty. I would like to seize
this opportunity to invite all those here today to take
part in the celebrations, as we did together back on
20 May 2002.
In conclusion, I would like to thank His
Excellency the Secretary-General for his report and for
the recommendation to extend the UNMIT mandate for
one more year. In the consolidation phase of the PNTL,
the reconfiguration of UNPOL is important. I have
every confidence that the PNTL will be well assisted in
the process of building institutional and human
capacity.
(spoke in English)
During this time of anguish, it would be remiss of
me not to express my sincere and deep sympathy and
solidarity with the people and the Government of New

10

Zealand for the second earthquake that has hit
Christchurch.
The President: I thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Thank you
very much, Madame President, for convening this
debate on the situation in Timor-Leste. I would like to
start by welcoming His Excellency Prime Minister Kay
Rala Xanana Gusmão and thanking him for his very
comprehensive statement. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
briefing, and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/32).
We are encouraged by Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmão’s statement that the overall situation in TimorLeste remains calm and stable and the country is well
on its way to long-term peace, stability and
development. We would like to record our appreciation
for all the political parties for their continued and
active engagement in the democratic processes. In
order to confront the various challenges that TimorLeste faces, it is crucial for all the political parties,
including
the
Government
and
the
Frente
Revolucionária
do
Timor-Leste
Independente
opposition to fully cooperate with each other. This is
essential for cementing the foundations of nationbuilding as well as for socio-economic development in
the country.
We are happy to note that the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) will very soon assume primary
policing responsibilities for the entire country. More
importantly, the PNTL has demonstrated its ability to
incrementally assume policing responsibilities from the
United Nations police without any major difficulty.
This is essential for sustained peace and stability and
for a successful transition.
It is incumbent on the international community
and the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) to ensure that they remain steadfast in
their commitment towards supporting training and
capacity-building for the PNTL. We strongly support
the efforts of UNMIT to ensure that its police
component has the skill sets to support the PNTL in
capacity-building as well with their efforts at

11-24004

S/PV.6485

institutional development. Moving ahead, it is critical
that there be a clear delineation of authority and
respective fields for the military and police, so that
they can effectively discharge their responsibilities
under the civilian Government.

The progress made so far gives us hope and
confidence that we are moving towards making
UNMIT a real success story. We appreciate the efforts
by UNMIT, the international community and the
bilateral partners in this regard.

The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled in the first half of 2012 will be major
milestones in the consolidation of the democratic
transition in Timor-Leste. Also, the elections will be a
litmus test of the PNTL readiness for the transition,
which is scheduled to take place by the end of 2012.
The United Nations must provide technical and
logistical support for the smooth conduct of these
elections in accordance with the priorities of the
Government.

Last but not least, I would like to express my
delegation’s
sincere
appreciation
to
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haq and her
team for their dedication and hard work in supporting
the Government and people of Timor-Leste.

Towards consolidating the progress made so far,
it is important that the international community
continue to extend assistance and support to the
Government’s
strategy
for
accelerating
the
infrastructure development and reconstruction of the
country. We have noted with satisfaction that economic
growth continues to remain robust, and the 2011 State
budget has been quadrupled from that of the 2006
budget.
India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste. We have sought to contribute to that
country’s development by providing expertise and
training in areas of our competence, and where we see
complementarities in their application. India has
extended its support to the Government of TimorLeste, including through assistance for the purchase of
equipment and materials related to socio-economic
development and in the human resources development
sector.
As UNMIT moves into a critical transition phase
prior to its departure and the Government assumes full
responsibility for various processes, the United Nations
system and agencies present in the field must work in a
coherent manner towards addressing the long-term
needs of the country in accordance with the priorities
set by the Government.
We support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral for the extension of the UNMIT mandate for a
further period of 12 months, with the same
composition and current authorized level of personnel
while continuing with the gradual decrease of police
personnel.

11-24004

Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
Prime Minister Gusmão and Ambassador Haq for their
briefings on Timor-Leste and the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haq
for her dedicated leadership and commitment to
solidifying peace in Timor-Leste.
The United Nations and the international
community as a whole played a critical role in the
independence of Timor-Leste, as described with much
eloquence by Prime Minister Gusmão. Sustained
international support will be crucial to ensuring a
peaceful and prosperous future for this young country.
Today, I would like to make five brief points that
touch on both the progress that Timor-Leste has made
and on the challenges that lie ahead.
First, the United States is encouraged that the
security situation in the country remains stable, to the
degree that a further reduction in the force size of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) is planned for June 2011. We are encouraged
by
the
international
community’s
continued
commitment to the electoral process in Timor-Leste. In
that regard, we are eager to learn the results of the
needs assessment mission, which will determine the
scope and kind of election support needed. The success
of the electoral process will indicate a further
consolidation of peace and security throughout the
country and signal continued progress toward a
peaceful and prosperous future.
Second, the transfer of primary policing
responsibilities from UNMIT to the Timorese national
police will be critical to further cementing stability in
the country. Efforts to strengthen institutions and build
local capacity are essential to the success of the
peacekeeping mission. We commend UNMIT, the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste and bilateral donors

11

S/PV.6485

for their hard work in this area. We strongly support
the efforts of UNMIT to adapt the composition of its
personnel to address the changing nature of UNMIT
policing in Timor-Leste. UNMIT must ensure that the
Mission has the appropriate specialized skills it needs
to be successful. That includes ensuring that all 19
additional civilian expert posts within UNMIT’s police
component are filled as expeditiously as possible.
We are concerned that the Government of TimorLeste certified 199 police officers despite pending
criminal and disciplinary charges. Of those, 52 face
serious disciplinary and criminal charges. We strongly
urge the Government to pursue justice expeditiously.
The accountability of the police force and the
discipline process under which it operates are critical
for the integrity of the Timorese national police.
Third, the development of competent and
professional security institutions, both police and
military, is critical to the long-term success of TimorLeste. We commend the progress that has been made in
constructing the overarching legislative and policy
framework in the security sector. We urge the
Government to finalize its national security policy and
to work to implement an understanding of the resulting
roles and responsibilities throughout the security
institutions, specifically within the military and police.
The United States is committed to strengthening
the Timorese security sector. We have recently
increased our bilateral support in this area — for
example, through a programme to advance community
policing.
Fourth, we are encouraged by the concluding
conference of the national consensus dialogue on truth,
justice and reconciliation. The United States strongly
supports those and additional efforts to further the
national reconciliation process under clear and
predictable legal procedures. Addressing growing
concerns about impunity and establishing public trust
in the justice sector are important for a stable path
forward.
Finally,
socio-economic
development
and
democratic institutions are critical to the long-term
stability and security of Timor-Leste. Sustained
engagement of the international community is
essential, as is continued engagement with bilateral
partners. The United States is committed to assisting
Timor-Leste to achieve its long-term goals. We are

12

investing in programmes to promote good governance,
improve health and spur economic growth.
As we continue to partner with Timor-Leste, we
are pleased to note the continued planning undertaken
by the Government and UNMIT for an eventual
UNMIT departure and a transition to a post-UNMIT
presence. The United States welcomes the High-Level
Committee on Transition and the establishment of
seven working groups. Those bodies are critical in
identifying and addressing the challenges on the road
ahead.
We encourage UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste to create a gradual and methodical
transition plan. Such planning should include handing
over or discontinuing certain United Nations functions,
beginning this year, and closing United Nations offices
in a staged fashion well in advance of UNMIT’s
departure. We further encourage UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste to identify the role the
United Nations will play after UNMIT’s departure and
to work closely with bilateral missions throughout the
planning and transition process. We believe that
elections should not in themselves be an exit strategy.
UNMIT’s transition should be determined by events on
the ground.
In closing, I would like to thank the peacekeepers
of UNMIT, as well as their Timorese partners on the
ground, and international supporters for the continued
dedication to peace and security in Timor-Leste.
Timorese have made great strides towards peace and
stability and will continue to do so with the presence
and commitment of strong international partners.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah
Haq, for presenting the report on the work of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) (S/2011/32). We welcome the Prime Minister
of the country, Mr. Xanana Gusmão, and we listened
attentively to his assessments.
I can say straight away that Russia is satisfied
with the stabilization of the military and political
situation in Timor-Leste and with the progress made in
key areas of its development. That is undoubtedly due
to the country’s leadership and to the United Nations
Mission. The political forces in Timor-Leste have been
demonstrating a responsible approach and a
commitment to the process of national dialogue and

11-24004

S/PV.6485

reconciliation based on democratic principles. That is
especially important in the context of the general
elections planned for 2012.
The stabilization of the situation has created the
necessary preconditions for tackling long-term
challenges. The Government has managed to achieve
economic growth, a decrease in the poverty level and
improvements in human development indicators. We
welcome the progress in handing over responsibilities
for law enforcement from United Nations peacekeepers
to the Timor-Leste police. We trust that process will be
concluded shortly. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to refocus the efforts of the United
Nations Mission on providing assistance to the national
police and strengthening its potential. Given that, while
the State authorities are currently being established, the
socio-economic problems remain acute, the progress
that has been made requires further and stronger
assistance from the international community. In that
regard we support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the
Mission for a year.
We approve the plan to decrease the police
component of the Mission as the situation in the
country improves, and in accordance with the wishes
of the Government. The Mission should be prepared to
provide assistance in conducting the elections. We have
taken note of the information on the start of
discussions with the leadership of Timor-Leste on the
parameters of future work for the United Nations
Mission and the modalities for the United Nations
presence.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and to all the staff of the Mission,
which include Russian civilian police officers, for their
professional work.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we wish to welcome the presence of Prime
Minister Gusmão and thank him for his valuable
contribution to this debate. Also, we wish to thank the
Special Representative, Ms. Haq, for her briefing today
and for her commitment in fulfilling the mandate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to commend
the Timorese people, Government and political parties
for their cooperation and responsibility, which largely
contributed to the overall progress achieved in all areas
during the reporting period. We also welcome the

11-24004

important role that the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) continues to play in
support of the efforts of Timor-Leste to advance peace,
stability and development. With this in mind, Bosnia
and Herzegovina supports UNMIT’s mandate extension
for another 12 months.
We are pleased to learn that significant progress
has been made in many important areas, particularly in
strengthening the rule of law and the development of
democratic institutions.
We would like to recall that the Council had the
opportunity to learn about the institution-building
experience of Timor-Leste during its open debate on
post-conflict
peacebuilding:
institution-building,
organized by Bosnia and Herzegovina last month (see
S/PV.6472 and Resumption 1).
Strengthening security sector reform is crucial for
sustainable peace and security in Timor-Leste. We
welcome the resumption by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) of primary responsibilities for
police operations in two additional districts in
September 2010. We strongly encourage the early
finalization of this process in all districts and units. To
that end, the joint activities of UNMIT and the PNTL
in further institutional capacity-building — including
improving administrative skills, investigating genderbased violence, countering human trafficking and
community policing — are of particular importance.
They represent a part of the PNTL strategic
development plan for 2011-2012 that should result in
its full resumption of primary policing activities.
We firmly believe that only truth and justice can
lead Timor-Leste towards full reconciliation and
prosperity. We therefore welcome the outcome of the
concluding conference of the national consensus
dialogue on truth, justice and reconciliation, which will
certainly further facilitate continued dialogue within
Timorese society.
Regarding the general elections to be held in
2012, we welcome the expected approval of proposed
amendments to the laws on presidential and
parliamentary elections and the electoral management
bodies. That will consolidate institutional capacities to
conduct the upcoming elections with limited
international support. In that context, we also support
the role envisaged for the United Nations in providing
technical and logistical support as requested. The
successful organization and conduct of the 2012

13

S/PV.6485

elections will be a major test of democratic progress in
Timor-Leste.
As the Secretary-General stated in his report
(S/2011/32), the economy of Timor-Leste has
recovered remarkably since the 2006 crisis. However,
additional efforts are needed to sustain the envisaged
growth by promoting rural development and
infrastructure development and the role of the private
sector, which should provide more employment
opportunities, especially for young people.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our full support
for the efforts of the people and Government of TimorLeste to achieve sustainable peace, stability and
prosperity in their community.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ms. Haq, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her briefing. I also welcome the
presence here of the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Gusmão. Ms. Haq underscored that the situation in
Timor remains calm and continues to develop in the
right direction.
I would like to congratulate Prime Minister
Gusmão and, through him, the authorities and the
parliamentary opposition in his country, as well as its
civil society, all of whom confirm the political maturity
and solidity of their young institutions. The economic
and social progress we have seen, particularly in
poverty reduction, is the consequence of this new
stability, to the benefit of the Timorese people. What
we see in Timor today is a success story for the United
Nations and its ability to accompany a country on the
road to peace and stability.
However, the country’s recent history should not
encourage us to relax our attention or our efforts. From
that viewpoint, we are convinced that peace and
reconciliation will be achieved in Timor only if its
authorities show determination to fight impunity. It is
therefore essential that the Timorese State be able to
vouch, beyond the shadow of a doubt, for the integrity
of its police officers at the moment when they are
about to resume all their responsibilities. We expect,
therefore, that Timorese justice will continue to
prosecute those guilty of committing serious crimes
during the events of 2006. Like the Special
Representative, we note with concern the decision to
certify 199 police officers despite the criminal and
disciplinary procedures that are under way, some of
them very serious.

14

We hope that we will soon see the prompt
completion of the parliamentary deliberations on the
laws on reparations, as well as on the follow-on
institution to the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship.
We trust the Special Representative to lead the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) throughout the period that will encompass
the full transfer of powers to the Timorese police, the
2012 elections and the withdrawal of the Mission. The
goals, I think, are clear. First, it must ensure that the
numbers and qualifications of UNMIT staff correspond
to the Mission’s new tasks and to the situation on the
ground. Secondly, the Mission must contribute to the
success of the 2012 elections, the responsibility for
which will belong to the Timorese themselves. Thirdly,
UNMIT must prepare for the Mission’s withdrawal
after those elections, under the best conditions
possible.
We hope that the next report of the SecretaryGeneral and the renewal of the Mission’s mandate in
February 2012 will afford the opportunity to define —
together, of course, with the authorities of Timor-Leste —
the kind of presence that the United Nations will maintain
there after UNMIT leaves. Its departure will be proof not
of lack of interest on the part of the international
community, but of the trust we have in this country’s
capacity to take charge of its destiny.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa thanks
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her briefing to the Council
today. We also appreciate the presence in this debate of
His Excellency Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste and thank him for
his statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2011/32).
In just over a decade since independence, TimorLeste has made significant progress towards long-term
stability, peace and development. The Government and
people of the country had to start afresh with the
creation of peace and stability after decades of
struggling for independence. The relative peace in
Timor-Leste has facilitated an enabling environment
for development goals and the establishment of Stateand institution-building. Those efforts should be
recognized. The international community, particularly
the United Nations, has played a crucial role in

11-24004

S/PV.6485

partnering with the Timorese in addressing their
challenges. The Government of Timor-Leste should be
commended for its continuation of national dialogue
and unity, consolidation and building of sustainable
peace, and respect for constitutional principles and the
democratic rule of law.
Those processes will benefit significantly from
the Government’s continued efforts to foster dialogue
and reconciliation through the hosting of the national
consensus conference involving a spectrum of national
actors, both from the Government and from civil
society, and through the seminars organized by the
Anti-Corruption Commission. These are indispensable
and important indications of serious efforts by the
Government of Timor-Leste to address the difficult
issues of justice, corruption and reconciliation. Those
efforts on the Government’s part bode well for the
consolidation of democracy and are indicative of the
people’s aspirations for a prosperous future.
South Africa firmly believes that the stable
security situation in Timor-Leste has laid a solid
foundation for its economic development. Its continued
peace and stability has translated into remarkable
progress, and the 2010 Human Development Report
ranked Timor-Leste 120th of 169 countries, signalling
a remarkable improvement since 2005. My delegation
also noted with great satisfaction that Timor-Leste is
now ranked among the 20 fastest-growing economies
in the world.
We further acknowledge the important progress
achieved by the Timor-Leste national police force in
resuming its primary policing responsibilities. The
Government of Timor-Leste continues to make
progress in developing an overarching legislative and
policy framework for the security sector, and we also
appreciate the progress made in meeting the objectives
of the medium-term strategy in the areas of the rule of
law, justice and human rights.
South Africa commends the Government of
Timor-Leste for introducing social welfare packages
for the aged and the vulnerable and the legislation
passed to establish social pensions for combatants, as
well as labour-intensive infrastructure projects at the
community level to inject income into poorer
households.
Despite the commendable progress achieved,
challenges remain, and the Government of Timor-Leste
will continue to rely on the support of the international

11-24004

community. One important challenge is the need for
continued training and capacity-building for the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) in the five areas
defined by the national authorities: legislation,
training, administration, discipline and operations.
A further challenge relates to the issue of
unemployment, especially among young people, which,
as the Secretary-General’s report indicates, has
“potential for disillusionment and social unrest”. In
that regard, my delegation supports the SecretaryGeneral’s observation that “the challenge now is to
achieve inclusive and sustainable growth by promoting
rural development, the private sector and employment
generation, especially for youth” (S/2011/32), para. 65).
Continued efforts to address urban-rural disparities and
to support vulnerable groups must also be prioritized.
In its efforts to further deepen democracy and
stability, Timor-Leste is preparing to hold its national
elections in 2012. My delegation welcomes the
ongoing work of UNMIT and the United Nations
Development Programme to build the capacity of the
national institutions to run and administer these
elections and to provide them with logistical and
technical support. As we support State-building and
institution-building in Timor-Leste, we are reminded
that these efforts will be sustainable only if grounded
on the principle of national ownership and when
security and developmental needs are carefully
calibrated.
With regard to the future of UNMIT’s mandate,
my delegation supports the extension of the mandate
by 12 months. We encourage careful calibration of a
drawdown after the 2012 elections, taking into
consideration the conditions on the ground and that the
future mandate reflects a priority of the national
Government, in particular focusing on its consolidation
of the peacebuilding efforts.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Allow me to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Xanana Gusmão, Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, to the Security Council and to thank him
for his insightful and comprehensive statement. I
would also like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, for her lucid briefing today in the context of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/32). We appreciate
her contributions and dedicated service as Head of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).

15

S/PV.6485

I will limit my remarks to three important issues,
namely, the political and security situation in TimorLeste, its economic and development agenda and its
judicial and correctional system.
The Nigerian delegation welcomes the climate of
calm and stability that continues to characterize the
overall political and security situation in Timor-Leste,
especially since 2008. The prevailing condition
undoubtedly manifests the commitment of the
Timorese leadership and stakeholders to sustain peace
through national dialogue and political inclusiveness.
Indeed, the relative calm has also facilitated focused
implementation of the Government’s national
development plan. In that context we welcome the
consultations held in Dili from 27 to 29 December
2010 on the Government’s proposed development plans
for 2011, as a firm determination by the Government to
promote internal peace and security.
The
resumption
of
primary
policing
responsibilities by the Policia nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) is also critical to bolster the country’s peace
and stability. We therefore welcome the recent progress
recorded in the resumption of primary policing
responsibilities by the PNTL in two additional districts
and three more units. We fully support the district-bydistrict process of handing responsibility back to the
Timorese police. We expect, however, that the process
will be completed within the given timeline, thus
paving the way for the PNTL to assume full command
and control responsibility for all police operations in
Timor-Leste.
We want to emphasize that an effective
disciplinary mechanism is vital for the creation of a
strong, professional and independent PNTL. In that
regard, the recent decision of the Government to certify
52 PNTL officers who are facing various disciplinary
and criminal charges is of serious concern. The core
challenge facing the Government and the country’s
judicial authorities is how to safeguard the integrity of
the PNTL and ensure that its internal discipline
systems are effective.
The constructive interaction between the various
political parties and major stakeholders in guaranteeing
peace, harmony and continuity in governance is
commended. In particular, we note the Government’s
initiative on roads to peace and national unity, which
has helped to foster dialogue and reconciliation among
the parties.

16

The prospects for long-term peace, political
stability and economic recovery and growth are huge
incentives for the parties to approach the 2012
elections with renewed vigour and compromise. We
therefore welcome the commencement of the joint
transition planning mechanism, especially the fourth
meeting of the High-Level Committee on Transition.
The recent measures taken by Government to
strengthen the capacity and effectiveness of the justice
and correctional sectors are commendable. Those
measures have clearly enhanced access to justice,
reduced pending criminal prosecution cases and
improved prison infrastructure. Nonetheless, the
challenges of staffing and insufficient budgets are
daunting. To underpin the notable progress already
achieved in these sectors, the Government should
emphasize combating impunity. Steps should also be
taken to generate public confidence in the judicial
system and ensure respect for the independence of the
judiciary.
Regarding economic development, Timor-Leste’s
social and economic revival is rapidly gaining traction,
with improved security and greater confidence in the
country’s leaders. We therefore welcome the reduction
in poverty and improvements in human development
indicators and the prudent use of resources by the
Government, including the huge investment in
infrastructure.
To fully transform the economy, the Government
should give priority to rural development and youth
employment. There is also an overarching need for the
Government to communicate its goals and programmes
more clearly to the population. If properly harnessed,
investments in the three economic pillars identified by
the Government — agriculture, natural resources and
tourism — will generate economic growth and
accelerate the pace of development in the country.
Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to
UNMIT and the United Nations country team for the
important roles they have played in promoting peace,
stability and development in Timor-Leste. We call on
donors and development partners to provide long-term,
predictable support that will strengthen the
Government as it faces the onerous challenges of
achieving lasting peace and security in the country. We
commend the United Nations capacity-building and
technical assistance support for Timor-Leste, rendered
through UNMIT and the United Nations Development

11-24004

S/PV.6485

Programme. The establishment of the National Defence
Institute is a laudable demonstration of this
commitment.
Nigeria shares the Secretary-General’s view that
UNMIT’s police presence will be vital to support the
PNTL in capacity-building, skill enhancement and
specific advisory functions in all districts and units of
Timor-Leste throughout 2012. UNMIT police will also
provide operational support to the PNTL in the event of
extreme circumstances, if so required and requested,
during the period of elections in 2012. Given the
critical roles to be played by UNMIT, Nigeria supports
the extension of its mandate for another year.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish to
express our thanks to Prime Minister Gusmão and to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ameerah Haq, for their briefings today and to all the
personnel of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for their dedication to assisting
the people of Timor-Leste.
The next two years will determine the prospects
for a stable and peaceful future for Timor-Leste and its
people. The elections in mid-2012 remain the most
significant milestone ahead. As Timor-Leste works
towards those elections, we are pleased that the
security situation continues calm and that there has
been clear and steady improvement since 2006.
The men and women of UNMIT deserve credit
for their role in ensuring the stabilization of TimorLeste. Their work is now bearing fruit as the
Government increasingly assumes responsibility for
domestic security.
We are particularly encouraged by the imminent
handover of all policing districts to the national police
forces — the PNTL — and the fact that this transition
is being accomplished without any increase in crime or
disorder. The successful handover to the PNTL marks a
step towards the end of the United Nations
peacekeeping role. We do not envisage that the
Security Council will need to extend UNMIT’s
peacekeeping mandate beyond February 2013.
As we prepare for UNMIT’s departure in two
years’ time, it is right that the United Nations police
(UNPOL) should begin its drawdown now. We note the
small drawdown of UNPOL personnel recently
recommended by the Secretary-General. We expect to
see this rapidly accelerated after the election in 2012.

11-24004

The drawdown should be regarded as a display of trust
in the PNTL’s ability to re-establish itself as the
primary provider of security in Timor-Leste. The
Government of Timor-Leste can play an important role
by ensuring that its police are sufficiently equipped
with important enablers such as generators,
communications facilities and office equipment to
enable the PNTL to reach its full potential.
The Government of Timor-Leste should also
ensure — as some of my colleagues have highlighted —
that the integrity of the PNTL is not compromised. The
words of Prime Minister Gusmão this morning on this
subject were encouraging. But we are concerned at the
news that 52 serving PNTL officers who face serious
criminal charges have been certified. We call on the
Government of Timor-Leste to give priority to resolving
this unsatisfactory situation.
The Government should also continue to take a
firm stance against impunity and to bring perpetrators
of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
to justice. It is important that work on legislation
providing for follow-up to the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation make real
progress alongside work on reparations for victims of
past abuses.
It is imperative that the United Nations now
prioritize planning for its post-2012 presence. UNMIT
must plan a coherent, realistic and durable exit
strategy, enabling civilian peacebuilding actors to take
the lead in helping shape Timor-Leste’s future. We look
forward to receiving a detailed update on this planning
in the Secretary-General’s report later this year.
At the same time, the wider United Nations
family must work towards addressing the longer-term
needs of the county, in close collaboration with the
Government of Timor-Leste. We stress the importance
of the High-Level Committee on Transition in this
regard. United Nations involvement in Timor-Leste has
the potential to be a beacon of success, modelling how
peacekeeping operations can be drawn down as civilian
peacebuilders continue their vital work. The United
Kingdom encourages the United Nations to seize this
opportunity.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
Allow me to welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste. Xanana Gusmão has long represented

17

S/PV.6485

the struggle of Timor-Leste for self-determination and
independence. He is a man who has shown unrelenting
courage and determination in face of the most
tremendous odds, who has led his young country, first
as President of the Republic and today as Prime
Minister. In welcoming Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmão, I also welcome the leader of a sister nation, a
member of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), a Community united by indelible
links. It is indeed symbolic that today, both TimorLeste and Portugal are sitting at this table in a meeting
chaired by Brazil. Welcome, Prime Minister — your
words inspire our trust in the future of Timor-Leste.
(spoke in English)
I also wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her very comprehensive
briefing and to assure her once again of Portugal’s full
support for the work of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
Today, Timor-Leste is at a very special juncture.
In roughly one year’s time, ten years after her
independence, very important elections will be held,
thus respecting once again the democratic path that the
Timorese people have charted for themselves.
Next year, the Security Council, acting on the
advice of the authorities of Timor-Leste and the HighLevel Committee on Transition, will be working on
ways in which the United Nations will continue to
contribute to the consolidation of democratic
institutions, of the rule of law and of economic and
social development in the country upon the conclusion
of UNMIT’s mandate. But we will have the
opportunity to discuss those issues at the appropriate
time; today, I wish to underline the encouraging
achievements that took place in 2010 in several areas,
despite the enduring problems still facing the country.
Parallel to the further development of democratic
institutions, democratic culture and practices are
consolidating their imprint in Timorese society.
Political dialogue on matters of national concerns has
been reinforced, and we are encouraged by the active
involvement of the Timorese leadership, including the
opposition, in that process. We believe that
strengthening the forums for open and democratic
discussions of national issues is the best way to find
solutions for them and to reinforce national cohesion in
facing difficult challenges.

18

In the economic field, growth has been fast, and
the recently approved budget may represent a useful
tool for the diversification of the economy, the
development of much-needed infrastructure and the
creation of jobs, while ensuring a better distribution of
wealth and increasing opportunities, especially for
young people.
The judicial system has also improved its
capacities, including in rural areas, and has
strengthened its independence. Training of judicial
officials and prison officers has continued. The
protection of human rights, including in terms of
gender issues, is progressing. As a leading cooperation
partner in the justice sector, Portugal recognizes the
importance of a coordinated approach to justice system
reform, in order to increase Timorese ownership in
strengthening national institutions.
I wish to commend UNMIT for the very
important contribution it has made to the progress I
have outlined. Timor-Leste is indeed an example of a
United Nations contribution to peacebuilding that has
succeeded well, and we are confident that the current
peaceful situation will endure during and beyond 2012.
Notwithstanding these very important positive
developments, Timor-Leste is still confronted with
serious challenges. There is still much to be done to
strengthen the State institutions in order for them to
fully discharge their responsibilities. Likewise,
accomplishing security sector reform, developing the
capacities of the civil society, ensuring full respect for
the rule of law and further promoting human rights are
still priority tasks on the path towards a consolidated
and stable democracy in Timor-Leste.
Like others, we believe that long-term stability
and security will depend on the capacity of Timorese
security institutions to function in an effective,
responsible and accountable way, fully respecting the
rule of law and benefiting from public trust and
support. A clear articulation of strategies within and
across State institutions is indispensable on these
issues.
One issue that has been a matter of concern for
members of the Council is the certification of officers
of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) facing
serious criminal and disciplinary charges. We took note
of the Prime Minister’s encouraging comments on the
matter, and we trust that due and speedy process will
be observed, leading to the reinforcement of the

11-24004

S/PV.6485

credibility,
professionalism,
impartiality
and
effectiveness of the PNTL. Portugal encourages the
Government of Timor-Leste to continue working
closely with UNMIT on all issues concerning the
PNTL, specifically the five priority areas highlighted
by the Special Representative and with the continued
support of the United Nations police.
The people of Timor-Leste have repeatedly
shown their resolve to build a peaceful, democratic and
stable society. These goals require the continued
support of the international community, and it is
important that the Timorese rest assured that they are
not and will not be alone in pursuing these objectives.
UNMIT continues to play a crucial role in this context,
and we fully support the extension of its mandate for
an additional period of 12 months. UNMIT’s role
before, during and after next year’s elections will be
fundamental to help the Timorese authorities ensure a
stable and secure environment for the elections and
their outcome.
Portugal remains fully committed to supporting
Timor-Leste in its efforts to consolidate democracy and
development, both bilaterally and as a member of the
European Union and the CPLP. Our cooperation with
Timor-Leste covers a very wide spectrum of areas,
including governance, public administration, justice,
education and security sector reform, and fully
supports all areas under the responsibility of UNMIT.
We are particularly happy that, in the near future, we
will be welcoming Timorese officers in the framework
of Portuguese contingents in peacekeeping operations.
That highlights the degree of maturity and
professionalism reached by the Falintil-Forças
Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL).
We are convinced that Timor-Leste will succeed
in its endeavours, but in order for the country to reach
its objective, the international community must carry
on providing the necessary political support and
appropriate resources, thereby living up to its
responsibilities and commitments to democracy and
stability in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I too would like to thank the Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, for her detailed presentation on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/32) on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I would like to take this

11-24004

opportunity to recognize His Excellency Mr. Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmão, Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence of Timor-Leste, and thank him for his
important statement.
In my statement, I will focus mainly on the
progress made in the construction process in TimorLeste, the remaining challenges and the outlook for the
future.
With regard to progress, the report under
consideration takes stock of, among other things, the
advances made in the security and justice sectors.
There have been encouraging developments in the
economic sector. With regard to security, my
delegation is pleased that the overall situation
remained calm and that in many areas and districts the
Timorese State, in particular the national police, is
reassuming its prerogatives and its State functions of
maintaining public order. We further note the
continuing coordination and cooperation between the
international security forces and Timorese forces.
Indeed, the civilian police component of UNMIT
has continued its efforts to strengthen the capacity of
the Timorese police and to foster institutional
development through logistical support, targeted
training, administrative skills development, ongoing
inquiries into cases of sexual violence, combating
human trafficking and through community policing.
We can only welcome this.
We further commend UNMIT for its efforts to
train Timorese national civilian police officers so as to
enable them to serve in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Gabon has always advocated building the
capacity of Member States for peacekeeping.
We remain convinced that the development plan
for the police for 2010-2012, intended to strengthen the
operational capacity of the national police, provides a
unique framework for cooperation between the police
and UNMIT.
With regard to the justice system, my delegation
welcomes the support provided by UNMIT, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Development
Fund for Women to strengthen the Timorese judicial
apparatus, in particular through staff training
programmes and the development of the legislative
framework. They are also providing assistance in
conducting some of the more complex inquiries, such

19

S/PV.6485

as those involving the serious crimes committed in
1999. The increased number of cases prepared for
judgment and the extension of justice administration to
rural areas are also satisfying developments.

To contribute to the achievement of those
objectives, my delegation supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to extend the mandate of
UNMIT for an additional 12 months.

Regarding the economic sector, we welcome the
progress made in achieving the 2010 national priorities
targets in the framework of the international compact
for Timor-Leste. In spite of the serious food crisis,
which unfortunately does not exclude any developing
country, we should be pleased that the State has
provided food assistance to the most vulnerable
persons. We also welcome the progress made towards
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals, particularly in terms of the infant mortality rate,
which decreased from 83 to 64 deaths per 1,000 live
births.

My country once again congratulates the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste for their
laudable efforts for peace and stability in their country.
I reiterate my delegation’s firm support for the
remarkable work of UNMIT. I commend the leadership
of Ms. Ameerah Haq and the professionalism that she
and her staff have shown on the ground. They can
count on my delegation’s ongoing support.

My delegation shares the Secretary-General’s
satisfaction with the remarkable recovery of the
economy of Timor-Leste, which posted a growth rate
of close to 10 per cent, with a reduction in poverty and
an improvement in human development indicators. We
hope that the revenues generated by hydrocarbons,
which enabled the progress, will continue to benefit
from good governance, in order to stay the course of
growth and to attain sustainable and comprehensive
development in the country.
Regarding the challenges, we must continue to
fight impunity and corruption, which are sources of
potential conflict. Responsibly addressing those issues
will undeniably help not only to build public trust in
institutions but also to preserve the gains made in
national reconciliation, in reinforcing the rule of law
and, by extension, stability and durable peace in
Timor-Leste.
Similarly,
the
presidential
and
parliamentary elections to be held in 2012 will test the
entire peace process in Timor-Leste.
My delegation believes that the outlook for peace
and development in Timor-Leste remains reassuring.
The Government and its various bilateral and
multilateral partners seem to be solidly committed to
establishing peace and building the economy. The
country’s assets in terms of development are not
insignificant, either. We must therefore continue to
encourage the Timorese people to derive maximum
benefit from the support of the international
community and from the revenue generated by the oil
sector to establish national unity and build a
prosperous nation.

20

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for TimorLeste, for her briefing. I also welcome the Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste and his participation in today’s
meeting. I have listened carefully to his statement.
We take pleasure in seeing that the overall
situation in Timor-Leste remains stable. The State
capacity has gradually strengthened. There are
significant opportunities for economic and social
development. The national police of Timor-Leste are
playing an increasingly important role in maintaining
public order. The Government and people of TimorLeste have made inspiring progress in the construction
of their country. I also commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
for their efforts to that end.
At the same time, however, Timor-Leste still
faces many challenges on the road to consolidating
peace, maintaining peace and stability and achieving
sustainable development. China is of the view that the
international community should now focus its support
to Timor-Leste in the following three areas.
First, we encourage all parties in Timor-Leste to
base their actions on the country’s long-term interest,
to maintain unity and settle their differences through
political dialogue. We commend President RamosHorta for continuing to promote the national consensus
dialogue. We hope that the presidential and
parliamentary elections to be held next year will
proceed smoothly.
Secondly, China welcomes the strategic
development plan proposed by the Government of
Timor-Leste. Poverty, lack of economic development,

11-24004

S/PV.6485

insufficient institutional capacity, youth unemployment
and the shortage of human resources are the major
factors affecting peacebuilding and social stability in
Timor-Leste. We support the Government in its efforts
to continue to strengthen institutional capacitybuilding, focus its energy on development, expand its
input in infrastructure, education and health and further
improve the lives of its people.
Thirdly, ultimately achieving lasting security and
stability in Timor-Leste depends on the strength of the
people and Government of Timor-Leste. China
supports Timor-Leste in strengthening capacitybuilding in the police and judicial sectors, with the
assistance of the United Nations and relevant countries,
and in taking over full responsibility for the
maintenance of public order at an early date.
We support the extension of UNMIT for one year
on the basis of the current mandate. We have taken
note of the plan for the future restructuring and
downsizing of UNMIT mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/32). We support the full
transfer of responsibilities to the Government of
Timor-Leste when conditions are right. Meanwhile, the
plan to downsize should fully take into account next
year’s elections and, under the prerequisite of
maintaining security and stability, ensure a smooth
transition. The international community should
continue to provide further assistance to Timor-Leste in
order to consolidate peace and promote development.
Once UNMIT’s mandate expires, on the basis of
respect for the will of the people and Government of
Timor-Leste, the United Nations can remain in TimorLeste as a friendly partner. China is ready to continue
to provide as much support and assistance to TimorLeste as we can.
Ms. Duarte-Rodríguez (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Colombia would like to thank Prime Minister
of Timor-Leste Xanana Gusmão for his important
contribution to our debate today. We would also like to
commend the work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq and Mr. Finn ReskeNielsen, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General
for
Governance
Support,
Development and Humanitarian Coordination, as well
as that of the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Security Sector Support and
Rule of Law.

11-24004

As a non-permanent member of the Council in
September 2002, Colombia participated in the
discussions that led to the establishment of this new
State and its entry into the United Nations. My
delegation therefore notes with particular satisfaction
the
ongoing
developments
towards
quickly
consolidating peace, development and stability in
Timor-Leste. We agree on the importance of continuing
efforts to promote national unity and dialogue through
cooperation with the various political, national and
regional forces, including civil society, the Catholic
Church, the United Nations and other stakeholders in
Timor-Leste.
We are pleased to see that bilateral relations with
Indonesia remain strong. The Bali meeting in
December is proof of that, in particular the
commitment shown by Indonesia to help Timor-Leste
in its plan to become a member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
We emphasize the outcomes of the concluding
conference of the national consensus dialogue on truth,
justice and reconciliation, in particular with regard to
reparations for victims of human rights violations
committed between 1974 and 1999, and to the serious
crimes committed in 1999. As President Ramos-Horta
has said, it is necessary to find a balance between
punitive and restorative elements.
We would like to highlight the progress made in
the area of security, in particular in those districts in
which the national police have resumed their functions.
In that regard, we share the concern of the Special
Representative about the certification of the 52 officers
accused of committing serious crimes. While that
procedure was based on the review and
recommendations of the new certification scheme
established by the Government, we believe that a more
thorough review to prevent impunity is necessary.
We view the fact that domestic violence has been
defined as a public order offence under the criminal
code as an important step forward in judicial reform.
However, we are struck by the continued use of
traditional mechanisms that are not consistent with
international human rights. We call for the full
implementation of existing standards. We encourage
initiatives developed in that regard by the Secretary of
State for the Promotion of Equality, with the support of
the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Fund for Women.

21

S/PV.6485

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/32)
refers to much progress with regard to economic and
social development. We are pleased to learn that
Timor-Leste is growing at a rate of 10 per cent and that
it has reduced the poverty level and improved human
development indicators. However, we are concerned
about the difficulty young people face in finding
employment.
We endorse the work of the High-Level
Committee on Transition. In that regard, we highlight
the beginning of the work of the joint technical
working groups on democratic governance, the police
and security sector, the rule of law, justice, human
rights, economic development, mission support and
logistics, training for national officials and the impact
of the Mission’s departure on the local economy.
Throughout that process it is necessary to regularly
consult and duly inform all stakeholders, political
parties, civil society and donors.
Colombia expresses its satisfaction at the
progress achieved in Timor-Leste with the coordinated
support of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), other agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system, financial institutions and
donors. We should continue such support work while
making preparations for the transition and permanent
transfer of all functions to the authorities of TimorLeste.
Given the progress achieved in the stabilization
of Timor-Leste, my delegation supports the extension
of UNMIT’s mandate for another year.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste for his
important statement. I also thank Ms. Ameerah Haq for
her briefing and for her efforts as head of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
aimed at promoting security and stability and helping
the Government and people of Timor-Leste to build
their national institutions.
My delegation welcomes the contents of report of
the Secretary-General (S/2011/32) with regard to the
security and stability that Timor-Leste is experiencing.
We look forward with optimism to further steps to
strengthen national unity, as well as to positive
economic indicators that augur well for a better future
for the people of Timor-Leste. That was underscored
by the Prime Minister himself in his statement today.

22

Joint efforts between the authorities of TimorLeste and UNMIT must be redoubled during the
remaining period of the Mission’s mandate, to the end
of 2012, in order to complete all major tasks entrusted
to it, in particular, security sector reform, strengthening
the rule of law, achieving socio-economic development
and reinforcing a culture of dialogue and democratic
governance. In that regard, we would like to make the
following observations.
First, concerning security sector reform, we
welcome the fact that the National Police of TimorLeste is taking responsibility for security in 10 of 13
districts. We would like to stress the need for the
rehabilitation of the national police to be completed so
that it can undertake its security responsibilities in the
three remaining districts. That will pave the way for
the Mission’s smooth exit.
Secondly, with regard to reinforcing the rule of
law, we pay tribute to the recent measures undertaken
to fight corruption. We underscore the importance of
reactivating the role of the judiciary, in particular with
regard to accountability and preventing impunity,
especially as concerns the crimes committed in 1999
and during the crisis of 2006 and since. This is
considered as one of the basic principles necessary for
ensuring permanent security.
As for economic and social development, we
welcome the national development plan for the period
2011-2030, which the Government is preparing in line
with the Millennium Development Goals. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the importance of
the development plan covering all sectors of Timorese
society. This will contribute to political stability and
security.
As for ensuring a culture of dialogue and
democratic governance, we welcome the democratic
path taken by the Government of Timor-Leste. We
believe that the presidential and parliamentary
elections scheduled to take place in 2012 are indicative
of the return of stability after the events of 2006. In
that regard, we reiterate the importance of joint
cooperation between the Mission and the election
authorities in Timor-Leste.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that UNMIT
represents a success story for the international
community. Together with all the United Nations
agencies, it has helped to strengthen democratic
practices and build State institutions. We call upon all

11-24004

S/PV.6485

parties to make maximal use of its experience during
the remaining period. We support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNMIT for another year.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me thank the
Brazilian presidency for convening today’s meeting
and for preparing the draft resolution currently under
consideration.
It is a pleasure to welcome Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão to the Council today. We have listened
to his intervention with great interest and commend
him on his achievements. Germany will continue to
support his country bilaterally in cooperation with our
European Union partners, and not least as a member of
the Council and within the United Nations community.
I also welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq. I thank her for the
briefing and would like to commend her able
leadership of the Mission. Germany takes note with
satisfaction of the fact that the overall situation in
Timor-Leste remains stable. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) certainly
has made its contribution, and we would like to pay
tribute to the work of the men and women who make
up the Mission.
Before I offer some national remarks, let me
underline that my Government aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union.
Germany supports the extension of the mandate
of the Mission for another 12 months, as recommended
by the Secretary-General. UNMIT, in cooperation with
the Government of Timor-Leste, has achieved
considerable results but, given the remaining
institutional weaknesses and persisting fragilities, we
are still facing considerable challenges. Germany
therefore considers it imperative to continue to invest
in Timorese capacities and institutions closely in line
with national strategies, priorities and needs. National
ownership is key to successful support.
The next 18 months will be crucial for building
the foundations for lasting peace in Timor-Leste, with
next year’s elections being an important milestone. In
that regard, Germany supports the Secretary-General’s
proposal to leave the Mission’s composition and
authorized levels of personnel unchanged while

11-24004

continuing the gradual decrease of police as conditions
on the ground permit.
It is encouraging that the resumption of primary
policing responsibilities by the national police has
continued to make progress and that completion in all
the districts and units is likely in the coming months.
However, an adequate level of UNMIT police will be
required, both to intensify the support to capacitybuilding and skills transfer and to lend operational
support to the national police if needed. We believe
that the proposed level allows for the necessary
flexibility.
While we work towards the gradual transition to
full Timorese control in all areas where currently
international support is still required, it is clear that the
United Nations has a longer-term commitment to
Timor-Leste, including beyond UNMIT. If current
trends can be sustained, the post-UNMIT period is
approaching fast. Germany is therefore of the view that
we need to continue to intensify discussions about the
strategy and the modalities for the transition and the
preparation for the future and scope of the United
Nations on the ground post-UNMIT. We must make
every effort to ensure that UNMIT support in areas
where there is a continued need beyond the term of the
Mission’s final mandate is effectively transferred to
State institutions, bilateral and multilateral partners,
United Nations country team entities or civil society.
In the view of my Government, current progress
will only be sustainable if the preconditions for the
development of a vibrant civil society — functioning
State structures and an adequate judicial framework —
are in place. Germany agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s call for continued efforts to be undertaken at
all levels of society to combat impunity and to
strengthen public confidence in the justice system.
Public institutions themselves must be role models for
the rule of law and for accountable action nation-wide.
It is in that context that we share the concern about the
so-called certification of police officers who face
disciplinary and criminal charges. This very visible
issue should be addressed thoroughly.
Inclusiveness is another decisive factor for
achieving
economic
growth
and
sustainable
development. The opportunity for women and young
adults to contribute their share cannot be
overestimated. We invite UNMIT to continue to focus

23

S/PV.6485

on these groups of society and on implementing the
women, peace and security agenda.
Let me conclude by thanking UNMIT and its
partners once more for their commitment to creating
the conditions for the Mission’s future withdrawal and
by encouraging our Timorese partners to continue the
vigorous implementation of their ambitious national
reform agenda. The Government’s motto “Goodbye
Conflict, Welcome Development” aptly sums up the
aspirations we share.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.
(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the
delegation)
I would like to extend the warmest welcome to
His Excellency Mr. Xanana Gusmão, Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste. I would like to echo the words of the
Permanent Representative of Portugal about the
admirable role played by His Excellency Mr. Xanana
Gusmão in the history of his young country and about
the significance of this moment. Moreover, the presence
of the Prime Minister among us today provides an
opportunity for us to celebrate the significant progress
achieved and to plan together the next steps to ensure a
future of peace and prosperity for Timor-Leste.
(spoke in English)
I also wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for her briefing and
commend her for her leadership and her work in
Timor-Leste.
Although Brazil and Timor-Leste lie in different
corners of the world, our two nations are very close.
Not only do we share a common history and language,
but we also face some of the typical challenges of
developing countries. Those bonds have given rise to
an intense bilateral cooperation over the past years.
Such cooperation encompasses a broad range of
issues, including security sector reform, education and
justice, to name just a few. Brazil has provided training
for officers of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL). We have sponsored initiatives on private
sector development, professional training, elementary
schoolteacher training and technical education in
agriculture. Brazil has also been involved in the
capacity-building activities and the training of
Timorese judges, prosecutors and public attorneys.

24

This year Brazil has the special honour of being
the lead country for Timor-Leste in the Security
Council. I take this opportunity to thank Japan for its
role as lead country for the past two years. Brazil
wishes to congratulate the Timorese leadership and
people for the significant progress they have achieved
in the past few years. Important strides have been made
in many areas, from sustained economic growth to
enhanced capacity for delivering social services; from
improved security to the consolidation of democracy;
and from the promotion and protection of human rights
to investment in infrastructure. Timor-Leste stands out
as an example of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Let me focus on four issues that will be
particularly important in the coming months, namely, the
2012 elections, security sector reform, socio-economic
development and preparations for the transition period.
The parliamentary and presidential elections to be
held during the first half of 2012 will constitute TimorLeste’s most important political event. We agree with
the Secretary-General that a peaceful, transparent and
credible electoral process will be an important
milestone on the country’s path to long-term stability
and recovery. Brazil is confident that Timor-Leste will
achieve those goals, thus consolidating its remarkable
gains.
Progress has been particularly evident in the
security sector. Ten districts have been handed over to
the national police, while another two are ready to
follow suit. Both the Government of Timor-Leste and
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) should strengthen their efforts to ensure that
the PNTL is ready to resume primary policing
responsibilities in Dili.
As Brazil has often noted, socio-economic
development is a key component in the maintenance of
peace and stability. Again, Timor-Leste has stood out in
that respect, although challenges still remain. The
international community should continue to assist
whenever requested.
The last point I want to comment on is about the
preparations for the transition period. UNMIT has
made an outstanding contribution to the stability and
development of Timor-Leste. It should now adapt to
the new circumstances and assist the Government with
its current challenges. These include socio-economic
development, institution-building and security. Any
decision on a gradual decrease in the number of

11-24004

S/PV.6485

UNMIT police officers should reflect the realities on
the ground rather than follow fixed or artificial
deadlines. It should also be thoroughly discussed with
the Timorese authorities.
Brazil is glad to celebrate Timor-Leste’s
achievements. Prime-Minister Xanana Gusmão and the
Timorese people can be proud of them. It is now
important for the country to build on that progress in
order to follow a steady course towards peace
consolidation and long-term development. The
Security Council should continue to assist Timor-Leste
in this endeavour.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending a very warm welcome to His Excellency
Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão of TimorLeste, as well as to thank him for his statement. I would
also like express our appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq
for her briefing to the Council in her capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Japan
highly
commends
the
positive
developments in Timor-Leste in the past year. As the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/32) states, the
situation remains calm, almost all internally displaced
persons have returned to their home towns and, most
significant, the Government has made notable progress
in the area of security sector reform, by passing
relevant laws well in advance of receiving the support
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) for its comprehensive review.
We may say that Timor-Leste is at a critical
juncture on the path to becoming a prosperous,
responsible nation. In particular, the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for the first half of
2012 will be of great importance. We look forward to
seeing transparent and democratic elections conducted
proudly by the Timorese people. To achieve that goal,
it is critically important to have not only adequate
logistical and administrative capacity but also adequate
security. In order to achieve the successful conduct of
the elections, Japan stands ready to assist Timor-Leste,
working with UNMIT in the area of electoral support,
as required and requested.
We highly commend the national police’s
successful resumption of policing responsibility in

11-24004

most districts. We have seen the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the United Nations police
work together in the districts where policing
responsibility has now been handed over. But what is
more urgently needed, in accordance with the Special
Representative’s plan, is to build more substantial
capacities within the PNTL in order for it to actively
engage in the preventive activities usually described as
community policing. Although such low-profile
activities often get less attention from the public, they
contribute to better security in the longer term. Japan
therefore believes that the Government of Timor-Leste
should increase its commitment in this area.
As for the issue of the certification of PNTL
officers, I trust that the Government will find no reason
to exempt the 52 officers who face serious disciplinary
and criminal charges from further criminal and
disciplinary proceedings. Japan acknowledges the
strong willingness and commitment of the Government
to expedite the resumption of the process to enable
PNTL officers to gain as much experience as possible
ahead of the critical elections in 2012 and the period
beyond. However, the lack of capacity in the judicial
sector should also be acknowledged as a source of
concern. In that regard, I concur with the Special
Representative, who has urged the Government and
judicial authorities to take all measures necessary to
ensure the national police’s integrity. The international
community stands ready to support this endeavour as
well.
We recently saw that the Timorese budget has
exceeded $1 billion and the country’s population has
surpassed 1 million people. Such rapid expansion gives
this young country great potential, as well as posing
socio-economic challenges. While we commend the
Government’s work, it is worrisome to note that many
young people remain unemployed and that large
numbers of youth are joining the labour market every
year with limited opportunities for employment. Japan
would therefore like to encourage the Government to
put more emphasis on formulating policies for job
creation and rural development.
Against this background, Japan strongly believes
that UNMIT’s presence and support are critical,
especially in assisting the Government in the
successful conduct of the important elections in 2012.
From that point of view, Japan strongly supports the
extension of UNMIT’s mandate for another year, at the
strength proposed in the Secretary-General’s report. At

25

S/PV.6485

the same time, Japan encourages not only the
Government and UNMIT, but also the Security Council
and all interested stakeholders, to engage actively in
the discussions as to the type of international support
and commitment that is most needed and most suitable
for Timor-Leste. I affirm Japan’s commitment to
leading those efforts.
It was regrettable that the Security Council
mission to Timor-Leste that Japan organized as lead
country last October had to be postponed just before
the planned departure. But we sincerely hope that the
new members of the Council will undertake to
reschedule the mission prior to the critical year of
2012.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
continued commitment to strengthening the friendship
between our countries and cooperating with the
Timorese people to support their nation-building
efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): I would like to thank
you, Madame President, and the members of the
Security Council for allowing my delegation to speak
on today’s agenda item. We are also very grateful for
the report (S/2011/32) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Timor-Leste. We are particularly
appreciative of the presence of His Excellency the
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, whose words today
reaffirmed his commitment and dedication to moving
forward his young country in our part of the region and
the world. My delegation also deeply appreciates the
comprehensive and timely briefing of Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
Since the Council’s last debate on UNMIT (see
S/PV.6405), we have seen major improvements in the
political and security situation in Timor-Leste. It is
satisfying to stress that among the country’s 13
districts, 10 now are in the hands of the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), with the remaining
three, including Dili, scheduled to be turned over in
April. The vastly improved peace and order situation
has allowed UNMIT to downsize the number of its
police officers by 20 per cent. But at the same time, the
reduction will test the ability of the PNTL to take over
the role of United Nations police.

26

One immediate concern is to help the PNTL
strengthen its criminal investigation and forensics
capability. The major challenge over the long term will
be to ensure balance between the PNTL’s capacity to
handle primary policing responsibilities and UNMIT’s
support to institution and capacity-building, including
strengthening civilian oversight and management over
the Timorese security forces.
As an active member of the core group on TimorLeste, the Philippines welcomes these recent positive
developments. The Philippine contingent in UNMIT
and United Nations police, numbering 137 personnel,
including 14 women, is now preparing to scale down
its present force by around 30 per cent in the coming
months, in accordance with UNMIT’s overall
drawdown plans and without sacrificing the
contingent’s effectiveness and viability.
The Philippines is also pleased to note that the
overall crime rate in Timor-Leste has decreased.
However, some concerns remain on the local security
forces’ ability to protect civilians. We are particularly
concerned by reports of the growing incidence of
violence against women. A solution must be found
quickly to address this problem, lest it negate TimorLeste’s efforts to advance the cause of women at the
regional and global levels.
The report of the Secretary-General underscored
the great strides that Timor-Leste has made towards
sustained peace and order, political and economic
stability and the pursuit of justice and development.
This is indeed a tribute to Timor-Leste’s determination,
notwithstanding the difficult challenges it continues to
face as a young nation. The parliamentary elections in
2012 will be a crucial test for the people of TimorLeste. Political stability is needed to deepen democracy
and the rule of law in order to buttress the foundations
of long-term peace and prosperity.
In that context, the Security Council will once
again renew the mandate of UNMIT for another year —
a decision that the Philippines strongly supports. As we
experienced in 2006, premature United Nations
disengagement can produce dire consequences.
The renewal of UNMIT’s mandate must also be
seen as a window of opportunity for the Government
and people of Timor-Leste to show their readiness to
take responsibility for their own peace and security. All
agree that the transition to post-UNMIT must be well
managed. But concrete steps are necessary to make it

11-24004

S/PV.6485

as smooth and seamless as possible. Coordination
among UNMIT, the Government of Timor-Leste and
other stakeholders must therefore be reinforced. In
view of the inevitable expiration of UNMIT’s mandate,
all concerned partners must cooperate to come up with
an exit strategy that is realistic, transparent and
practical.
Like other States emerging from conflict, TimorLeste faces hardship and adversity. But the Philippines
believes that Timor-Leste, our good and close
neighbour, is in a good position to hurdle the
challenges ahead. I once again assure the Council and
all of our partners in the United Nations, especially the
core group on Timor-Leste, that the Philippines stands
ready to do its part to contribute to the success of
UNMIT and to help the people and Government of
Timor-Leste in their quest for peace and prosperity.
The President: As I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand, I wish to convey to him
our deep sympathy and condolences for the loss of
lives following the earthquake that struck his country.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Can I respond
immediately by thanking you, Madame President, and
Prime Minister Gusmão and others who have expressed
their sympathy over the earthquake that occurred about
24 hours ago. Dawn is just now breaking in
Christchurch and it will only be then that we can see
the true extent of what is unquestionably a national
tragedy. I thank you for your sympathy.
I want to thank Prime Minister Gusmão and
Special Representative Haq for their statements, and
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/32).
I want to acknowledge with deep respect the
Prime Minister’s lifetime of effort to provide Timorese
with a path to a safer and more prosperous future, and
in particular his leadership in nation-building over the
past decade. It is an honour to have him join us today.
The Secretary-General’s latest report paints a
positive picture of progress over the past year, with the
security situation more calm and stable and the country
more prosperous than at any time since independence.
The impressive commitment to democratic and
constitutional norms across the political spectrum and
the willingness to put long-term interests ahead of
short-term gains bode well for next year’s elections.
Steady progress has been made in strengthening the
justice and corrections sectors and the various

11-24004

institutions responsible for ensuring Government
accountability and respect for human rights. Strong
economic growth, together with targeted social
programmes, has delivered progress in addressing key
socio-economic challenges.
All of this is cause for optimism. But we cannot
be complacent. The next 18 months will test whether
the political and security climate can withstand the heat
of competitive democratic elections. It will also test the
readiness of core State institutions to sustain
themselves with reduced international support.
When we last met in October (see S/PV.6405),
there was broad recognition that Timor-Leste was
entering a new phase. A period that required a large
international presence to ensure security and support
core State institutions is now giving way to one in
which a confident and capable Government is
increasingly charting its own course and defining the
future form and scope of its international assistance.
After a decade focused on security and stability,
attention has now turned to longer-term challenges of
institutional development to achieve sustainable and
inclusive growth. Carefully and effectively managing
this must now be the Mission’s overriding priority. The
transition process must be nationally owned and led,
with careful planning and sequencing of changes to the
international presence in order to minimize risks of
instability and disruption and with thoughtful
judgments regarding the transfer of specific Mission
functions and capacities to the Timorese Government.
New Zealand welcomes the early engagement
between Government and Mission leadership, notably
through the High-Level Committee on Transition and
its working groups. We applaud the Mission’s work to
mitigate the economic impact of a future drawdown
and to prepare local staff for post-UNMIT
employment.
Nowhere will astute transition management be
more important than in the security sector. We are
pleased with progress made over the past year in
transferring executive policing authority to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and at the SecretaryGeneral’s advice that this process should be completed
in the coming months, as it will be a significant
milestone in the reconstitution of the Timorese security
sector following the 2006 crisis.

27

S/PV.6485

Following handover, work will remain to ensure
that PNTL administrative and operational capacities
are sufficiently robust for it to operate unassisted.
Little time remains before the PNTL will be asked to
do just that. We therefore welcome the establishment of
a process to agree priority measures to strengthen these
capacities within the National Strategic Development
Plan. All this requires close cooperation and
coordination between the Mission and the PNTL
leadership.
We also encourage early engagement with
potential bilateral and multilateral partners. We also
welcome assurances on early engagement with those
partners, focused on expectations of future donor
assistance to ensure they are realistic and clearly
signalled. For its part, New Zealand is considering
what bilateral assistance it can provide to the PNTL.
This is likely to be focused in the area of community
policing, building on the results and lessons learned
from our recent pilot programme within UNMIT.
As UNMIT’s policing undergoes fundamental
change, so too must its size and composition. We
support the Secretary-General’s proposal to reduce the
number of United Nations police, and are open to
further gradual reductions if consistent with the wishes
of the Government and realities on the ground. This
drawdown must be conducive to maintaining stability
in the lead-up to the 2012 elections and beyond, while
providing the PNTL the space to operate with greater
responsibility and autonomy.
The Mission must also be adequately equipped
with the skills necessary to carry out the complex
specialized tasks that now form its primary focus.
Civilian and non-civilian deployments should be
configured to effectively strengthen the human and
organizational capacities of State institutions. We urge
the early deployment of the 19 additional civilian
experts approved last year. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal that an independent assessment be
conducted of PNTL capabilities.
All of this requires that we ensure the PNTL’s
long-term credibility and integrity. As an active and
committed partner, we share the concerns at the recent
certification of officers facing serious disciplinary and
criminal allegations. This is a matter only the
Government of Timor-Leste can resolve. While we
appreciate the challenges, it is only by demonstrating
that its personnel are as legally accountable as all other

28

citizens that the PNTL will become the trusted and
respected institution that Timor-Leste needs and
deserves. We support the Secretary-General’s call for
early steps to address this issue.
Our immediate priority must be to ensure a
smooth transition and stable and credible elections next
year. It is also important to focus on Timor-Leste’s
needs beyond 2012. That period is harder to visualize,
but we need to consider our respective roles in helping
Timor-Leste address its longer-term challenges. Recent
gains have been impressive but only concerted action
will address the needs of the 41 per cent of the
population still living below the poverty line. Urgent
challenges
remain
in
terms
of
developing
infrastructure, addressing poverty and extending
essential basic services.
New Zealand looks forward to the launch in June
of the Government’s National Strategic Development
Plan, which must be Timorese-led and form the
framework for future action by international partners.
As a long-term partner, New Zealand will align its
development assistance with the Plan’s priorities.
New Zealand is proud of Timor-Leste’s
considerable achievements over the past decade and
proud to call itself a neighbour, partner and friend of
this young country. The Secretary-General’s report
suggests we are well on track to delivering a new
Timor-Leste. New Zealand is committed to working
with the Government and its international partners to
help Timor-Leste deliver on that promise.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Madame President, for presiding over this
meeting. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
in the Council today of Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmão and to thank him for his briefing this morning.
This is an opportunity to acknowledge that his own
leadership and the constancy of his personal
commitment to the people of Timor-Leste have been
instrumental in the evolution of his nation.
I would also like to congratulate Special
Representative Ameerah Haq for the crucial work she
has been doing in Timor-Leste and for her helpful
briefing this morning. Of course, I also want to thank
the Secretary-General for that most recent report
(S/2011/32).

11-24004

S/PV.6485

The progress Timor-Leste that has made over the
past few years is very impressive. The country today
enjoys a measure of security that would have seemed
almost unimaginable in the dark days of 2006. The
security forces, working with the support of United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
are developing the capacity to provide the security that
will underpin Timor-Leste’s development themselves.
It is good to see that the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste (PNTL) has now resumed primary
policing responsibility in 10 of Timor-Leste’s 13
districts, reflecting the significant progress the PNTL
has made in recent years. An effective policing
capacity is fundamental in any country, just as a mature
and mutually understood relationship between the
police and the military is critical.
When we look at East Timor today, we see a
country that has had good rates of economic growth for
the past four years. Timor-Leste’s Petroleum Fund is
performing well, which, together with wise public
investment and diversification in the nation’s
development, should provide a sustainable basis into
the future.
The support of the United Nations and the
international
community
for
Timor-Leste’s
development has been important in assisting the
Government to make this progress. The United Nations
still has a key role to play to help to ensure that
progress made to date is sustained, as well as to
continue to support Timor-Leste’s ongoing development
goals over both the short- and longer-terms.
In spite of the improvements of recent years,
significant challenges remain, as we all know. There
has been some progress in reducing poverty, increasing
school enrolments, achieving immunization and
tuberculosis control targets and reducing infant
mortality. But the fact is that many of the Millennium
Development Goal indicators are unfortunately still off
track and poverty levels still remain high, particularly
in rural areas. The health and education sectors remain
underdeveloped. The economy remains heavily reliant
on petroleum revenues. We encourage Timor-Leste to
continue working to resolve uncertainties over land
tenure and simplify business regulation, both measures
which would encourage the private sector growth that
is essential for economic development. It is also vital
that Timor-Leste continue to strengthen the
institutional framework for good governance. This will
require strong and effective leadership — the sort of

11-24004

leadership we are in fact already seeing — and a
commitment from all levels of Government, civil
society and the broader community.
None of this, of course, is easy for any
Government, and identifying the problems is in no way
intended to sound negative, but rather to recall for all
of us the enormity of task that still needs to be done.
The Timor-Leste Government is showing real
leadership in this task, but the international community
continues to have a critical role to play.
The national elections scheduled for 2012 will be
a key milestone and a significant test for the national
police. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, it is
impressive as well as determinative to hear politicians
across the board in Timor-Leste eschew violence to
achieve political ends. We remain hopeful that, like the
suco elections in 2009, the national elections will
proceed peacefully and help to further cement TimorLeste’s democratic foundations.
Australia supports the current plans outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report for the United Nations
police contingent to conduct a modest drawdown this
year and then remain steady until after the 2012
elections. Of course, the final drawdown should take
into account the security environment in Timor-Leste
at the time. We also support the decision to conduct an
independent assessment of the PNTL and the United
Nations-led police expert assessment mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report.
Given that 2012 is close, there is clearly an
urgent need to plan for the end of the United Nations
Integrated Mission, not just in the policing sector but
in respect of the broad range of support it provides in
other sectors. We commend the work already done by
the Government and UNMIT to commence this
transition preparation and note that a lot more work
will need to be done quickly to ensure that the
transition process goes smoothly. This includes
ensuring that donors have time to factor into their own
planning any additional responsibilities that might
ensue.
We welcome Timorese resumption of policing
responsibilities. As I said, the resumption of primary
policing responsibility in 10 of 13 districts and most
units is a vital step. We look forward to the resumption
of policing responsibility in the remaining districts
once they have met the agreed conditions. It is
important that the integrity and reputation of the PNTL

29

S/PV.6485

is upheld, including through ensuring that the criminal
or disciplinary cases against individual PNTL officers
are completed and appropriate action taken.
Australia is aware that there will be an ongoing
need to support the development of the PNTL’s
capability. We are working directly with Timor-Leste to
improve the capacity of its security forces, through
substantial bilateral programmes to assist with the
development of the PNTL and the Timorese armed
forces.
Through the International Stabilization Force
(ISF) and our contribution to the United Nations
police, Australia will continue to support the Timorese
Government and UNMIT to maintain security. As
requested by the Government of Timor-Leste, we
expect that the International Stabilization Force will
remain until after the 2012 elections. Future reductions
in the ISF will be made in close consultation with the
Timorese Government, our ISF partner New Zealand
and the United Nations. We are keen to ensure that ISF
structure and force levels are coordinated and
commensurate with UNMIT.
On development, we have heard the Timorese
Government’s clear message to all of us that the people
of Timor-Leste must drive their own development
agenda. We welcome the forthcoming release of TimorLeste’s Strategic Development Plan, which will guide
our own contribution to Timor-Leste’s development.
We are currently its largest bilateral partner and this
year we will deliver over $100 million through the
partnership. This will help create employment by
assisting Timor-Leste to improve agricultural
productivity, infrastructure, vocational education,
private sector development and labour-intensive works,
such as road maintenance, which give jobs to young
people. It will also support the delivery of health and
education services and the Timorese Government’s
own efforts to improve Government accountability.
To return briefly to the question of youth
unemployment, as we have said before the Council in
the past, this remains perhaps the biggest single
challenge and threat to future stability in Timor-Leste.
This is not a unique situation, as we know. As is now
starkly obvious, youth unemployment and its
consequences are among the defining realities globally
in our era.
In conclusion, let me state the obvious. Nationbuilding is a very hard thing to do. Outsiders all expect

30

Governments to do probably too much in possibly too
short a time. Too many countries still struggle to break
the downward cycle. But Timor-Leste shows that it can
be done. Australia itself has had what for us has been a
unique bond with this new nation. We are very
seriously committed to standing with Timor-Leste to
help it secure a successful future, and to help it secure
that future on Timor-Leste’s own terms. The
international community has equally been decisive in
working for Timor-Leste’s future. We have confidence
that it will remain committed to what Prime Minister
Gusmão himself described this morning as a noble
mission.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano.
Mr. Serrano: Thank you, Madame President, for
giving the floor to the European Union (EU). At the
outset, I also wish to extend deep condolences to the
Government and people of New Zealand for the loss of
lives during the earthquake that shook Christchurch.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro, the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and the European
Free Trade Association country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
Let me start by greeting the Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Xanana Gusmão, who has addressed
the Council today for the first time. As a close partner
of his country, the European Union is very pleased with
its progress in many fields, in particular its strides
towards long-term stability and its remarkable
economic recovery. We commend his leadership and
the closer cooperation of the stakeholders in TimorLeste. Improved national dialogue and greater
inclusiveness in the democratic process are delivering
results, just as are the strong political commitment to
fostering peace, unity and development. Let me also
commend Timor-Leste’s active engagement at the
regional level, such as in the Regional Forum of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
I also welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq, who has again
provided an insightful and encouraging briefing on the
situation in Timor-Leste. The European Union would
like to thank her for the close cooperation in Dili and

11-24004

S/PV.6485

the good management of donor coordination, as well as
the quality of her work.

its second quarterly meeting earlier this month and we
look forward to regular updates on its work.

As many speakers before me have stressed, the
general elections in 2012 will be an important
milestone for the country and its young democracy.
The European Union has started to assist the
preparations of the elections through training and
capacity-building activities in several fields, such as
gender empowerment, civic voter education and voter
registration. We stand ready to consider further
requests for assistance with a friendly eye.

As the international presence transitions from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding tasks, particular
attention must be paid to strengthening institutional
and human capacities, activities that are at the heart of
the EU assistance programme. Moreover, possible
additional
support
for
selected
Millennium
Development Goals has just been announced to the
Head of State.

Additionally, the European Union strongly
supports the continuation of United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) with a view to the
critical period of the elections, as proposed by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative. We
believe that the limited and gradual decrease in the
Mission’s police personnel serves to adapt UNMIT’s
capabilities to the progress towards the full resumption
of primary policing responsibilities by the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste, while allowing UNMIT
police to assist with the important institutional
development and capacity-building tasks in the
security sector, including training on human rights,
gender awareness and domestic violence, and to
provide operational support if needed.
While the European Union welcomes the progress
made by the national police, we would also like to
stress in this context that it needs to live up to the
highest standards of professionalism and integrity. The
EU firmly supports the United Nations position about
the certification of 52 national police officers who face
serious disciplinary and criminal charges. Along with
the Secretary-General, we urge the Government to take
all necessary measures to ensure the credibility and
accountability of the national police. The European
Union also recognizes the continued importance of a
comprehensive review and reform of the entire security
sector.
While 2011 will mainly serve to consolidate
achievements, address outstanding issues and prepare
for 2012, the EU deems it of great importance to
discuss the architecture of the future United Nations
presence early and to prepare the exit strategy for
UNMIT carefully, in order to ensure a sustainable
transition and to help secure a continued stabilization
of the country. In view of that, we welcome the fact
that the joint High-Level Committee on Transition held

11-24004

The European Union is pleased with progress in
the build-up of the judiciary, to which the EU
contributes in the framework of a democratic
governance programme. We have also followed with
great interest Timor-Leste’s efforts in coming to terms
with its difficult past. It is true that Timor-Leste has
taken some steps towards addressing impunity and
improving accountability for crimes, but we would also
like to encourage a full implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations Special
Commission of Inquiry report of 2006.
We also believe that reconciliation is an
important precondition for long-term stability, and is
strongly in the interest of people of Timor-Leste itself.
It is with that in mind that we are concerned about the
recent decision of the National Parliament to
indefinitely delay the debate of the draft laws on the
public memorial institute and reparations. We urge the
resumption of their consideration at the earliest
possible occasion, as well as other steps to implement
the recommendations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
In conclusion, Timor-Leste has seen accelerated
progress in many aspects of its political, economic and
social development. At the same time, the country still
faces challenges and needs the continued assistance of
bilateral and multilateral partners in order to fully
realize its potential for equitable and sustainable
development. For its part, the EU stands firmly by
Timor-Leste’s side and cooperates with it closely. After
the visit of President Ramos-Horta to Brussels in
October last year, EU Commissioner for Development
Piebalgs will travel to Dili in the beginning of March
to continue consultations with the Timorese leadership.
The President: His Excellency Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmão has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now give him the floor.

31

S/PV.6485

Mr. Gusmão (Timor-Leste): I wish to thank the
members of the Council once again for their interest,
concern and help. I very much appreciate the
statements made by all members. We will take your
words back to our country and we will make every
effort to do what the Council asks of us.
We remain committed to working together with
the international community. We will meet and work
together because this is actually a critical phase of the
transition. As members of the Council have recalled,
we will hold elections next year. We want them to take
place. We are committed to carrying out fair elections.
We know that our elections will not just be something
for us alone. They will also be of importance to many
other countries that are in the same situation or are
about to start this process.
On behalf of the people of Timor-Leste, I would
like very much to thank all the members of the
Security Council, as well as the representatives of
Japan, Australia, New Zealand, the European Union
and the Philippines, for their help and concern, but
especially for their solidarity and generosity.
The President: I thank His Excellency Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão.

32

I now give the floor to Ms. Ameerah Haq for
additional comments.
Ms. Haq: First of all, let me thank you very
much, Madame President, for so ably chairing this
meeting under Brazil’s presidency. I also wish to thank
you and all your colleagues for the excellent
cooperation that we have had in this process. I would
also like to convey my thanks to all the members of the
Security Council for their expressions of support.
Similarly, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão for having been here
with us to continue the same expression of support for
our work back in Dili. I would also like to thank all the
Council members for the confidence that they have
expressed in the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, as well as for the extension of the
mandate. As the Prime Minister has so ably said, we
will now again continue our work in Timor-Leste.
The President: I thank Ms. Ameerah Haq for her
statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

11-24004
