General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

26

7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue those efforts with a view to promoting a political solution, in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution, and
the exploration of securing appropriate guarantees for nonuse of force, or threat of use of force, against the political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security
of all neighbouring States, on the bas is of mutual guarantees
and strict non-interference in each other's internal affairs
and with full regard for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member States
and the Security Council concurrently informed of the P!O·
gress towards the implementation of the present resolution
and to report to Member States on the situation at the earliest
appropriate opportunity;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security" .
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1982

37/65.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and 262 l (XXV) of 12
October 1970, containing the programme of action for the
full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3291 (XXIX)
of 13 December 1974, 31/4 of 21 October 1976, 32/7 of l
November 1977, 34/69 of 6 December 1979, 35/43 of 28
November 1980 and 36/105 of 10 December 1981, in which
it, inter alia, affirmed the unity and territorial integrity of
the Comoros,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3385 (XXX) of
12 November 1975 on the admission of the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations, in which it reaffirmed
the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the islands of
Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte and Moheli,
Recalling further that, in accordance with the agreements
signed on 15 June 1973 between the Comoros and France
concerning the accession of the Comoros to independence,
the results of the referendum of 22 December 1974 were to
be considered on a global basis and not island by island,
Convinced that a just and lasting solution to the question
of Mayotte is to be found in respect for the sovereignty.
unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago,
Bearing in mind the wish expressed by the President of
the French Republic to seek actively a just solution to that
problem,
Taking note of the talks opened between the Government
of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros and the
Government of the French Republic,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 43
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Organization of
African Unity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference concerning
this question,
l. Reaffirms the sovereignty of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte;
43

N371147.

2. Invites the Government of France to honour the commitments entered into prior to the referendum on the selfdetermination of the Comoro Archipelago of 22 December
1974 concerning respect for the unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros;
3. Calls for the translation into practice of the wish
expressed by the President of the French Republic to see a
just solution to the question of Mayotte adopted as soon as
possible;
4. Also invites the Government of France to pursue actively the negotiations with the Government of the Comoros
with a view to ensuring the effective and prompt return of
the island of Mayotte to the Comoros;
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations
to follow developments concerning this questio":, i~ conjunction with the Secretary-General of the Orgamzatton of
African Unity, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled' 'Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte".
91 st plenary meeting
3 December 1982
37/66.

Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November
1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, 3483 (XXX) of
12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10 December 1976, 32/194
of 20 December 1977, 33/17 of 10 November 1978, 34/20
of 9 November 1979, 35/ l 16 of l O December 1980 and
36/79 of 9 December 1981,
Taking note of the adoption, on 30 April 1982, of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea44 and the
related resolutions 45 by an overwhelming majority of States
and of the decision of the Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea, on 24 September 1982, to accept
with appreciation the invitation extended by the Government
of Jamaica for the purpose of adopting and signing the Final
Act and opening the Convention for signature at Montego
Bay from 6 to 10 December 1982, 46
Taking special note of the fact that the Conference decided
to establish a Preparatory Commission for the International
Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea and that the Commission shall meet at the
seat of the Authority if facilities are available and as often
as necessary for the expeditious exercise of its functions,
Taking note of the extensive functions entrusted to the
Preparatory Commission, including the administration of
the scheme governing preparatory investment in pioneer
activities relating to polymetallic nodules,
Recalling that the Convention provides that the seat of
the International Sea-Bed Authority shall be in Jamaica,
Taking further note of the timely measures being taken
at considerable expense by the Government of Jamaica to
construct an adequate administrative building and conference complex for housing the secretariat of the Preparatory
Commission and providing meeting facilities for the purpose
of enabling the Commission to function from Jamaica.
44
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea. vol. XVII, document A/CONF.62/122.
4
·
' /hid .. document A/CONF.62/121. annex I.
40
!hid. vol. XVII. Plenar\' Meeting.,. 184th meeting.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the urgent need for the Preparatory Commission to be assured of adequate resources to enable it to
discharge its functions efficiently and expeditiously,
Recalling also that in General Assembly resolution 35/
116 the Secretary-General was requested to prepare and
submit to the Conference, for such consideration as it deemed
appropriate, a study identifying his future functions under
the proposed Convention and that such a study was submitted on 18 August 1981 ,47
Noting that, in a letter dated 7 September 1982 to the
President of the General Assembly, 48 the President of the
Conference drew attention to the responsibilities which
the Secretary-General was called upon to carry out under
the Convention and the related resolutions and to the need
for the Assembly to take the appropriate action to approve
the assumption of these responsibilities by the SecretaryGeneral,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the third preambular
paragraph of the Convention, the problems of ocean space
are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole,
Recognizing the need for the Secretary-General to be authorized to assume his functions under the Convention and
the related resolutions, including in particular the provision
of the secretariat services required by the Preparatory Commission for its effective and expeditious functioning,
l. Welcomes the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the related resolutions;
2. Calls upon all States to consider signing and ratifying
the Convention at the earliest possible date to allow the
effective entry into force of the new legal regime for the
uses of the sea and its resources;
3. Appeals to the Governments of all States to refrain
from taking any action directed at undermining the Convention or defeating its object and purpose;
4. Accepts with appreciation the invitation extended by
the Government of Jamaica for the purpose of adopting and
signing the Final Act and opening the Convention for signature at Montego Bay from 6 to l O December 1982;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into the
necessary agreement in this regard with the Government of
Jamaica;
6. Reiterates its gratitude to the Government of Venezuela for the hospitality extended to the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea at its first substantive session, held at Caracas in 1974;
7. Approves the assumption by the Secretary-General
of the responsibilities entrusted to him under the Convention
and the related resolutions and also approves the stationing
of an adequate number of secretariat staff in Jamaica for
the purpose of servicing the Preparatory Commission for
the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, as required by its functions
and programme of work;
8. Authorizes the Secretary-General to convene the Preparatory Commission as provided in Conference resolution
I, of 30 April 1982, 45 by which the Commission was established, and to provide the Commission with the services
required to enable it to perform its functions efficiently and
expeditiously;
9. Approves the financing of the expenses of the Preparatory Commission from the regular budget of the United
Nations;

I0. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
91st plenary meeting
3 December /9H2
37 /6 7.

Ibid., vol. XVII. document A/CONF.62/L.76.

48

A/37/441.

•

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization

The General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the continuing deterioration of international relations, the frequent recourse to the threat or
use of force, the further escalation of the arms race, particularly in its nuclear dimension, the aggravation of global
economic problems, widespread, mass and flagrant violations of human rights, all hindrances to the process of decolonization and the continued stalemate in the resolution
of various fundamental international crises and their
exacerbation,
Gravely concerned at the crisis in many multilateral negotiations and in co-operation, especially within the United
Nations.
Noting with concern that the United Nations system of
collective security has not been used effectively.
Gravely concerned at the frequent disregard shown for
the provisions of the Charter and the resolutions of the
United Nations,
Convinced that there is an urgent and imperative need for
strict respect for the provisions of the Charter and for
strengthening the role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security and in solving
international problems in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations 49
and the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes, 50
Bearing in mind the views expressed by Member States
during the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization; 51
2. Solemnly reaffirms that genuine and stable peace and
security in the world can be achieved by strict adherence to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to international law and that all States should
fulfil in good faith their obligations assumed in accordance
therewith;
3. Emphasizes the imperative need to strengthen the role
and effectiveness of the United Nations as indispensable for
the maintenance of international peace and security, for the
settlement of international disputes and crises by peaceful
means, for the strengthening of international co-operation
on the basis of sovereign equality and for the promotion of
economic and social development and of human rights;
4. Calls upon all organs of the United Nations to discharge fully and effectively their responsibilities in accordance with the Charter and upon all Member States to
contribute actively to that end;
5. Requests the Security Council to carry out the primary responsibility for the maintenance of intemat.ional peace
" Resolution 2625 ( XXV)
"' Resolution 37/10, annex.
" Official Records of the General As.,emhlr. Thirn'-.<el'enth St•.uio11.
Supplement No. I (A/37/1).
4

1

27
