54

General Assembly-Eleventh Seesion

" ( d) Social, Humanitarian and Cultural Committee ( Third Committee) ;
" ( e) Trusteeship Committee ( including Non-SelfGoverning Territories) (Fourth Committee);
"(f) Administrative and Budgetary Committee
( Fifth Committee) ;
"(g) Legal Committee ( Sixth Committee) ".

623rd plenary meeting,
18 December 1956.

1105 (XI). International conference of plenipo•
tentiaries to examine the law of the sea
The General Assembly,
H aving received the report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its eighth session,2
which contains draft articles and commentaries on
the law of the sea,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in resolution
798 (VIII) of 7 December 1953, havirtg regard to the
fact that the problems relating to the high seas, territorial waters, contiguous zones, the continental shelf
and the superjacent waters were closely linked together
juridically as well as phy~ically, decided not to deal
with any aspect of those matters unt_il ail the problems
involved had been studied by the International Law
Commission and reported upon by it to the General
Assembly,
Considering that, by its resolution 899 (IX) of 14
DecemLer 1954, it requested the International Law
Commission to submit its final report on these subjects
in time for the General Assembly to consider them as
a whole at its eleventh session,
Taking into account also paragraph 29 of the report
of the International Law Commission wherein it is
stated that the Commission considers-and the comments of Governments have confirmed this view-that
the various sections of the law of the sea hold together,
and are so closely interdependent that it would be
extremely difficult to deal with only one part and leave
the others aside,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on this complex
subject;
2. Decides, in accordance with the recommendation
contained in paragraph 28 of the report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its
eighth session, that an international conference of plenipotentiaries should be convoked to examine the law
of the sea, taking account not only of the legal but
also of the technical, biological, economic and political
aspects of the problem, and to embody the results of
its work in one or more international conventions or
such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
3. Recommends that the conference should study
the question of free access to the sea of land-locked
countries, as established by international practice of
treaties;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to convoke the
conference early in March 1958;
5. Invites all States Members of the United Nations
and States members of the specialized agencies to par• Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Supplement No. 9 (A/3159).

ticipate in the conference and to include among their
representatives experts competent in the fields to be
considered ;
6. Invites the interested specialized agencies and
inter-governmental bodies to send observers to the
conference ;

7. Requests the Secretary-General to invite appropriate experts to advise and assist the Secretariat in
preparing the conference, with tbe following terms of
reference:
(a) To obtain, in the manner which they think most
appropriate, from the Governments invited to the conference any further provisional comments the Governments may wish to make on the Commission's report
and related matters, and to present to the conference
in systematic form any comments made by the Govemments, as well as the relevant statements made in the
Sixth Committee at the eleventh and previous sessions
of the General Assembly;
( b) To present to the conference recommendations
concerning its method of work and procedures, and
other questions of an administrative nature;
( c) To prepare, or arrange for the preparation of,
working documents of a legal, technical, scientific or
economic nature in order to facilitate the work of the
conference ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange also
for the necessary staff and facilities which would be
required for the conference, it being understood that
the technical services of such experts as are needed
will be utilized ;
9. Refers to the conference the report of the International Law Commission as the basis for its consideration of the various problems involved in the
development and codification of the law of the sea, and
also the verbatim records of the relevant debates in
the General Assembly, for consideration by the conference in conjunction with the Commission's report;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the conference ail such records of world-wide or regional international meetings as may serve as official
background mate rial for its work;
11. Calls upon the Governments invited to the conference and groups thereof to utilize the time remaining
before the opening of the conference for exchanges of
views on the controversial questions relative to the
law of the sea;
12. E:rpresses the hopc that the conkrence will be
fully attended.
658th plenary meetin_q,
21 February 1957.

1106 (XI). Special allowance to be paid to memhers of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 485 (V:) of 12 December 1950, it amended article 13 of the S"tatute of the
International Law Commission, in consequence of
which that article reads as follows:
"Members of the Commission shall be paid travel
expenses, and shall also receive a special allowance,
the amount of which shall be determined by the
General Assembly",

55

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Sixth Committee

N oting that this amendment provided for a special
allowance for the members of the Commission, and
that one of the reasons specified in the said resolution
was that the nature and scope of the work of the Commission are such as to require its members to devote
considerable time in attendance at the necessarily long
sessions of the Commission,
Considering that the circumstances thus referred to
have not, in the meantime, in any way changed and
that it has in addition become clear that the nature
of the Commission's task requires ail its members to
devote considerable time to the work of the Commission between, as well as during, its regular sessions,
Considering that the General Assembly, on the report of the Fifth Committee, has by its resolution
1075 (XI) of 7 December 1956 fixed a uniform subsistence allowance for all organs of the United Nations,
Having regard to the fact that resolution 1075 (XI),
which deals only with subsistence allowances, does not
affect article 13 of the Statute of the International Law
Commission which, for the reasons stated in General
Assembly resolution 485 (V), provides for a special
allowance to be paid to the members of the Commission, and that subsistence allowance at the normal
uniform rate does not constitute a "special" allowance
according to the meaning and intention of article 13
of the Commission's Statute, because that term, interpreted in such a wa y as to fulfill the purposes of

resolution 485 (V), must include both the normal subsistence allowance and an additional allowance to be
paid to the members of the Commission,
Confirms that, article 13 of the Statute of the International Law Commission being still in force and
General Assembly resolution 485 (V) of 12 December
1950 having determined the global allowance that should
be paid in order to give due and adequate effect to that
article, a special allowance of $15 per day continues to
be payable to the members of the Commission, in addition to subsistence allowance at the normal uniform rate.
658th plenary meeting,
21 February 1957.
1107 (XI). Elimination or reduction of future
statelessness

Tne General Assembly,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General8
relating to the question of convening an international
conference of plenipotentiaries to conclude a convention for the elimination or reduction of future statelessness.
658th plenary meeting,
21 February 1957.
• Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, documents A/3189 and Add.l to 3.
