S/PRST/2000/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 May 2000
English
Original: English and Russian

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4137th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 May 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Georgia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 24 April 2000 (S/2000/345).
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enhance contacts at all levels
between the Georgian and Abkhaz sides, and calls upon the parties to continue
to expand such contacts. It supports the Secretary-General’s appeal to both
sides to make more active use of the Coordinating Council machinery, and
actively to consider the paper prepared by the Special Representative
concerning the implementation of the agreed confidence-building measures. In
this context, the Security Council recalls with appreciation the invitation of the
Government of Ukraine to host a meeting in Yalta.
“The Security Council believes that resolution of issues related to the
improvement of the humanitarian situation, socio-economic development and
ensuring stability in the zone of conflict would facilitate the peace process. In
this regard, it calls upon the parties to finalize their work on and to sign a draft
agreement on peace and guarantees for the prevention of armed confrontation
and a draft protocol on the return of refugees to the Gali region and measures
for economic rehabilitation.
“The Security Council notes with deep concern the continued failure of
the parties to achieve a comprehensive political settlement, which includes a
settlement on the political status of Abkhazia within the State of Georgia. It
also notes the adverse impact that this failure has on the humanitarian
situation, economic development and stability in the region. It calls upon the
parties to display the political will required for a breakthrough and to spare no
efforts in order to achieve substantive progress without further delay. In this
regard, it joins the Secretary-General in encouraging the parties to be ready to
consider proposals, based on the Security Council decisions, to be presented in
due course by the Special Representative on the question of the distribution of
constitutional competences between Tbilisi and Sukhumi.

00-42675 (E) 110500
`````````

S/PRST/2000/16

“The Security Council strongly reaffirms the imprescriptible right of all
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) directly affected by the
conflict to return to their homes in secure and dignified conditions. It calls
upon the parties to agree upon and to take, in the nearest future, concrete steps
towards implementing effective measures to guarantee the security of those
who exercise their unconditional right to return, including those who have
already returned. In particular, the undefined and insecure status of
spontaneous returnees to the Gali district is a matter that must be addressed
urgently. The Security Council encourages the Abkhaz side to continue the
process of improvement of security conditions for returnees, which the
Secretary-General notes may be beginning in the Gali region.
“The Security Council encourages the Special Representative, in this
context, to continue his efforts, in close cooperation with the Russian
Federation, in its capacity as facilitator, the Group of Friends of the SecretaryGeneral and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the measures
undertaken by the Government of Georgia, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Bank, in order to improve the situation of those refugees and IDPs who have
not been in a position to exercise their right of return, to develop their skills
and to increase their self-reliance.
“The Security Council notes that the situation on the ground in the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) area of responsibility
has remained generally calm although unstable during the reporting period. It
welcomes all efforts which have been undertaken, in particular by the Special
Representative, with a view to alleviating tensions and increasing confidence
between the parties. It regrets that the Protocol of 3 February 2000 has not
been implemented in full and, in particular, that the withdrawal of illegal
armed groups has not been brought about. It is concerned at the tension created
by recent attacks against Abkhaz militiamen. It deplores these attacks and the
high level of criminal activities in the zone of conflict, as well as acts of
violence against UNOMIG personnel and members of their families. In this
context, the Council recalls the relevant principles contained in the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel adopted on 9
December 1994 and the statement of its President of 10 February 2000
(S/PRST/2000/4). It calls on the parties to refrain from any actions which
could increase tensions on the ground and to ensure the safety of the UNOMIG
personnel.
“The Security Council welcomes the important contribution that the
UNOMIG and the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS Peacekeeping Force) continue to make in stabilizing
the situation in the zone of conflict, notes that the working relationship
between UNOMIG and the CIS Peacekeeping Force has been good at all
levels, and stresses the importance of continuing and increasing close
cooperation and coordination between them in the performance of their
respective mandates.”

2
