499 (V).

Place of meeting of the sixth regular session
of the General Assembl~·

ther to deny such contributions -.,ould support aat
supplement the military action .of the United Na tions i1
Korea and would assist in putting an end to th,
aggression,

( R esolution adopted without refere11a
to a Committee)

Recommends that every State :
(a) Apply an embargo on the shipment to .iri:a~
under the control of the Central People's Govcrnm.:m
of the People's Republic of China and of the N0rth
Korean authorities of arms, ammunition and impk·
mcnts of war, atomic energy materials, petroleum, tran~portation materials of strat'egic value, and items useful
in the production of arms, ammunition a nd implements
of war ;
(b) Determine which commodities exported from its
territory fall within the emb.a rgo, and apply controls
to give effect to the embargo ;
(c) Prev~nt by all means within its jurisdiction the
circumvention of controls on shipments applied by
other States pursuant to the present resolution ;
(d) Co-operate with other States in carrying out the
purpos~s of this embargo ;
(e) Report to the Ad,ditional Measures Committee.
within thirty days and thereafter at the request of the
Committee, on the measures taken in accordance with
the present resolution;
2. Requests the Additional Measures Committee :
(a). To. ceport to the General Assembly, wi"1 recommendations as appropriate, on the general effectiveness
of the embargo and the desirability of continuing.
extending or relaxing it ;
(b) To continue its consideration of additional measures to be employed to meet the aggression in Korea.
and to report thereon further to the Gene~l Assembly.
it being understood that the Coi;nmittee is authorized
to defer its report if tb,e Good Offices Committee
reports satisfactory progress in its efforts ;
3. Reaffirms. that it contin.ues to be the policy ~r
the United Nations to bring about a cessation of hostilities in Korea, and the achievement of United Nations
objectives in Korea by peaceful means, and requc:sh
the Good Offices Committee to continue its good office::;.
I.

The General Assembly,
Ha ving heCJ1 informed' that the French Government.
desirous of responding to the wish that has be::n
expressed to it on several occasions. has decided to
welcome the General Assembly to Paris for the duration of its sixth session,

1. Decides, in pursuance of its resolution 497 (V) of
14 December 1950, to hold its sixth regular session
in Paris;
2. Decides that, notwithstanding the provisio,.s of
rule 1 of its rijles of procedure, the sixth session shall
commence not later than 6 November 1951 ;
3. Authorfr.es the Secretary-General to conclude with
the French Government the necessary agreements for
holding the sixth session of the General Assembly in
Paris, provided that the total estimated cost of holding
the sixth session in Paris (including such meetings as
may be arranged after 1 January 1952) shall not
exceed the amount of $US 2,350.400 provided in the
19 5 I budget, plus such additiona l amounts as may be
authorized by transfer from other sections of the 1951
budget by the Secretary-General with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Bud~etary Questions.
329th plenary meeting,
20 March 1951 .

SOO (V).

Additional IIH!tiures to be employed to meet

the aggres.,ion in Korea
(Resolutfon adopted on the report of the First
Committee)
The General A ssembly,
NotinK the report' of the Adc!~tional Measures
Committee dated 14 May 1951,
Recalling its resolution 498 (V) of l February 195 1,

330th plenary m ee1i 11,:.
18 May 1951.

Nothing that :
(a) l11e Additional M:easures Committee established
by that resolution has considered additional measures
to be employed to meet the aggression in Korea,
(b) The Additional Measures Committee has reported• that a number of Stat~s have already taken measures designed to deny contributions to · the military
strength of the for~s opposing the United Nations in
Korea,

501 (V).

Question of tbe repre.seatation of Cllilla i..a
tbe General Aueably

(Resolution adopted on tht; r.eport of the Special Cum·
millee an the Rt:presentation of Chino)
The Gentral Assembly
X~~es note of the. report" of the Special Comnii111:.:
on the R~presentation of China.

(c) The Additional Measures Committee bas also
reported" that certain economic measures designed fur-

332nd plenary mee1in.~.
5 November /95/ .

• See oocu,nent A/ 1788/ Rev. I.
• See document A/1799.
• Sec Official Records of tlze General A ssembly, Fifth
Sesssion, First Committee, 443rd meeting.

'See documen« A/1923.

2
