Reaolution1 adopted on the repOl'tll of the Fifth Commhlee

Section

33.

ltt US dollars

B. INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE

Part XI. International Court of Justice
International Court of Justice .............................. .

617,000

TOTAL, PART XII

617,000

GRAND TOTAL

48,807,650

2. The appropriations voted by paragraph 1 above shall be financed by contributions from Members after
adjustment as provided by the Financial Regulations, subject to the provision of paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 1085 (XI) of 21 December 1956 relating to the Working Capital Fund. For this purpose, miscellaneous income for the financial year 1957 is estimated at $US 2,531,010;
3. The Secretary-General is authorized :
(a) To administer as a unit the following appropriations:
(i) Provisions under section 3a; section 18, chapter III; and section 25, chapter I, article (v);
(ii) Provisions under section 10; section 18, chapter II; section 20; and section 25, chapter IV;
( b) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to
transfer credits between sections of the budget;
4. In addition to the appropriations voted by paragraph 1 above, an amount of $US 13,000 is hereby appropriated from the income of the Library Endowment Fund for the purchase of books, periodicals, maps an<l library
equipment and for such other expenses as are in accordance with the objects and provisions of the endowment ;
5. The Secretary-General is authorized, in accordance with the Financial Regulations, to charge against
the income derived from the sale of publications, the catering and related services, the United Nations Postal
Administration, the Visitors' Service and the Gift Centre, the direct expenses of those activities; income in excess
of those expenses shall be treated as miscellaneous income under the terms of financial regulat;on 7.1 and of
paragraph 2 above.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.

1084 (XI). Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financial year 1957
The General Assembly
Resolves that, for the financial year 1957:
1. The Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and subject to the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations, is authorized to
enter into commitments to meet unforeseen and extraordinary expenses, provided that the concurrence of
the Advisory Committee shall not be necessary for:
(a) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$ US 2 million, as the Secretary-General certifies relate
to the maintenance of peace and security or to urgent
economic rehabilitation ;
( b) Such commitments as the President of the International Court of Justice certifies relate to expenses
occasioned by :
( i) The designation of a,d hoe judges ( Statute,
Article 31), not exceeding a total of $24,000;
(ii) .The appointment of assessors ( Statute, Article
30), or the calling of witnesses and the appointment of experts ( Statute, Article SO), not
exceeding a total of $25,000;
(iii) The holding of sessions of the Court away
from The Hague ( Statute, Article 2), not
exceeding a total of $75,000;
( c) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$12,000 a!,l may be required in the event of the coming
into force during 1957 of the Protocol for Limiting
and Regulating the Cultivation of the Poppy Plant,
the Production of, International and Wholesale Trade
in, and Use of Opium ;18
10

United Nations publication. Sales No. : 1953.Xl.6.

2. The Secretary-General shall report to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and to the General Assembly, at its twelfth
session, all commitments made under the provisions
of the present resolution, together with the circumstances relating thereto, and shall submit supplementary
estimates to the General Assembly in respect of such
commitments.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 Decesnber 1956.

1085 (XI). Working Capital Fund for the finan•
clal year 1957
The General Assembly
Resolves that :
1. The Working Capital Fund shall be established
for the year ending 31 December 1957 at an amount
of $US 22 million to be derived from cash advances
by Members in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present resolution ;
2. Members shall make cash advances to the Working Capital Fund as required under paragraph 1 above
in accordance with the scale adopted by the General
Assembly for contributions of Members to the twelfth
annual budget, u
3. There shall be set off against this new allocation
of advances the amounts paid by Members to the Working Capital Fund for the financial year 1956, under
General Assembly resolution 981 (X) of 16 December
1955, provided that, should such advance paid by any
Member to the Working Capital Fund for the financial
"'See resolution 1087(XI).

44

General Assembly-Eleventh Se1111ion

year 1956 exceed the amount of that Member's advance under the provisions of paragraph 2 above, the
excess shall be set off against the amount of contributions payable by that Member in respect of the twelfth
annual budget, or any previous budget;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions ;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts from contributions are available for the purpose;
(b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 1084 (XI)
of 21 December 1956 relating to the unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses; the Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing
the Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed $125,000,
to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total of $125,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; the SecretaryGeneral shall submit, with the annual accounts, an
explanation of the outstanding balance of the revolving
fund at the end of each year;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by intergovernmental agreement under the auspices of the
United Nations to finance their work, pending receipt
by the agencies concerned of sufficient contributions
under their own budgets; in making such loans, which
shall normally be repayable within two years, the
Secretary-General shall have regard to the proposed
financial resources of the agency concerned, and shall
obtain the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for
any cash issues which would increase the aggregate
balance outstanding (including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) at any one time to an amount
in excess of $1,500,000 and for any issue which would
increase the balance outstanding ( including amounts
previously advanced and outstanding) in respect of
any one agency to an amount in excess of $500,000;
(e) Such sums not exceeding $35,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance
premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond tlie end of the financial year in which payment
is made; this amount may be increased with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; the Secretary-General
shall make provision in the budget estimates of each
year, during the life of the related policies, to cover
the charges applicable to each such year ;
(f) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending accumulation of credits ; such advances shall
be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.

1086 (XI). Public information activities of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having examined sections 10 and 20 of the budget
estimates for the financial year 1957,15
Noting with satisfaction the Secretary-General's proposal to extP.nd the network of information centres to
the new Member States,
Considering the desirability of the establishment of
information centres, on the basis of the regional and
linguistic distribution referred to in the basic principles
underlying the public information activities of the
United Nations 16 approved by the General Assembly
in resolution 595 (VI) of 4 February 1952,
Considering that the new Member States should be
treated, by means of a flexible administrative policy,
on a footing of equality with other Members in the
matter of the provision of information services,
1. Recommends the Secretary-General to continue
to give favourable attention to the establishment of information offices in the new Member States, giving
priority to those countries which, for linguistic or other
reasons, cannot be adequately served through existing
centres or through the information services of the
specialized agencies and which have informed him of
their interest in that regard;
2. Recommends the Secretary-General to keep the
structure of the information centres under constant
review and to renew his efforts to co-ordinate the
information services of the United Nations with those
of the specialized agencies in order to avoid duplication
of work and to make it possible-by means of savings
which may be made in other sections of the budget
without prejudice to existing services, or by other
administrative means within the competence of the
Secretary-General-to set aside funds for the progressive establishment of the necessary information centres
in new Member States;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to take into consideration the views expressed in the debate on this
item in the Fifth Committee, both in the distribution
o_f the funds appropri~ted for 1957 and in the preparation of the budget estimates for the financial year 1958.
632nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1956.
1087 (XI). Scale of assessments for the appor•
tionment of the expenses of the United
Nations

The General Assembly
Resolves:
1. That the scale of assessments for Members' cont~ibutions to the United Nations budget for the financial years 1956 and 1957, contained in paragraph 1 of
General Assembly resolution 970 (X) of 15 December
1955, shall be revised to include assessments for the
sixteen States admitted to membership in the United
Nations on 14 December 1955 ;17
"'Official Records of the Gnteral Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Supplement No. 5 (A/3126).
'"Ibid., Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 41, document
A/C.5/L.172, annex.
"See General Assembly resolution 995 (X) of 14 December
1956.
