S/PV.8426

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8426th meeting

Monday, 17 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom/Mr. Ipo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2018/1092)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44303 (E)
*1844303*

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2018/1092)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, and Ms. Ghizaal Haress, Independent
Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of
the Constitution.
Mr. Fedotov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Vienna.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite
Mr. Serge Christiane, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1092, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At today’s meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Mr. Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov,
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), and Ms. Haress.
2/43

17/12/2018

I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: Today, I would like to focus on
elections and peace and to touch upon the outcomes of
the Geneva ministerial conference.
First, on elections, on 20 October, an estimated
4 million people in Afghanistan voted in the
parliamentary elections. Next year, the people of
Afghanistan will also make a critical political choice
for their president. Those elections are essential
steps on the path towards firmly establishing a
representative democracy.
It has been almost two months since the
parliamentary elections were held in 33 out of 34
provinces. So far, the results for 29 provinces have
been released. Preliminary results show that 28 per
cent of the newly elected parliamentarians are women,
which is above the quota. We commend the courage
and the strong will of the people of Afghanistan in
having defied the threat of the Taliban to exercise their
fundamental right to vote.
When we look at the elections this year, it is necessary
to realize that the preparations and implementation, as
well as the management of security, were primarily
conducted by the Afghan people, with only assistance
and advice from international experts. Compared to the
elections in 2005, when 550 international experts were
responsible for the implementation of the elections, this
year only about 60 international experts participated
in an advisory capacity. Also, the Government of
Afghanistan bore more costs this year than in the
past. The international contribution decreased from
approximately $140 million in 2014 to $60 million
this year.
In the area of security, the threats were real. There
were more than 108 verified incidents, causing 400
civilian casualties, the largest number of casualties
on a single election day since systematic records were
kept in 2009. At the same time, it must be recognized
that the total number of civilian casualties throughout
the electoral period this year was on a par with that
in 2014. We need to acknowledge the efforts of the
national security forces, which managed the security
primarily themselves this year without the significant
international support that they had in 2014.
However, there were major and avoidable
irregularities by the electoral management bodies in the
preparations and implementation of the parliamentary
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

elections. It is clear that the electoral institutions need to
make significant improvements before the presidential
election. The irregularities in and mismanagement of
the parliamentary elections will be unacceptable for the
presidential election. We strongly urge the Independent
Election Commission (IEC) and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, as well as the Government, to take all
necessary collective measures and to focus intensively
in the coming months in order to complete the reforms
so that the problems are addressed as they prepare for
the presidential election in 2019. It is more important
to conduct credible elections by allowing for reforms
and sufficient preparations to take place rather than to
conduct the elections without implementing the proper
reforms from the lessons learned. The presidential
election is critical to the future of the country.
As part of our commitment to helping the Afghan
institutions deliver a credible presidential election,
the United Nations, in response to the request by the
President and the Electoral Complaints Commission,
will recommend two international experts be appointed
as non-voting members of the Complaints Commission.
We will also reassess the roles of the international
experts in the IEC and determine if more experts
are necessary.
The Government of Afghanistan and the United
Nations co-hosted a ministerial conference in
Geneva on 28 November. Ninety-six countries
and organizations participated. The international
community reconfirmed that it will continue to assist
Afghanistan in achieving self-reliance on the basis
of mutual accountability between its development
partners and the Government. The conference
acknowledged the need for improvements in reforms,
while recognizing the commitment of the Government
to mutual accountability and a genuine reform
agenda, in particular so as to counter corruption. The
importance of the private sector and regional economic
connectivity were underlined. A joint communiqué and
the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework were
unanimously adopted at the end of the conference.
Another key outcome of the ministerial conference
was the assurance of continued international support
in the post-peace phase. The international community
expressed its commitment to continuing to provide
assistance to Afghanistan in the event that a peace
agreement is reached with the Taliban.
In the past 17 years, the possibility of a negotiated
end to the conflict has never been more real than it is

S/PV. 8426

now. On the Afghan side, a peace plan was presented
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
at the Geneva ministerial conference. A team to
negotiate directly with the Taliban was appointed. A
senior advisory board representing a broader group
of Afghan politicians to support the peace efforts was
also announced. On 9 December, a new head of the
secretariat of the High Peace Council was appointed.
In Geneva, there was a dedicated meeting on peace,
where participants reiterated that all international
efforts, including those by regional actors and
neighbouring States, needed to be in concert and
aligned with the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
efforts. The reiteration of that key consensus is timely
and important, as a number of initiatives are under
way to advance the process. For instance, the United
States Special Representative for Afghanistan has been
actively engaging with the various parties concerned.
On 9 November, a meeting was held in Moscow,
where parties from the region participated to discuss
peace. Many countries in the region, including the
neighbouring States, have also expressed their support
for the peace process, which appears to be emerging.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is also encouraged by such
developments. However, we understand that they are at
a delicate stage, where political space must be allowed
for the main actors to formulate their positions and
determine how to react to the recent developments.
The key next step would be for representatives of the
Government and of the Taliban to meet, or at least to
formally initiate what in mediation is referred to as
talks about talks. We hope that the current momentum
will bring those parties together so that they can begin
to explore how they would address the many agenda
points needed to reach a peaceful settlement.
In this forum, I have frequently spoken of the need
to move from sporadic contacts to structured, formal
talks. Efforts are under way to bring about that change.
While fighting and talking are often a reality in the
initial stages of a peace process, it is also the case
that actions on the battlefield can have an impact on
progress in any peace process. I would therefore urge
all parties to the conflict to carefully consider how
they can reduce the levels of violence, in particular the
harm to civilians. I urge all parties to foster trust and
to enable dialogue to take place. I call on the countries
in the region in particular to contribute to creating
an environment conducive to peace talks, thereby

18-443033/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

allowing the people of Afghanistan to resolve their
internal differences through negotiations. By moving
from contacts to talks, we can begin to move from a
logic of war to one focused on opportunities for peace.
With that shift we can begin to envisage the benefits of
a stable Afghanistan in the middle of a region full of
promise and potential for growth, rather than continue
to fear threats emanating from an unstable Afghanistan.
As President Ghani has stated, there is a need to change
the perception of Afghanistan from a site of danger
or a battle ground to a platform of cooperation by
location and strategic perspective. This is a moment
of hope and possibility. Like all such moments, when
adversaries begin to engage with one other, it is also
a moment of risk. For the sake of a peaceful future for
Afghanistan, these opportunities must be fulfilled and
the risks managed.
UNAMA’s Human Rights Unit has reported that
there were more than 8,000 civilian casualties from
1 January to 30 September. That is the same level as that
of last year. Child casualties remain high, with 2,136
recorded for the same period. Efforts must be made by
all concerned to reduce the casualties. Almost 60 per
cent of the casualties were caused by suicide attacks
and ground engagements. The increase in the direct
targeting of civilians by anti-Government elements this
year is a concern for us. We also note the significant
increase in civilian casualties from aerial operations.
UNAMA also recorded 1,513 civilian casualties from
suicide and other improvised-explosive-device attacks
claimed by Da’esh/ISIL this year. That is a more than
a three-fold increase for the same period last year.
Given the way in which Da’esh/ISIL has expanded
its influence in other parts of the world, we remain
concerned about the threats from that group.
Before concluding, I need to mention the ongoing
suffering that plagues a large proportion of citizens
in Afghanistan. Despite progress on economic
reforms, the country remains one of the world’s
poorest, and it is blighted by climate change. Of most
immediate concern are people struck by drought
and violence, and the suffering of 4.5 million people
needs to be alleviated. The United Nations and its
partners are issuing a humanitarian response plan for
Afghanistan. Approximately $612 million is required
for 2019, and I ask the international community for
its immediate financial support to help people in need
across Afghanistan.
4/43

17/12/2018

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council.
As the Secretary-General’s statement at the
recent Geneva ministerial conference on Afghanistan
conference highlighted, renewed efforts by the
international community, together with regional
support and engagement, are needed to overcome the
serious challenges related to insecurity, poverty and
the rule of law. Illicit opium and the criminal economy
are among those urgent challenges, as recognized
in the conference’s joint communiqué, which calls
for increased efforts to fight corruption and illicit
narcotics. According to this year’s Afghanistan Opium
Survey, the overall area under cultivation remains
the second-highest measured since the beginning of
systematic opium poppy monitoring and recording, in
1994. The area under cultivation fell this year by 20 per
cent as compared with the record level of 2017, and
was accompanied by a drop in opium yield, but both
decreases can be attributed to the devastating drought
that Afghanistan has suffered. Eradication remained
insignificant, falling to 400 hectares in four provinces,
as compared to 750 hectares in 14 provinces in 2017. As
a result, more than 5,000 tons of opium are potentially
available for heroin production within and outside
Afghanistan, which translates into more than 600 tons
of export-quality heroin.
Continuing high levels of supply have brought
prices down to rock bottom. The farm-gate value of
opium decreased by 56 per cent compared to last year
but, at $604 million, that still represents nearly 3 per
cent of the country’s gross domestic product. High
levels of opium supply mean that there are a lot of drugs
that will go to various destinations at a cheaper price.
Moreover, Afghanistan remains an important source
country of hashish. This year’s World Drug Report
found that Afghanistan had reported 22 per cent of the
global total of hashish seized in 2016. Afghanistan is
the first victim of that overproduction of drugs, which
contributes to high rates of drug use in the country. Up
to 200 tons of raw opium are consumed annually. A
report by the Ministry of Counter Narcotics estimated
adult drug use at more than double the global use rate.
That poses a grave threat to public health and safety and
hinders peacebuilding, economic growth and stability.
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

Balanced responses to drug supply and demand are
therefore critical to supporting Afghanistan’s efforts
to achieve progress in combating corruption, money
laundering and terrorism financing.
The Afghan Government has taken steps to
increase resilience to illicit financial flows and foster
good governance. Measures encompass banking
regulation, the National Procurement Authority, the
digitalization of many processes, including land titling
and asset declaration, the anti-corruption law and
strategy, the National High Council for Rule of Law
and Anti-Corruption, the Anti-Corruption Justice
Center, the new penal code, and the law on anti-money
laundering and countering financing of terrorism. The
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
continues to provide support in all its mandate areas,
including to address the Geneva mutual accountability
framework priority area on anti-corruption, governance,
the rule of law and human rights. UNODC is seeking to
step up strategic responses in line with the peacebuilding
and conflict prevention priorities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
That includes strengthening the interconnectivity
of country and regional and interregional action
to facilitate alternative development activities and
access to international markets. Our Office in Kabul
is supporting the Afghan Government in identifying
common targets under a regional counter-narcotics
strategy, which should be fully plugged in with existing
coordination mechanisms.
I hope that we will be able to further strengthen
progress, including through the implementation of the
recommendations of the special session of the General
Assembly on drugs (General Assembly resolution
S-30/1), as well as through the forthcoming ministerial
segment at the March 2019 session of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs. As ever, UNODC remains committed
to supporting Afghanistan and the international
community to address these shared challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Umarov.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I appreciate this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban,
which I am pleased to do in accordance with paragraph
56 of resolution 2255 (2015). I am also grateful to

S/PV. 8426

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
support of the work of the 1988 Sanctions Committee
and continued assistance to its Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team.
The main goal of the 1988 Committee is to deter
the Taliban from continuing to support Al-Qaida and
its affiliates and to deter Taliban attacks against the
Government of Afghanistan, through the use of tools
such as global asset freezes, global travel bans and
global arms embargoes. At the same time, the 1988
sanctions regime is intended to support the peace
and reconciliation process, including through the use
of the delisting process and the process of granting
exemptions to enable listed persons to engage in peace
and reconciliation negotiations and other approved
activities. For the credibility and effectiveness of
the sanctions regime, it is essential that the relevant
procedures be followed at all times, in particular the
requirement that all listed individuals require travel
ban exemptions, which should be submitted in a
timely manner.
In its most recent statement at the Moscow
conference on Afghanistan, organized and hosted by
the Russian Federation on 9 November, the ending of
the sanctions regime was the first demand made by
the Taliban. International engagement with the Taliban
throughout the year has concentrated on encouraging
it to enter a political dialogue, primarily through the
Kabul Process initiative. In addition to the initiatives
launched by Uzbekistan and Indonesia, overtures
were also made through the meetings of prominent
religious clerics in Afghanistan, Indonesia, Pakistan
and Saudi Arabia.
The leadership of the Taliban has stabilized under
Haibatullah Akhundzada and his deputy Sirajuddin
Haqqani. In its latest report (see S/2018/466), the
Monitoring Team noted that the fighting season in 2018
would be at least as bloody as that of 2017. Unfortunately,
that prediction has proven to be correct, in spite of the
sanctions measures. The Taliban has pressed forward
throughout the year with a ferocious military campaign
that included the use of terrorist tactics, such as
infiltration and targeted assassinations, kidnappings
for ransom and suicide bombings. The Taliban was also
successful in overrunning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) presence in northern Afghanistan
after it was critically weakened by an intense campaign

18-443035/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

led by Afghan and United States forces. The presence
of ISIL in eastern Afghanistan remains contained
through the same factor of combined Afghan and
United States military pressure. Afghan security forces
have struggled to repel repeated Taliban assaults on
provincial capitals, but resolutionemain optimistic due
to the consistent support and assistance received from
the international presence in Afghanistan.
The report of the Monitoring Team also noted
that Al-Qaida remains closely allied to and embedded
within the Taliban. There has been no change to that
close relationship in recent Taliban declarations.
The Taliban’s finances originate from taxation on
the narcotics economy and the illegal extraction of
natural resources. The impact of the assets freeze on
the Taliban’s illegal activities will only be intensified
once additional information is gathered on where the
Taliban and its financial backers have invested their
illicit proceeds from the narcotics economy and illegal
exportation of illegally mined mineral resources, such
as onyx marble, chromite, talc, gemstones and gold.
While there are many structures and frameworks
in place for the implementation of the 1988 sanctions
regime, the effectiveness of its implementation depends
not only on internal, but also regional and international
actors. The Committee would therefore like to
encourage Member States to play a more active role
in providing information that would help to maintain
the sanctions list as up-to-date as possible and to assist
the Committee in the implementation of the sanctions
measures in order to enhance its effectiveness.
The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions
measures also relies on close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and other actors in the
region. I travelled to Afghanistan last year, and again
this year as part of the Council’s visit in January. I
remain convinced that there is potential for greater use
of the 1988 sanctions regime to deter the Taliban and
support the peace process. Renewed efforts are also
needed to list individuals and entities associated with
the Taliban who are not yet on the sanctions list, but
who carry out activities that are harmful to the peace
and security of Afghanistan.
The Committee is keen to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in making wider use of the tools
offered by the 1988 sanctions regime. Throughout
2018, the Government of Afghanistan made overtures
for peace with the Taliban, including the offer in
6/43

17/12/2018

February of negotiations without preconditions and
the establishment of ceasefires in June and August. I
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his briefing to the Committee in October and for his
regular support of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team in its three visits to Afghanistan.
The Committee looks forward to continued close
engagement with UNAMA, Afghanistan and other
States in the region under the chairmanship of Indonesia
in 2019.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Umarov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Haress.
Ms. Haress: I speak today as a professional Afghan
woman who has worked for decades to advance human
rights, economic empowerment and democracy in
my country. I am also a member of the Independent
Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of the
Constitution. I am here to brief the Security Council
on the recent political developments in Afghanistan.
My statement will address the recent and upcoming
elections, the role of women and youth in the peace
talks and the crucial importance of adhering to
the constitutional framework in the current peace
negotiations in order to protect the civil liberties
of Afghan citizens and put my country on the road
to democracy.
Afghan citizens defied threats of violence to
participate in the long-overdue parliamentary elections
of 20 October. Four million Afghans — women and
men, young and old, urban and rural — came out to
vote. Women, who went to the polling centres to fulfil
their civic duty at great personal risk, constituted
34 per cent of voters. The participation of Afghan youth
was also noteworthy — young women and men ran for
office across the country, promising a more educated
Parliament that would be less paralysed by corruption.
In a country scarred by ongoing conflict, the strong
participation of citizens in this election was a significant
achievement and an assurance that democratic
institutions would be established, in accordance
with the Constitution. However, the elections were
also marred by significant challenges that must be
addressed before the presidential elections in April
2019. The risk of violence before and on election day
led to many polling centres remaining closed. At other
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8426

centres across the country, voters were killed or injured
by militant attacks, roadside bombs or suicide bombers.

future of their country and feel ownership over the
decisions that will determine it.

In addition to those grave security threats, there was
widespread disappointment at the underperformance
of the Independent Election Commission. Voters
complained about technical and organizational
problems, including the late opening of polling
centres, the absence of electoral staff and materials
and technical difficulties with the use of biometrics
machines, which were intended to prevent fraud.
Thousands of complaints have been registered with the
Electoral Complaints Commission and other related
monitoring institutions, which reflect the inability of
those bodies to fulfil their obligations. It is vital that
those challenges be addressed prior to the upcoming
presidential elections.

The Government must ensure that any continuing
obstacles to the participation of women in all spheres
of public and political life are eliminated and that their
inclusion is a non-negotiable priority. Women must have
formal, substantive and specific roles at every level of
the peace process. In addition, youth, the generation
that will bear the consequences of the current peace
process, must also be consulted, have direct access
to the negotiating table and be included in the peace
agreements. The Government of Afghanistan must also
ensure transparency and keep citizens informed of any
developments in the peace process.

Afghanistan has suffered from war throughout
most of its recent history. Conflict has killed thousands
of Afghans, destroyed villages and infrastructure and
forced many to flee their homes. Peacebuilding is
therefore an urgent priority. Positive developments,
such as recent political agreements with the Taliban,
have given many Afghans hope. However, those
negotiations have also raised serious concerns regarding
the meaningful participation of women and youth in the
ensuing peace process.
Article 22 of the Constitution of Afghanistan
guarantees the equality of women and men before
the law. Women have seen major advances in recent
years, including in basic access to education, health
and work, and have significantly contributed to the
development of post-Taliban Afghanistan.
However, despite the important role that women
have played in bringing about social change in the
country, gender inequality and numerous barriers to
their meaningful participation persist. Afghan women
suffer from violence, insecurity and lack of access
to justice.
Given the history of the Taliban in Afghanistan,
building sustainable peace while preventing the
re-establishment of extremist rule depends on the
meaningful inclusion of women. To ensure sustainable
peace, those affected by the conflict must be an
important part of the peace process, both in negotiations
and in envisioning solutions. It is therefore vital that the
Government engage civil society and ordinary Afghans
from all walks of life so that they have a say in the

The establishment of the Constitution in 2004
marked a significant break from Afghanistan’s decades
of war and lawlessness. Despite the years of conflict
following the adoption of the Constitution, Afghanistan
has made modest progress with regard to the rule of law,
democratic governance and human rights, particularly
women’s rights. However, this progress has been placed
in serious jeopardy by repeated suggestions that the
Constitution be amended to accommodate the demands
of the Taliban. Such suggestions raise concerns over
preserving democratic governance, the protection of
human rights and the separation of powers as enshrined
in the Afghan Constitution.
Afghanistan’s Constitution allows amendments to
fundamental rights only if the objective is to improve
them. On election day, the Taliban attempted to
intimidate people into staying home and deemed the
democratic process a sham. It is therefore clear that
the Taliban’s intent to make amendments would not
improve the Constitution but instead result in bartering
away the rights and freedoms for which we have fought
for 17 years. Making changes to the Constitution in
order to negotiate peace is a red line we must not cross.
I therefore urge the Security Council to ensure that
all peace negotiations or talks adhere to the framework
of the current Constitution. Any compromise
concerning citizens’ rights and liberties would erase the
hard-won gains of nearly two decades. The cost would
be borne not only by the international community, but
also by ordinary Afghans, as the hope they felt in the
recent elections for a democratic Afghanistan would be
cruelly snatched from them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Haress
for her briefing.

18-443037/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. We also
welcome the presence of our worthy colleague, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto;
Mr. Fedotov of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime; and Ms. Ghizaal Haress, from our country’s
civil society.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/1092), which provides a useful update on the
overall situation in Afghanistan.
Today’s meeting is being held against the backdrop
of important developments. These include the renewed
international partnership as affirmed by the Geneva
Ministerial Conference and the adoption of the General
Assembly’s resolution 73/88, on Afghanistan, two
weeks ago; new measures in the context of Afghan-led
peace efforts, supported by regional and global partners;
and sustained progress by our National Defence and
Security Forces in their fight against regional and
global terrorist groups, as well as enhanced economic
cooperation by virtue of regional connectivity projects.
Moreover, our parliamentary elections were, in spite
of the challenges, another opportunity where our
people, through ballots, took another step towards the
consolidation of democracy and the rule of law.
This series of events provide a clear picture of the
way in which our people have been turning the corner
in their difficult journey towards stability and selfreliance. The United Nations played a crucial role in
co-chairing the Geneva Conference on Afghanistan
and supporting our parliamentary elections, for which
we are very thankful.
In the area of security, our national security forces
have, at great sacrifice, kept terrorist elements at bay
throughout Afghanistan. The Taliban and affiliate
groups failed to register real gains anywhere in the
country. Attacks aimed at capturing territory, including
provincial capitals, were foiled, with massive casualties
in enemy ranks. Consequently, these groups, including
foreign terrorist fighters, resorted to new levels of
brutality, with increased numbers of cowardly terrorist
attacks on population centres, leading to a dramatic
increase in civilian casualties.
8/43

17/12/2018

In the face of these atrocities, our people stand
defiant in pursuit of peace and democracy. That
commitment was made evident by the more than
4 million Afghans, over 45 per cent of registered
voters, who came out on election day to cast their vote,
despite all of the threats and attacks in various parts
of the country. Every candidate and every voter was
a target of the Taliban. As we await the final results
of the parliamentary elections, our next focus is to
address existing shortcomings to ensure success in
the presidential elections currently scheduled for April
next year.
Our people have embraced and were inspired by
the international community’s renewed partnership and
support for a number of imperatives that are crucial to
our ultimate success. Among the most important issues
discussed in Geneva were our peace efforts, presented
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah in the
context of the road map for peace, which was deliberated
on at great length. We have fostered an unprecedented
level of consensus on the imperative of peace nationally,
regionally and internationally. Internally, an extensive
consultative process culminated in the creation of
a negotiating team and an Advisory Board that will
provide strategic input on various aspects and stages
of the peace talks once they begin. I just learned this
morning that the Board held its first meeting today.
Regionally, a number of additional countries
have stood behind our efforts, recognizing that the
prospect of peace is now within reach. Internationally,
we welcome the efforts of the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation, which
has brought new momentum to the peace efforts.
We welcome all forms of support for peace and
underline that all such initiatives should be under the
purview of Afghanistan’s leadership of the process.
Let me reaffirm to the Council that we seek a peace
that is durable, with increased political, social and
economic opportunities for our people: a peace that
protects human rights, especially women’s rights, and
consolidates the gains of the past 17 years and a peace
that keeps Afghanistan friendly to the region and to the
world at large. Any misuse, abuse or instrumentalization
of the peace process, by anyone, will not be tolerated by
the people of Afghanistan, who have paid a heavy price
over the past 40 years of imposed conflicts.
That notwithstanding, the imperative of genuine
and tangible regional support for peace is of crucial
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

importance. We have always asserted that the
Government of Pakistan has a particularly important
role to play, given its leverage over key Taliban figures.
Support for peace is one of the key commitments
stipulated in the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity, which entered into force in April.
The Action Plan constitutes an important framework to
effectively counter terrorism, help advance peace and
avoid territorial violations. Nevertheless, progress on
various fronts has thus far been elusive.
Last Saturday, Afghanistan, Pakistan and China
gathered at the level of Foreign Ministers in Kabul for the
second round of the trilateral dialogue platform, where
discussions centred on tangible measures to build trust
by addressing outstanding issues, mainly focused on
countering terrorism to reduce violence in Afghanistan.
With regard to peace efforts, we reiterated our request
from Pakistan to do what is necessary to facilitate
direct talks. With regard to security, we asserted that
mutual trust and confidence are possible only when we
see a reduction in violence and more tangible measures
taken against terrorist elements. We hope to see visible
progress in the coming weeks and months based on new
commitments made, as well as the expectations of our
people and the international community.
Afghanistan’s worst drought this century has
affected our people and lead to food insecurity,
internal displacement and other drastic humanitarian
implications. We appeal to the international community
to help provide the support needed in order to alleviate
this alarming situation, including through contributions
to the emergency appeal launched by the United
Nations. Amid the challenges facing Afghanistan,
adequately addressing the humanitarian crisis should
not be overlooked.
The Security Council visited Kabul under the
Kazakhstan presidency in January and made a strong
pledge to improve coordination and consensus on
security and development in Afghanistan. What
followed was a high-level ministerial meeting of
the Council on building regional partnerships in
Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link
security and development (see S/PV.8162). That was
seminal in setting a trend to approach Afghanistan’s
security from a development perspective. It reinforced
a sharpening focus among a broad range of regional
partners to advance numerous mega-projects, primarily
under the Afghan-led Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan and Heart of Asia Process.

S/PV. 8426

Last week, in a historic event, President Ghani
inaugurated the long-awaited Lapis Lazuli Corridor
project, signed by Foreign Minister Rabbani and his
Turkmen, Azeri, Georgian and Turkish counterparts
in Ashgabat in November 2017. That landmark project
reinstates the old trade route in its modern version,
transporting famous Afghan products to Turkey and to
European markets through Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan
and Georgia.
Moreover, since last year, we have operationalized
air cargo corridors with India, Kazakhstan, Turkey,
Europe, the Russian Federation, the United Arab
Emirates, Saudi Arabia and China, leading to a
substantial increase in the export of Afghan products
abroad. The Chabahar port remains an important
gateway for providing commercially viable access to
the sea, linking the Indian Ocean with Afghanistan,
Central Asia and beyond. In that regard, we appreciate
the collaboration and flexibility of our strategic partner,
the United States, in working with Afghanistan, Iran
and India towards exempting the port from its sanctions.
We also witnessed this year the implementation of the
Afghanistan section of the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India gas pipeline project, which will
revolutionize the energy sector in those four countries.
Experience has shown that progress on all
fronts — from development and security to economic
prosperity and social development — in Afghanistan
and elsewhere is best achieved in an atmosphere of
amity, unity of purpose, mutual trust and cooperation
for the common good. Afghanistan is a rare example
of a mission on which various countries, and from
different political blocs and security architectures, have
converged for a collective purpose, namely, to ensure
that Afghanistan is secure and stable and, through that,
to promote regional and global peace and security.
We are pleased that that imperative is reflected
in General Assembly resolution 73/88, on the
situation in Afghanistan, adopted two weeks ago. It
emphasizes that threats to stability and development
in Afghanistan and the region require closer and more
coordinated cooperation, as well as greater coherence
and complementarity of approach between countries
of the region and the international community, for the
long-term peace, security, prosperity and sustainable
development of the country. In that regard, it
underscores the standing of Afghanistan as a platform
for such international cooperation. That offers the
surest guarantee for completing the mission upon which

18-443039/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

we all embarked 17 years ago. In that objective, there
must be no space whatsoever for seeing Afghanistan as
a site of danger and a battle ground for proxy warfare,
but rather as a platform of cooperation and cordiality by
virtue of location and strategic perspective.
As we approach the new year, two issues are crucially
important for our shared success. First, the political
transition must be transparent, inclusive, embraced
by the Afghan people and lead to the strengthening
of our national unity and political stability. We look
forward to the completion of the transition, which
will give birth to a new and re-energized Parliament
and Government. Secondly, in relation to the peace
process, its outcome should provide the basis for
durable peace, while preserving our many democratic
gains across various spectrums and, above all, ensure
that our country remains on the trajectory of progress,
democracy and development. We count on the support
of the Council and all of our international partners for
our joint success.
Let me end with a note of thanks and gratitude
to the outgoing members of the Council — Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden.
We are particularly grateful to the Permanent Mission
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the United
Nations for all its efforts as penholder on Afghanistan
in the Security Council this year. We enjoyed a great
level of collaboration between our two Permanent
Missions on all relevant issues related to the Council’s
work on Afghanistan. We also thank Kazakhstan for
facilitating the Council visit to Afghanistan in January
and for playing a positive role in the peace, security
and development of Afghanistan and the region within
the Council.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the new members of the Security Council — Belgium,
the Dominican Republic, Germany, Indonesia and
South Africa. We look forward to working closely with
them during their tenure on the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to those Council members who wish to
make statements.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Umarov of
Kazakhstan for his annual briefing on the excellent
work of the Security Council Committee established
10/43

17/12/2018

pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I would also like
to express my gratitude to Ms. Haress for sharing
her in-depth analysis and valuable recommendations,
as well as to Ambassador Saikal for his insightful
statement. I also wish to thank him for the kind words
he expressed regarding our penholdership, which I shall
credit my team for, as they did all the hard work.
In previous debates the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has always stressed the need for an integrated and
inclusive approach to the challenges in Afghanistan.
With that in mind, I will focus on three issues: first,
human rights and the rule of law; secondly, the elections;
and, thirdly, peace.
This month we celebrated 70 years of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Under Taliban rule,
human rights were denied to most of the Afghan people.
Seventeen years since the end of brutal Taliban
rule, a great deal of progress has been made, but many
challenges remain, as our briefers pointed out. The
Afghan people cannot enjoy many of the fundamental
rights enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. We support
the efforts of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to work closely with all Afghan
institutions in overcoming challenges relating to those
rights. That includes a justice system that is able to
fully implement the progress the country has made
in legislative reform and in constitutional provisions
guaranteeing women’s rights and the elimination of
violence against women.
The security situation also constitutes a major
obstacle for safeguarding fundamental rights. In that
regard, we are concerned about the continuously high
level of civilian casualties. The deliberate targeting
of civilians by anti-Government forces is entirely
unacceptable; we condemn it in the strongest terms.
An estimated 4 million Afghans contributed to
shaping the future of Afghanistan by casting their
vote in the parliamentary elections in October. They
sent a very hopeful and powerful message. We hope
the turnout for the presidential elections will prove to
be even higher, with further increased participation by
youth and women.
The parliamentary elections showed that
improvements must be made to the electoral process.
The Afghan Government and the Independent Election
Commission will have to do their utmost to ensure that
the presidential elections planned for 2019 take place in
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

an orderly and credible fashion. We strongly urge them
to implement the lessons learned, and we call on the
United Nations Development Programme and UNAMA
to support the process. There must be improvements
in the implementation of biometric verification, the
training of election staff and voter education.
Also, the Independent Election Commission and
Electoral Complaints Commission both have their
respective roles and mandates, which are separate yet
interdependent. It is important that both institutions
work together towards the common goal of organizing
credible, legitimate and free and fair elections. All
stakeholders across the political spectrum need to engage
in political campaigning in a constructive and peaceful
way, while upholding the highest democratic standards.
Peace is possible, and the moment is now. We
urge the Taliban to reciprocate the offer of the Afghan
Government to engage in direct peace negotiations.
We commend President Ghani for his courageous
leadership in preparation for negotiations. There is
no alternative to an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process, supported by UNAMA and the
international community.
Besides agreeing on new benchmarks for the
important implementation of reforms, the Geneva
communiqué once more reiterated the support of the
international community for peace in Afghanistan. But
peace should not roll back the progress made over the
past 17 years, and can never come at the expense of the
fundamental rights of all Afghans.
A new generation of Afghans is knocking on the door
of a new Afghanistan — young, educated and talented
women and men who do not want to return to the dark
period of clerical rule. That was put on clear display by
Ramiz Bakhtiar, the first Afghan youth representative
to the United Nations, whom we invited to brief the
Council in September (see S/PV.8354). Ramiz was
elected as part of a joint initiative by Afghanistan and
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. It was also reflected
on 8 March (see S/PV.8199), when many members of the
Council underscored the importance of the women and
peace and security agenda in Afghanistan, a message
that was reinforced by the fact that the majority of
Council members at that meeting were represented by
female leaders.
The voice of Afghanistan’s people is clear: we need a
workable peace deal. That will require political courage
on the part of all the parties involved; it will require

S/PV. 8426

perseverance; and it will require the unity of effort of
the Council. That unity of effort is something that we, as
penholder this year, have consistently strived towards.
By acting collectively and in an agile manner, the
Council was able to give clear guidance and messaging
on important developments in Afghanistan, including
with regard to the peace process, the elections, the
reform efforts and the many terrorist attacks affecting
the daily lives of the Afghan people. Outside the
Council, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
to focus on those important themes and challenges.
They need to be carefully addressed along the difficult
road towards the sustainable peace and development
that the people of Afghanistan so rightfully deserve.
Finally, I want to thank both Ambassador Saikal
and Special Representative Yamamoto personally,
as well as their respective teams, for their excellent
cooperation over the past year. They can count on our
continued support, including outside the Council.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like now to
take the floor in my national capacity.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto for his briefing and personal
contribution to achieving peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan. We commend the work and dedication
of his qualified staff. We are also grateful to UnderSecretary-General Fedotov for his comprehensive
update, and we express gratitude to Ms. Ghizaal
Haress from, the Independent Constitution Oversight
Commission, and to my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Saikal, for
their statements.
Today we are delivering our final statement as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council under
the agenda entitled “The situation in Afghanistan”. As
the President of Kazakhstan, His Excellency Nursultan
Nazarbayev, noted in his policy address to the Security
Council, Afghanistan has been one of the main
priorities during our work at the Security Council. We
will continue to advocate for peace in our brotherly
country, both in the General Assembly and regional
organizations, and bilaterally after our membership of
the Council ends.
During our membership in the Security Council
we tried to focus the Council’s attention on solving the
Afghan conflict to establish peace in that country and
to achieve progress and prosperity in the entire region.
We organized two visits to Afghanistan, which was

18-4430311/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

already mentioned. The first was in October 2017 by the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities. The second
visit was a Security Council visit in January. We also
held a ministerial debate in January (see S/PV.8162)
under the agenda item “Building regional partnership
in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link
security and development”. Kazakhstan also initiated
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2018/2,
on Afghanistan and Central Asia. Those initiatives
helped Security Council members better understand
the current situation in Afghanistan and seek ways to
solve it.
Kazakhstan welcomes the parliamentary elections
in Afghanistan, which were held at the end of October.
It was an important milestone in the county’s path to a
more democratic State. At the same time, we express our
concern at the increase in violence during the electoral
period. We agree with the Secretary-General on the
need to draw lessons from the electoral process and take
appropriate measures during the upcoming presidential
elections next year, both in terms of organization and
security. It is important that all political stakeholders
take responsibility for the process.
Kazakhstan fully supports the efforts of the
international community to assist Afghanistan. In that
regard, we welcome the recent Geneva Ministerial
Conference and its joint communiqué. We will continue
to support the Kabul process, regional structures and
initiatives, as well as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process
and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan.
We commend our Central Asian partners for
holding the Tashkent conference in March, as well as
their efforts under the Moscow format. We also take
note of the importance of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group and the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity, in addition to the Resolute Support Mission.
We co-sponsored resolution 73/88, on Afghanistan,
which was recently adopted by the General Assembly.
However, all the efforts of the international community
must be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned in order to
be successful.
12/43

17/12/2018

Despite considerable measures taken by the
Government of Afghanistan, the security situation
remains volatile. We are concerned about the increase in
the number of victims as a result of large-scale attacks
by anti-Government forces and terrorists, including
those using improvised explosive devices and suicide
bombings. We recognize the serious problems with
the high-level of civilian casualties, including women
and children, as a result of air strikes. We are worried
about the ongoing process of recruiting young men and
women for terrorist organizations, as well as incidents
of abductions and sexual abuse of children and attacks
on schools and medical institutions, during the current
reporting period. We welcome the joint efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
UNICEF in addressing those issues.
We remain deeply alarmed by the growing presence
of militants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in northern Afghanistan. Despite the losses they
suffered, especially in Jowzjan province, the threat
posed to the Central Asian countries by their destructive
activities remains significant. ISIL militants continue
recruiting combatants, including from the countries of
the wider region.
The drug problem persists in Afghanistan, even
though the years 2017 to 2018 saw a decline in drug
production as a result of the drought, per the latest
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in November. The drought affected many areas
of Afghanistan and led to lower opium prices. In that
regard, we believe it is important to offer farmers
alternative ways of growing crops in order to reduce
their involvement in the production and manufacture of
narcotics in the future.
We are convinced that close economic cooperation
among countries of the region and the integration of
Afghanistan into the region will enhance stability
and facilitate the Afghan reconciliation process. It
will help create new opportunities for young Afghans
and reduce their participation in organized crime and
opium production, which, in turn, will have a positive
impact on the situation in the country and in the wider
region. We propose the promotion of an integrated
three-pronged strategy for Afghanistan based on the
following principles.
The first is strengthening the nexus between
security and development. That means that investment
in trade, transit routes, transport, and infrastructure
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

development should be seen as assets in promoting
stability through enhanced connectivity. We are
confident that projects approved by Central Asian
countries and Afghanistan, such as the TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline, the Central
Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project power line and other planned railways and
highways, as well as the Lapis Lazuli Corridor and the
Belt and Road Initiative, can lead to economic growth
and prosperity, which would inevitably strengthen
security and stability in Afghanistan. We note with
satisfaction the improved World Bank ranking for
Afghanistan’s investment climate going from 183 to
167 due to the ease of doing business. That indicates
progress toward the goals of the transformation decade
and economic growth.
The second principle is revamping the regional
approach. As threats today are transboundary, their
resolution requires concerted efforts, which also
happens to be more cost-effective than a countryspecific approach. Central Asia is today able to help
Afghanistan mitigate its challenges and increase its
connectivity to the world economy. Pursuing a regional
approach is the way forward to success.
The third principle is enhancing the role of
the United Nations by improving the capacity of
its agencies to coordinate and operate effectively
as one United Nations. That requires a revision of
practices both at Headquarters and in the field — a
streamlining that is ever more important in the light
of the diminishing development aid. We reiterate the
importance of enhancing the efficiency, transparency
and accountability of the work of the United Nations
in Afghanistan and Central Asia through enhanced
coordination and cooperation.
We also call on donors to increase their contribution
to peace and development in and around Afghanistan.
Kazakhstan is working on the establishment of a United
Nations regional centre in Almaty to ensure coordinated
support to the countries of the region in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. In that regard, we urge
the United Nations and its country offices to participate
in that regional development strategy for the benefit of
Afghanistan and the region. For its part, Kazakhstan
intends to host a high-level meeting of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe on Afghanistan
in 2019. The goal of the meeting is to develop regional
partnerships and discuss the link between security
and development.

S/PV. 8426

Kazakhstan attaches particular importance to the
role of women in conflict resolution. In that regard, we
organized a regional conference in Astana in September
entitled “Empowering Women in Afghanistan”.
The conference focused on sustainable economic
growth in Afghanistan through empowering Afghan
women, including in the business sector, and regional
cooperation with an increased focus on education. The
European Union, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan intend to
launch a joint project in 2019 aimed at educating Afghan
women in universities in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.
The project will be based on the success of our own
programme, with a total budget of $50 million. Thanks
to that programme, around 1,000 Afghan students are
studying in our universities.
Kazakhstan has made extensive investments in
the development of regional transport infrastructure
and continues to provide financial, technical and
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan supports the principle
of solving the problems of Afghanistan on the basis
of mutual benefit. We will continue our work with
regional and international partners to bolster stability
in the region. I would also like to thank all the members
of the Security Council for their fruitful cooperation
on the Afghan dossier and express our hope that in the
years to come we will continue to work collectively to
bring peace and stability to Afghanistan.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the outcomes of the Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan, held three weeks ago,
where the international community reaffirmed its
long-term commitment to a peaceful, prosperous and
self-reliant Afghanistan. At the Geneva conference,
Afghanistan’s international partners underscored their
commitment to supporting the peace process. We also
agreed on the need to look beyond peace negotiations
to begin planning for the broader economic agenda
required for lasting peace.
Underscoring the priority President Trump places
on achieving a durable peace agreement in Afghanistan,
Secretary of State Pompeo appointed Ambassador
Zalmay Khalilzad as the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation to lead
the efforts of the United States Government to bring an
end to the Afghan conflict. In appointing Ambassador
Khalilzad at this time, the United States is sending a
clear message that we believe peace in Afghanistan is

18-4430313/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

possible. Now is the time for the parties to the conflict
and the broader international community to seize this
opportunity for peace.
While we are regularly reminded of the challenge
security environment in Afghanistan and the heavy
toll of the ongoing conflict on the Afghan people,
we have also seen some encouraging signs that point
to prospects for peace. We call on the Taliban to
establish an authoritative team of negotiators to engage
in inter-Afghan talks with the Afghan Government
and other Afghans. To fully seize that opportunity,
we welcome the decision taken by Afghanistan’s
partners — and reflected in the Geneva conference
joint communiqué — to accelerate our collaboration
on the socioeconomic requirements for peace. We urge
all of our fellow donors, development partners and all
stakeholders to prioritize the development on an action
plan for a broad-based programme of post-settlement
economic initiatives. That includes a return of Afghan
capital, increased Afghan and foreign investment, job
creation and enhanced regional economic integration.
We thank the World Bank for its key role in working
to make the plan a reality. Such a commitment requires
broad-based collaboration and can be sustained only
through effective burden-sharing among donors,
Afghan stakeholders and the broader international
community
In addition to lending support to Afghanistan’s
peace process, the United States also remains committed
to supporting preparations for the presidential elections
to ensure that they are transparent and credible. We
were pleased to witness millions of Afghans exercise
their right to vote in October’s parliamentary elections
despite the security challenges. In advance of the
presidential election, we believe it will be important
for the Independent Election Commission to address
technical issues based on lessons learned from the
parliamentary elections. We also note the importance
of conducting credible investigations into allegations of
electoral fraud. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan plays a critical role in supporting
Afghanistan’s electoral process and coordinating donor
assistance. We urge the Mission to continue to prioritize
its efforts to bolster the capabilities of the Afghan
Election Commission to ensure that the presidential
election is as credible and transparent as possible.
Regardless of which candidate ultimately
prevails, the United States will remain committed to
working with the Afghan people and the next Afghan
14/43

17/12/2018

Government on areas of mutual interest, including
the fight against terrorism, promoting the rule of law
and inclusive democracy, protecting human rights and
increasing economic prosperity.
On security, the United States is deeply concerned
that violence in parts of Afghanistan remains at
unacceptably high levels. Despite the challenging
environment, the United States and our NATO
partners remain committed to strengthening the
professionalization and ability of the Afghan security
forces to protect the people of Afghanistan. Indeed,
building that capacity in a way that prioritizes longterm sustainability and ensures that Afghanistan’s
security forces are inclusive and representative of the
Afghan population is an essential element in laying the
groundwork for long-term peace.
The United States also supports the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) and encourages Member
States to fully implement their sanctions obligations.
Implementation is key for sanctions to be an
effective tool for achieving peace and reconciliation
in Afghanistan.
We also thank the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime for again providing a valuable report on the
status of opium production in Afghanistan. Despite
the reduction in production in 2018, it is clear that the
opium challenge in Afghanistan remains acute and
will require dedicated focus in the months and years
ahead. Our collective approach to addressing that
complex challenge must remain broad. Direct efforts
to scale back production, including eradication, must
be part of the solution. At the same time, we must
also focus on supporting Afghan law enforcement
and criminal justice agencies, increasing access to
evidence-based treatment for substance abuse, and
perhaps, most importantly, supporting efforts to help
Afghan farmers develop alternative, licit livelihoods.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
advance the implementation of its national drug control
strategy and national drug action plan. We also ask our
fellow donors to consider ways in which we can support
those efforts.
The United States welcomes this opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to the long-term peace and
prosperity of Afghanistan and to the Afghan people.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to sincerely
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

Yamamoto. I would like to say how much we appreciate
his update on the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like
to thank Executive Director Fedotov and Ambassador
Umarov for their briefings. I would like to point out
how much we appreciate the presence and input today
of Commissioner Haress and, as always, the visionary
intervention by the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Saikal.
We welcome the renewed efforts towards a
political settlement in Afghanistan. We fully support
the invitation of President Ghani to unconditional
peace talks and continue to urge the Taliban to engage
constructively in talks with the Afghan Government.
As we have heard, it is critical that the peace process
continue to be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led and that
it be inclusive. That means that it should include groups
that do not traditionally have a strong voice in society,
including ethnic minorities. The full and effective
participation of women is fundamental. With twothirds the population under the age of 30, youth must
also have a central role in any agreement on the future
of Afghanistan. Ms. Haress has eloquently set out why
that all matters.
Strong and cohesive international support will
continue to be needed. We urge all stakeholders,
and especially Afghanistan’s neighbours, to engage
constructively. The Kabul process, under the leadership
of the Afghan Government, is the vehicle that
international initiatives should feed into. UNAMA has
an important role to play in supporting current efforts,
not least to help ensure that the peace process is as
inclusive as possible and that its outcome upholds the
achievements of the past 17 years with regard to human
rights and fundamental freedoms, notably of women.
The social gains of past years must be preserved and
built upon. As one of Afghanistan’s largest and most
long-standing development partners, those are issues
Sweden will be considering carefully as we calibrate
our very substantial development cooperation with
Afghanistan going forward.
The Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
last month was a welcome opportunity for the
international community to take stock and assess
progress. Reports that the anti-corruption framework
is improving were encouraging, and it is now important
to move forward with implementation. As stated in
the communiqué issued at the Geneva Conference, the
continued delivery of mutually agreed commitments

S/PV. 8426

will be essential for sustained international support.
UNAMA also has a key role to play in supporting that
reform agenda.
The timely conduct of inclusive, credible and
transparent elections is imperative for stability and
for strengthening Afghan democracy. The recent
parliamentary elections demonstrated the commitment
of Afghans to democracy, as millions turned out
to vote across the country, braving obstacles and
defying serious security threats. There were, however,
serious operational and organizational shortcomings
that put the credibility of democratic institutions at
risk. It is therefore crucial that preparations for next
year’s presidential elections be improved at all levels.
Responsible institutions must draw necessary lessons
and address unresolved issues without delay. UNAMA’s
capacity-building efforts and technical assistance
to the electoral process are vital. We also encourage
close cooperation with UN-Women to promote the
participation of women in the elections.
Cooperation with UN-Women and other actors is
also important for the implementation of the national
action plan on women and peace and security, which
contains a framework for women’s active participation.
It now needs to be integrated into existing national
programmes, not least into their budgets. The progress
made in strengthening the role of women over the past
two decades must not be lost. Ms. Ghizaal Haress made
a very compelling appeal on that issue today. It is not
a side issue. It is central to the future of Afghanistan
and powerful forces are working against it. UNAMA
also has a critical role to play in those efforts, and
we welcome the attention given to that issue in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1092), including the
use of gender disaggregated data.
We share the deep concern of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation. The continuous
attacks in Kabul and around the country, including
targeted attacks on schools, religious minorities and
journalists, have increased the number of civilian
casualties, not least among children. Severe drought
has caused food insecurity at emergency levels
for 3.6 million people. Such climate-related food
insecurity is also forcing people to leave their homes,
thereby increasing the number of people displaced.
Six million people are now in need of humanitarian
assistance — almost double the needs compared to last
year. The very clear call of the Special Representative

18-4430315/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

of the Secretary-General this morning on all parties to
reduce the level of violence and protect civilians must
be echoed by all of us here at the Security Council.
The humanitarian response must also be stepped
up and closer coordination between humanitarian and
development actors is needed to address root causes.
Safe and unimpeded humanitarian access must be
granted, in accordance with international humanitarian
law. Attacks against humanitarian and development
workers are unacceptable. We urge all parties to the
conflict to comply with their obligations and ensure
the protection of civilians, as well as the protection
of humanitarian and health-care workers and medical
facilities. The Arria Formula meeting on Friday will
offer an opportunity to discuss the protection of healthcare facilities in more detail with a representative
of Afghanistan.
As Chair of the local Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in Kabul, we are concerned about
the continued lack of accountability for the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers, as well as the sexual
exploitation of children. We welcome the leadership
of UNAMA in more actively addressing the issue, as
serious challenges remain.

17/12/2018

I would like to start by congratulating every
Afghan who participated in the October parliamentary
elections, in the face of violence and intimidation. I
think they reflect what the Afghan representative and
the Dutch representative have both said. There is a
new generation of Afghans knocking on the door of a
new Afghanistan. Peace needs to be durable and must
increase political, social and economic opportunities
for every Afghan, as the Afghan Ambassador made
clear. I think it is a message the Taliban needs to heard
loud and clear from all members of the Council. The
Taliban lives in an Afghanistan of the past, which no
one wants to see restored. I think the Council can really
help to make that message understood, loud and clear.
To that end, we call on the Taliban to recognize that in
the elections, the wishes of Afghans across the country
to have a say in their country’s future and their strong
desire for a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan have
been heard loud and clear. In contrast, we are forced
once again to condemn intimidation and attacks
on civilians.

Since 2001, Afghanistan has rebuilt its political
system, State institutions, infrastructure and economy,
with real improvements for its people. However, serious
challenges of insecurity, poverty and the rule of law
persist. The civilian toll of the conflict continues to be
appallingly high. Finding a political solution is more
urgent than ever. We may now have a rare opportunity
and must not miss it. The renewed commitment of
the international community will be important and
UNAMA will continue to have a critical role to play.
Sweden, as a steadfast supporter over three decades,
will continue to support Afghanistan as it implements
its reform agenda and takes other essential steps on its
path towards development and inclusive, sustainable
and equitable peace.

A number of speakers look forward to next year’s
presidential elections. It is important that the Afghan
people get the transparent and credible presidential
elections that they deserve next year. As today’s
debate and the report have shown, there are a number
of technical and operational challenges that affect
the elections and that need to be ironed out. Also, the
lessons learned and the necessary reforms must be
implemented so that those issues are resolved before
the next presidential elections. In that context, I want to
welcome the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for those efforts
and its work to capture lessons learned. As part of that
process, I would urge the Mission to consider what
more UNAMA could do and what additional resources
it needs to strengthen its support ahead of the 2019
elections. I would ask through you, Mr. President, for
an update from the United Nations on that issue in the
new year.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
sincerely thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing on the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1092). I would
also like to thank Mr. Fedotov and Ambassador Umarov
for their briefings today. I join other colleagues in
thanking Ms. Ghizaal Haress for her insights into the
elections process. As other have said, it is very helpful
to have her here as we discuss today’s important issue.

Turning to peace, recent developments include the
efforts of the new United States Special Representative
for Afghanistan Reconciliation, Mr. Khalilzad, who I
used to know in this Chamber. His appointment, the
creation of a high advisory board for peace and the
announcement of an official Afghanistan negotiation
team offer a real opportunity to move the Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process forward. To give it
the best chance of success, it is vital that all other peace

16/43

18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8426

efforts underpin Afghan efforts in a way that reinforces
the indigenous progress. Any parallel process would
simply risk undermining progress and empowering
the Taliban. I think that General Assembly resolution
73/88, on the situation in Afghanistan, made clear that
States Members of the United Nations want efforts to
be driven by Afghanistan. Furthermore, they want all
other efforts to reinforce the Afghan Government’s
efforts in that respect. It is critical that the international
community give that its full support. It is also critical
that the countries in the region give it their full support.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting. We also thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Ambassador Khairat Umarov, as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), concerning the
sanctions on the Taliban, and Ms. Ghizaal Haress
for their important and comprehensive briefings.
I also welcome the participation of our colleague
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, in the meeting.

I want to take a moment to commend the efforts
of President Ghani and his Government so far and
to encourage them, as other speakers have done, to
focus on inclusivity, particularly of women and youth,
and on ensuring engagement at the community level
in electoral and peace processes. I think that what
Ms. Haress said about women’s rights and human rights
is absolutely vital in that connection. It is important
that we think about how we might approach supporting
Afghanistan’s reform and development after any peace
settlement, even if that seems to be some time away at
this point.

I would like to take this opportunity to renew the
support of the State of Kuwait to all efforts made by
Mr. Yamamoto and the members of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
given the difficult situation there. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/1092) on the
situation in Afghanistan during the past three months.

Today’s briefing by Ambassador Umarov on the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) reminds us of the important
role sanctions play in the pursuit of peace. However,
for a sanctions regime to be credible and effective,
it is essential that relevant procedures be followed at
all times. In particular, any request for travel-ban
exemptions need to be submitted in a timely manner.
Others have mentioned the humanitarian situation.
We join them in worrying very much about the dire
situation, and the food insecurity issue should only add
impetus to the peace process. We call on all partners
to do more, not just to respond to the current crisis,
particularly the ongoing drought, but to help strengthen
the resilience of Afghanistan’s most vulnerable people
in the long term.
I think we all know that 2019 will be a critical year
for Afghanistan. There is a significant opportunity for
progress on its path towards peace and democracy. The
United Kingdom is fully committed to supporting the
Special Representative, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the Afghan Government as
they continue their important work to help the Afghan
people, the Government and the peace process.

We hold our meeting today following the
parliamentary elections held two months ago in
Afghanistan. I am pleased to congratulate the
Government and the people of Afghanistan for
successfully holding those historic elections, where
the Afghan people showed their courage in the face
of challenges, threats and acts of violence by going to
the polling centres to choose their representatives in
the Parliament.
To accompany that historic achievement, the
Security Council and the international community not
only followed the elections, but we as members of the
Council also welcomed and supported those elections
through press statements. Last November, the Geneva
Ministerial Conference was held to support Afghanistan,
and reaffirmed without any doubt that the international
community continues to stand with Afghanistan.
As this year is coming to an end, we must address
the issue that concerns us the most in Afghanistan,
namely, the peace and reconciliation process to end
four decades of security and political instability, which
have had an adverse impact on the life of Afghan
citizens. The delicate political situation in Afghanistan
requires that all wise people and political party leaders
in Afghanistan give primacy to national interests over
party interests. They must intensify efforts to ensure
the success of upcoming presidential elections in
April 2019 in order to guarantee a better future and a
decent life for Afghan citizens after long years of war
and conflict.

18-4430317/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

The Security Council must also continuously
intensify efforts to support the political process and
encourage Afghanistan to hold presidential elections
as scheduled. In that regard, I join my colleague the
representative of the United Kingdom in welcoming
the appointment by the United States of Mr. Zalmay
Khalilzad as the Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation. We also read with relief the content of
the report of the Secretary-General on the effective and
positive role of that appointment on revitalizing the
peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. We
wish Mr. Khalilzad success in that vital mission.
We also express our relief for the efforts made by
UNAMA field offices, which have supported peace
initiatives in 11 provinces, including supporting the
role of the youth in the peace process and settling
sectarian conflicts.
In the area of security, we share the concern of the
Secretary-General regarding the ongoing instability and
the growing impact of the armed conflict on civilians,
especially the continuous increase in the number of
civilian casualties as a result of suicide and aerial
attacks. In that regard, we renew our call to all parties
to the conflict to honour their obligations by virtue of
international human rights law and to immediately stop
targeting unarmed civilians.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait renews its
support to Afghanistan in achieving permanent peace
and stability by reaching a diplomatically negotiated
settlement. We stand with Afghanistan in its war
against terrorism. We also believe that the diplomatic
efforts must be accompanied by an investment in
education. True reform in any society begins with a
real investment in comprehensive education system
that raises a promising and educated generation that is
free from the clutches of sectarianism and contributes
to building a safe nation for all. There is a famous
Chinese saying on the importance of education that best
describes my point, and with it I will end my statement
today. If you are planning for a year, sow rice; if you
are planning for a decade, plant trees; and if you are
planning for a lifetime, educate people.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank all
the briefers — Executive Director Fedotov, Ambassador
Umarov and Ms. Haress — for having shared their
comprehensive analyses on the current situation in
Afghanistan. Let me also express my gratitude to Special
Representative Yamamoto for presenting the report of
18/43

17/12/2018

the Secretary-General (S/2018/1092) as well as for all
the work of the team of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, which is helping to promote
political dialogue, foster economic development and
enhance good governance.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later in today’s debate by the Chargé d’affaires
of the Delegation of the European Union.
Let me make three points: on parliamentary
elections, the development of Afghanistan, with special
attention to climate change, and the security situation
in the country, including the threat posed by landmines.
Poland welcomes all the positive developments
that have occurred in Afghanistan in recent months.
The parliamentary elections, conducted under difficult
circumstances, demonstrated the strong commitment
of Afghanistan’s citizens, especially women and young
people. The determination of millions of Afghans to
exercise their civil rights was proof of the strength of
the foundations of the democratic procedures used. We
encourage the Afghan National Unity Government and
all relevant institutions to continue their efforts aimed
at improving the voting process during the upcoming
presidential elections.
Poland has been a strong supporter of the nexus
between security and development. In this regard,
we took an active part in the Geneva Ministerial
Conference, which expressed solidarity with the
Afghan people and their Government in its efforts to
promote prosperity and stimulate development. It also
allowed Afghanistan to show progress and commitment
in its pursuit of structural reforms. In this context, we
welcome the commitment of the Afghan Government
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the progress made towards achieving Afghanistan’s
sustainable development goals.
Climate change affects the security situation of
many regions, including the region where Afghanistan
is located. Extreme weather events, droughts,
desertification and water scarcity can lead to the
escalation of local and regional conflicts and act as a
threat multiplier. Therefore, we must emphasize the
importance of mitigation and adaptation to climate
change and strengthen countries’ resilience in that
regard. Proper climate-related risk assessments based
on reliable data from the field and better management
strategies are needed to effectively address these threats.
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

As a strong contributor to the NATO engagement
in Afghanistan, we are deeply concerned by the
recent developments in Ghazni province, which have
been experienced as a heroic struggle between the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and
anti-Government elements. The deterioration of the
security situation in the western areas of Ghazni
province during November as a result of large-scale
Taliban attacks is especially disturbing.
Poland encourages the Afghan Government to
restore stable security conditions, which will allow
the local population to live normal lives. We also
confirm our commitment to supporting the Afghan
forces through training and advisory activities in
the framework of the Resolute Support Mission, led
by NATO.
Despite the efforts undertaken by the Afghan
authorities, the security situation strongly affects the
civilian population. We are particularly concerned about
the sad plight of children, who continue to suffer from
the violence in the country. We welcome an enhanced
focus on children and armed conflict. However, in order
for us to see substantial and sustainable improvement,
words must be translated into action. In addition,
ensuring respect for humanitarian principles, human
rights and international humanitarian law should always
be an integral part of the United Nations Mission.
Poland remains concerned over the growing number
of civilian casualties, including women and children,
resulting from landmines and improvised explosive
devices. Afghanistan is one of the countries most
affected by this type of contamination. In this context,
let me welcome the country’s efforts aimed at addressing
the threat posed by landmines and underline the role of
mine action in supporting sustainable development.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Umarov for his dedication to the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). We believe that the Committee
is a useful tool that can contribute to reconciliation in
Afghanistan. However, we would like to underline that
the procedures applied to its work have to be followed
strictly by all States Members of the United Nations
in order for the peace process to be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned.
Finally, let me express our full support for the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan aimed
at bringing about lasting peace and stability in the

S/PV. 8426

country. We encourage all parties to the internal and
regional dialogue to strengthen their commitments in
order to achieve that ambitious objective.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his very useful briefing, in
particular on peace efforts and the electoral process. I
would also like to thank the Executive Director of United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his
briefing on the fight against narcotics in Afghanistan, a
very important subject for France. I thank Ambassador
Umarov for his briefing on the latest activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), a sanctions regime whose
effective implementation is of major importance in the
context of ongoing peace efforts. Finally, allow me to
express my special thanks to Ms. Ghizaal Haress for
her insight into the current elections and institutional
issues and the crucial importance of the political
participation of women and young people. I will make
three observations.
My first point involves elections. The holding of
parliamentary elections in October illustrated the
progress made in recent years. The elections, in which
women took a large part, which is to be welcomed,
showed the desire for peace of the Afghan people, who
mobilized courageously, despite the threats and attacks.
With a view to the 2019 presidential elections, the
consolidation of a free, credible and transparent electoral
process must continue. The weaknesses identified
during the parliamentary elections must be corrected.
In particular, the Independent Election Commission
must continue to work to ensure the widest possible
participation of the population in the elections and to
create the conditions for a fair, free and transparent
election. Indeed, it is trust in credible institutions and
legitimate representatives that guarantees peace. France
is very committed to ensuring that the European Union
continues to support these efforts, as well as the United
Nations and NATO, in order to help Afghan forces
prevent and combat terrorism and all forms of violence,
the objective of which is to prevent the Afghan people
from expressing their free sovereign will.
My second point is about peace efforts. The
seriousness of the security situation and the human
cost of the conflict should encourage renewed efforts
to achieve lasting peace in Afghanistan. The peace
process must be inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghanled, and must take the form of a negotiated peace with

18-4430319/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

the Taliban, with a view to achieving lasting stability.
This requires both sides to express acceptable and
necessary conditions for an integrated exercise of
power within the institutional framework provided for
by the Constitution.
Progress has been made, thanks in particular to the
initiative of President Ghani, who recently proposed a
road map. These gestures deserve to be commended,
and France reiterates its call to the Taliban to respond
to the peace offer on the table. It is also important that
women and young people can participate in a direct and
meaningful way. Finally, it is essential that all States in
the region unambiguously support the process and that
the international community’s efforts be both concerted
and not in competition with one another.
My third point relates to the fight against drugs.
The decrease seen this year is only temporary. We
remain concerned about the high levels of poppy
cultivation and opium production in Afghanistan. The
continued drug trafficking fuels the Taliban insurgency
and terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant-Khorasan Province. It is also a public
health issue. Poppy cultivation and drug trafficking in
the country threaten the lives of thousands of Afghans.
We are aware of the magnitude of the task and the need
for a collective approach in the context of the principle
of shared responsibility. We count on the Afghan
Government to continue the important efforts needed to
curb the production and trafficking of drugs, with the
support of UNODC and the international community,
particularly as part of the Paris Pact initiative. The
situation calls for an ambitious response and reforms in
the areas of governance and the fight against corruption
and organized crime.
In conclusion, allow me to thank the delegation
of the Netherlands for its significant efforts and its
clear and coherent stance on the Afghan issue during
this year. We would also like to reaffirm France’s full
support for Afghanistan in this pivotal period and for
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in support of the Afghan authorities.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the importance that
France attaches to the unity of the international
community in support of Afghanistan. More than
ever, we must remain united to support Afghanistan’s
path to peace, stability, democracy and economic and
social development. Together with the international
community, we reaffirmed that message of unity at the
20/43

17/12/2018

Geneva conference on 28 November, and we must now
live up to it.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Ambassador Kairat Umarov, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), and Ms. Ghizaal Haress,
member of the Independent Commission for Overseeing
the Implementation of the Constitution, not only for
their enlightening briefings but also for their tireless
efforts to achieve a lasting peace in Afghanistan. We
express our sincere appreciation to them.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea will look at the
situation in Afghanistan from three aspects — national,
regional and international — because we believe that
genuine tripartite cooperation is the most effective
inducement to achieve the peace and security to which
the Afghan people aspire.
At the national level, unfortunately, security
continues to be the key challenge for Afghanistan.
Improving its security is one of the main requirements
for achieving stability and long-term socioeconomic
development. We continue to note with extreme concern
the effects of the high level of violence to which the
Afghan people, in particular civilians, are subjected.
In that regard, we firmly condemn all deliberate and
abhorrent attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
that occurred during the reporting period. We urge
the parties to comply with their obligations to protect
civilians from harm. We maintain that all parties to
the conflict must strictly fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law to take all possible
steps in order to prevent attacks against civilian and
civilian infrastructure, as well as the restriction of
humanitarian access.
We would like to mention in particular the
treacherous and barbaric terrorist attack in Kabul on
20 November, which claimed the lives of approximately
55 people and wounded more than 60. While we
reiterate our condemnation and rejection of such acts
in the strongest terms, we also once again express our
deepest condolences to the Government of Afghanistan
and to the families of the victims.
With regard to the political process, we share
the view of Kabul and the Geneva conference that
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

the process must be led and fully owned by Afghans.
By holding parliamentary elections in Afghanistan
in such difficult and threatening circumstances, the
Afghan people once again showed that they wanted to
participate in the democratic process. In that regard,
we wish to take this opportunity to congratulate all
Afghan women and men on their courage in going to
the polls in a climate of terror and constant threats to
exercise their constitutional right to vote and to elect
their representatives. The considerable increase in
the participation of Afghan women by 8 percentage
points as compared to the 2014 elections may seem
insignificant. However, in the light of Afghanistan’s
history, we know that an effort to include women and
also young people in the electoral process is being
made. We call on the Afghan Government to step up
that effort so that women also take part in all stages
of the peace process. As Ms. Aleta Miller, UN-Women
country representative for Afghanistan, said:
“Not only does peace last longer when women
lead and participate in peace processes, but also
women have a right to participate in negotiating
peace in Afghanistan. ... No decisions on the future
of Afghanistan should be made without the full
participation of all citizens affected by that future,
and no peace process will be complete and lasting
without the direct involvement of women.”
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the significant
progress made in the political, economic, social and
governance reform agenda of the Government of
Afghanistan, including the finalization of 10 national
priority programmes, the implementation of farreaching fiscal reforms and the promotion of women’s
participation in public life. Given our concern about the
high level of violence against women and girls, as well
as boys, in Afghanistan reported by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (see S/2018/1092),
we hope that both the establishment of a technical
committee to review the Elimination of Violence
against Women Law of 2009 and the adoption of the
Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework will result,
among other achievements, in stronger and rights-based
legal protection from violence for all Afghan women
and girls, as well as the prosecution of perpetrators
of atrocity crimes against the civilian population,
among others.
We take good note of the successful meetings held
by Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad with various States in an

S/PV. 8426

effort to generate regional support for the Afghan peace
process, as well as the outcomes of those meetings.
At the regional level, Equatorial Guinea
understands that resolving a number of fundamental
issues relating to economic development, security
and stability in Afghanistan depends to a large extent
on the neighbouring countries and their goodwill,
firm resolve and willingness to actively facilitate
national reconciliation and to put an end to violence
in Afghanistan. We therefore attach great importance
to promoting regional cooperation in support of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan. We commend
the efforts being made by some Central Asian countries,
such as Kazakhstan, through bilateral agreements to
contribute to stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan
and to its social and economic development.
On the international front, we welcome the
outcome of the Geneva conference on Afghanistan
held from 27 to 28 November, jointly organized by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations,
which renewed the partnership and cooperation between
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community towards peace, prosperity and self-reliance
in Afghanistan during the Transformation Decade
(2015-2024). We also commend the strong commitment
of the international community to continuing to support
the training, equipping, funding and capacity-building
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
We emphasize that, in order to deal with the threat of
terrorism, there must be a collective commitment to
fighting and overcoming that scourge in the context of
the global counter-terrorism strategy.
In conclusion, we express our concern about
the rampant increase in the production of narcotics.
Narcotics provide significant financial support
for terrorists in Afghanistan. We are aware of
the connection closely linking cultivation, opium
trafficking and terrorism. In that regard, we commend
the counter-narcotics operations carried out by the
Afghan Government, supported by the international
community and in close cooperation with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which resulted in a
high number of narcotics seizures, the arrest of narcotics
traffickers and the closure of heroin laboratories,
among other successful achievements. Accordingly, as
a problem with ramifications at the national, regional
and international levels, we encourage the international
community to continue to assist the Government of

18-4430321/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

17/12/2018

Afghanistan in its national drug control strategy and
action plan.

attacks that blur the arduous path leading towards a
consolidated democracy in Afghanistan will end.

I would be remiss were I not to conclude my statement
by expressing well-deserved praise to Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and his entire team, and
expressing our appreciation to Ambassador Umarov for
sparing no effort in his work as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

We would be remiss if we did not express our deep
concern about the high number of civilian deaths this
year, the large majority of which resulted from terrorist
attacks. The statistics provided by the UNAMA report
on the protection of civilians show that there is a clear
intention on the part extremist armed groups to target
civilians in highly populated areas. We regret that there
were 8,050 civilian casualties between January and
September, which resulted in 2,798 deaths and 5,252
injured. In that regard, we categorically reject the
violent acts perpetrated by extremist armed groups,
which, through the use of improvised explosive
devices, have led to 1,065 deaths and 2,569 injured. We
were saddened that the violence, particularly during
the 20 October parliamentary elections, resulted in
approximately 425 civilian casualties — the greatest
number of casualties in a single day for 2018. In that
regard, we join the Secretary-General in his call on all
parties to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
and to stop such attacks directed against civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I thank all
the briefers for their important briefings today. As this
is the last time during its term on the Security Council
that Bolivia will be speaking in an open meeting on the
subject that brings us together, I reaffirm my country’s
commitment to the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
On behalf of my delegation, I underscore the major
democratic commitment that the people of Afghanistan
have shown in holding the 20 October parliamentary
elections, in which the people participated in a
disciplined manner. Despite several incidents that
could have affected security, they did not prevent
Afghan women and men from going to the polls, as
planned by the Independent Election Commission. We
are pleased to note that, according to the Independent
Election Commission, during the three days of voting,
4,812 polling stations opened and received an estimated
4.2 million voters. Turnout was highest in the provincial
capitals. We stress in particular that, according to the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1092), 30 per
cent of the voters were women.
Without any doubt, the history that is being
rewritten by the people of Afghanistan is marked to a
large extent by their willingness to build a democratic
and secure State fully linked to its neighbours, the
region of Central Asia and the rest of the world for
the sake of its development. We believe, however,
that, in order to achieve that goal, there needs to be a
greater inclusion of women in decision-making at the
Government level and in the economy of Afghanistan.
In that regard, we are optimistic about the clear sign
of democratic commitment shown by Afghan citizens,
especially given that next year — more precisely on
19 April 2019 — presidential elections are scheduled to
be held. We hope that the violent actions and terrorist
22/43

Bolivia welcomed the outcome of the Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan held on 27 and
28 November, which was organized by the Government
of Afghanistan and the United Nations. It renewed the
partnership and cooperation between the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community to
achieve Afghan peace, prosperity and self-reliance. We
also express our satisfaction with the communiqué that
resulted from the Geneva Conference and acknowledged
and reaffirmed the participants’ commitment to an
Afghan-led and -owned peace process with the full and
meaningful participation of women.
Lastly, Bolivia stresses that there is no military
solution to the situation in Afghanistan. We will add
our support to any initiative aimed at fostering an
inclusive dialogue that is framed within respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of that country.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2018/1092) on the situation in Afghanistan and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We appreciate the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

Yamamoto, based on the report, and thank those others
who briefed us on the topic.
Afghanistan continues to faces multiple and
complex challenges to its security, stability and
development. The people continue to pay a heavy price
because of the instability and violence affecting the
country. We remain very concerned by the deliberate
acts of violence that have been directed against civilians,
particularly throughout the electoral process, including
the spike in attacks on electoral and related targets on
20 October, which exceptionally resulted in the highest
number of civilian casualties recorded on a single
day in 2018. Therefore, we condemn in the strongest
terms those recent attacks. Once again, we take this
opportunity to express our sympathy and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Afghanistan for
their suffering and loss of innocent lives.
We reiterate our support for the proposal by
President Ghani for direct negotiations with the Taliban,
which has received broad and strong support from
Afghans and the international community. We also take
note of the international and regional communities’
continued commitment and effort to support the
Afghan peace process, including the various forms
of engagement with the parties to the conflict. The
long-term security and stability of Afghanistan can be
ensured only through a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation and
political process. In that regard, the renewed call made
by the Afghan Government for direct peace talks with
the Taliban is encouraging. However, that will not make
any difference without a genuine response from the
Taliban with regard to the peace process or engagement
in direct peace talks with the Afghan Government
without any preconditions.
We congratulate the Afghan people and
the Government for the holding of democratic
parliamentary and district council elections within the
set time frame despite enormous security challenges.
We also commend the people for their endurance in
exercising their democratic rights amid high-level
security incidents around the election areas throughout
the country. Nevertheless, the number of incidents
witnessed on 20 October is a matter of concern that
could potentially undermine the electoral process. It
could also overshadow the next presidential election,
to be held in April 2019, if no substantive measures
are taken on the early preparation days. We believe
that building the confidence of the Afghan people

S/PV. 8426

in the electoral process through the involvement and
participation of all the relevant stakeholders will be
key to ensuring the timely and successful holding of
the presidential elections. All Afghan stakeholders
have important responsibilities in that regard, and we
hope that they will demonstrate the necessary political
will and commitment to doing their part for the sake of
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Without sustained and inclusive economic growth
and development, Afghanistan cannot effectively
address its peace and security challenges. That is why
the National Unity Government needs coordinated
and comprehensive support from the international
community if it is to advance its political reform and
national development priorities, particularly as they
are envisaged in the Afghanistan National Peace
and Development Framework. It will be vital to
ensure that the international community sustains its
engagement and delivers on its various commitments.
In that regard, we welcomed the joint communiqué of
the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
which acknowledged and reaffirmed the commitment
of participants to an Afghan-led and -owned peace
process with the full and meaningful participation of
women. The joint communiqué also reaffirmed the
international community’s commitment to a postsettlement partnership with Afghanistan, including in
the economic arena. It also underlined the importance
of deepening regional cooperation in every area,
including on the political, security, economic and social
fronts, to the benefit of the whole region.
Finally, the ongoing engagement of the United
Nations in support of the Afghan peace process, as well
as for the country’s social and economic development
and in the areas of humanitarian issues, human rights
and the holding of peaceful and credible presidential
elections, remains very important, and we will continue
to follow developments in that regard. UNAMA’s efforts
to promote and support initiatives for peace talks and
reconciliation, as well as dialogue and support for
social and democratic development, with full respect
for the country’s sovereignty and leadership, remain
very important. We therefore commend its active
engagement with the Government, civil society and the
people of Afghanistan, in line with its mandate.
Since this will be Ethiopia’s last debate on this
topic as a member of the Council, we would like to
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
Special Representative Yamamoto and his team for all

18-4430323/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

17/12/2018

of their dedicated efforts in support of the people and
Government of Afghanistan. We also commend the
Netherlands for its role and efforts as the penholder on
Afghanistan over the past year.

trafficking, promoting alternative development and
combating the transnational organized crime that is
yoked in an evil nexus to terrorist groups in Afghanistan,
as Mr. Fedotov pointed out in his briefing this morning.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
Mr. Yamamoto and Mr. Fedotov’s informative briefings.
We also want to thank Ambassador Kairat Umarov
for his important work as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We
support all of them in their execution of their various
and complementary duties. We are also grateful for
the briefings by Ms. Ghizaal Haress and Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal of Afghanistan.

Finally, we wish to commend the efforts of
international partners in assisting Afghans in their
quest for the peace that has eluded them for so long.
Peru believes that the support of the international
community and neighbouring countries in Central Asia
is crucial to advancing the intra-Afghan dialogue with
a view to building sustainable peace. In that regard,
and in conclusion, we want to commend the convening
at the end of November of the Geneva Ministerial
Conference, which reaffirmed the commitment of
the international community to consolidating peace
and promoting development in Afghanistan. We also
pay tribute to the important work being done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations country team, in line with
their respective mandates, as well as the work of the
Netherlands as penholder on the Afghanistan issue.

Peru continues to closely follow developments in
Afghanistan, which we had the opportunity to visit
at the beginning of this year. We want to commend
the Afghan authorities and the millions of Afghan
women and men who participated in the parliamentary
elections on 20 October. We emphasize that the
large-scale participation of citizens in consolidating
and strengthening democracy is essential to combating
violent extremism and building sustainable peace. In
that regard, we would like to highlight the increase in
the participation of women compared to the presidential
elections of 2014, and we encourage more women and
young people to participate in the political life of the
country. In our view it is very important to ensure that
women exceed 30 per cent of the total numbers of voters
in the presidential elections to be held next April.
However, we condemn the terrorist attacks on the
country’s population and civilian infrastructure, and we
are concerned about the serious political fragmentation
that unfortunately continues to foster instability and
insecurity in the country. In the light of the upcoming
presidential elections, it will be crucial for political
leaders and their supporters to conduct themselves
maturely, avoiding any exacerbation of differences,
fostering a spirit of democratic unity and a rejection
of violence and safeguarding the intra-Afghan dialogue
process in the quest for peace. We also want to underscore
how important it is that the competent authorities work
rapidly and transparently in counting and tabulating
votes. In order to foster the people’s trust, national
institutions must show themselves to be effective in
preventing and avoiding the problems that result from
the kind of technical and logistical deficiencies that
were encountered during the parliamentary elections.
We also underscore the importance of fighting drug
24/43

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his analysis of the processes currently
under way in Afghanistan. We are also grateful for the
briefings by Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), and Ms. Ghizaal Haress. We listened attentively
to the statement by Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, Ambassador
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and we share
many of the opinions in the latest quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1092). For its part, Russia
has the following comments to make.
The Russian Federation strongly and consistently
supports the Afghan people in their desire for a lasting
peace in their country. Russia and Afghanistan are
traditionally linked through friendly relations that
correspond to the national interests of both countries and
contribute to the stable, multidimensional development
of the entire region and the world generally. The
international Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan in
Geneva, in which Russia was a high-level participant,
shows how important peace and stability in Afghanistan
are to the international community.
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

We have been monitoring the tense and unfortunately
continually deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan, a trend that has also been accompanied
by civilian casualties in the Afghan national security
forces, and we want to pay tribute to the memory
and courage of all who have died in the fight against
terrorism. We are still seriously concerned about the
strengthened position of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), which is filling its ranks mainly
by recruiting foreign fighters with combat experience
in Syria and Iraq. The militants remain true to their
goal of increasing their numbers and strengthening
their influence across the country. We are alarmed by
the regular occurrence of major acts of terrorism in
various cities in Afghanistan, including Kabul, whose
victims are Afghan civilians, including women and
children. The adherents of ISIL skilfully combine their
ideological, propaganda and recruitment activities
with their use of information and communications
technology. The jihadists’ expansionist aspirations,
including in northern Afghanistan, are a genuine
threat to the security of our Central Asian partners and
Russia’s southern regions. We want to emphasize that
it is unacceptable to belittle or downplay the threats
emanating from ISIL in Afghanistan. We await answers
to our repeated questions regarding the transportation
of ISIL militants in mysterious unidentified helicopters.
We are closely monitoring the evolving situation
in the fight against drug trafficking. The drug threat
represents a serious problem for the region, the world and
Afghanistan itself. We remain committed to providing
assistance to collective action to combat Afghan drug
trafficking, including with the active participation of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We must
maintain our joint policy of expanding the international
community’s efforts in the fight against this evil. The
practical steps we are taking, including through the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), are
also in line with that approach. Russia remains willing
to provide regular assistance to the global Paris Pact
Initiative, established under the auspices of UNODC
to comprehensively combat the illicit traffic in opiates
from Afghanistan, to the UNODC Regional Programme
for Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries and to
the alternative development project in Badakhshan
province. We intend to continue contributing to the
training of narcotics police from Afghanistan, Pakistan
and the countries of Central Asia. We hope that our
Domodedovo joint project with Japan, which aims to

S/PV. 8426

create a canine unit service for Afghanistan, will be an
important component of the war against drugs there.
We are concerned about the data in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the increase in the number
of civilian casualties, including as a result of the
international coalition’s activities, as well as the level of
losses among the Afghan national security forces in the
current season. We regret to have to conclude that the
17-year large-scale military presence of United States
and NATO contingents has not led to the stabilization
of the military and political situation in the country.
The challenges have only got worse.
Afghanistan is on the threshold of important
political events, including the upcoming elections.
As friends of the Afghan people, we assume that they
should constitute a step towards the country’s unity and
lasting stability.
There can be no military solution to the crisis in
Afghanistan. The only path to resolving it is through
the achievement of a common Afghan agreement
reached by political and diplomatic means. We believe
the negotiation process should be conducted under the
leadership of the Afghans themselves. We affirm our
readiness to provide all possible support to launching
it. That was the goal guiding us when we convened a
second meeting under the Moscow consultations format
on 9 November. We regard that event as a major step
towards developing a genuinely functioning collective
approach to resolving the situation in Afghanistan and
the start of direct inter-Afghan dialogue.
We emphasize the importance of the regional
context for the Afghan settlement, and we want to
particularly highlight the mechanism of the SCOAfghanistan Contact Group in that regard. We see
good potential for enhancing cooperation on counterterrorism and anti-drug efforts between Afghanistan
and the CSTO and recognize UNAMA’s important role
in coordinating international assistance to Afghanistan.
What is happening in Afghanistan confirms that
its accumulated problems require consolidated efforts.
Close international cooperation is now more vital
than ever, especially at the regional level, in order to
transform Afghanistan into a land of sustainable peace,
stability and prosperity. We are ready to continue
working to achieve this goal.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-

18-4430325/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

General Yamamoto and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings and their efforts. I also want to thank
Ambassador Umarov for his briefing. Over the past
two years, under his capable leadership, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) has
done a tremendous amount of useful work, and China
is grateful to him. I have also listened carefully to
Ambassador Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, and Ms. Haress, the representative of
civil society, and thank them for their statements.
China has been following the current political
process and the security and humanitarian situations
in Afghanistan very closely. In the wake of the
parliamentary elections in October, the political process
in the country has entered a new phase. Afghanistan’s
National Unity Government is committed to promoting
socioeconomic development and maintaining peace and
security. The Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
held in Geneva in November adopted a joint communiqué
and the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework,
reaffirming the international community’s steadfast
support to the country in all areas. The international
community should now honour its commitment in
earnest and continue to aid Afghanistan in the following
four areas.
First, Afghanistan must be helped to maintain its
political stability. While the parliamentary elections
were held in October, the results have not yet been
announced. As preparations for next year’s presidential
elections are under way, we hope that the country’s
Independent Election Commission can learn lessons and
draw on its experiences in the parliamentary elections
to strengthen the arrangements for the presidential
elections. All stakeholders across the political
spectrum in Afghanistan should strengthen their unity,
consider the maintenance of national political stability
a shared responsibility and resolve their differences
through dialogue.
Secondly, the international community must help
Afghanistan improve its security environment. The
outbreak of violence on 20 October, the day of the
parliamentary elections, claimed many lives and ended
up becoming the deadliest day of the year. In the first
nine months of this year, fighting inside Afghanistan
resulted in a record number of civilian casualties.
Statistics from the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime also show that drug production in the
country remains high. The international community
should strengthen its coordination and cooperation
26/43

17/12/2018

with a view to effectively implementing the various
Security Council resolutions related to these issues,
and should support the work of the relevant subsidiary
bodies, such as the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011). It should also continue to
support the Afghan national security forces in building
their capacity to respond effectively to threats such as
terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking.
Thirdly, Afghanistan needs help in advancing the
reconciliation process. The Government of Afghanistan
recently again called for unconditional talks with the
Taliban and reorganized its negotiating team. The
international community should support an inclusive
political process that is Afghan-led and -owned, back
the Government’s efforts to promote peace talks;
encourage the Taliban to return to the negotiating
table as soon as possible and give support to the Kabul
process, the Moscow format and other international
mechanisms with a view to making further progress.
Fourthly, we must help Afghanistan achieve selfdriven development. The investment and business
environments in Afghanistan improved in 2018. We
hope that all the country’s political parties will work
together to advance its development in accordance
with Afghanistan’s National Peace and Development
Framework and national priority programme. The
international community should continue to help the
Government and the people of Afghanistan improve
their livelihoods, and should respect the Afghan
people’s independent choice of political system and
development path. Regarding development, I would like
to respond to my colleague from Kuwait, who made a
reference in his statement to a Chinese proverb. China
has another saying — that development is of paramount
importance, and it is indeed of paramount importance
to Afghanistan as well.
As a traditionally friendly neighbour of Afghanistan,
China has always given support to its political process
and its reconstruction and development. As Ambassador
Saikal said, the second dialogue between the Foreign
Ministers of China, Afghanistan and Pakistan was
held in Kabul on 15 December with great success. The
three sides reached a broad consensus and reaffirmed
their joint commitment to realizing a comprehensive
and inclusive political settlement as soon as possible,
strengthening the momentum of improvement in
the relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan,
facilitating practical cooperation and connectivity by
advancing the Belt and Road Initiative, expanding its
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

cooperation on counter-terrorism and jointly promoting
regional security, stability and development. During
the dialogue, the three sides also signed a memorandum
of understanding on countering terrorism and issued a
joint statement on the tripartite dialogue.
In order to help the millions of people who have
been affected by drought in Afghanistan, China recently
provided Afghanistan with more than ¥60 million
in humanitarian assistance. We will continue to use
the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Foreign Ministers’
dialogue
and
the
quadrilateral
coordination
group on the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process — which consists of China, Afghanistan,
Pakistan and the United States — the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group
and other multilateral mechanisms to provide support
and assistance to Afghanistan in the relevant areas.
China will continue to work with Afghanistan to
actively implement the memorandum of understanding
on jointly advancing the Belt and Road Initiative,
facilitating its trade relations with other countries in
the region and building its infrastructure, connectivity
and socioeconomic development so as to contribute to
the security, stability, development and prosperity of
Afghanistan and the region as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
My delegation thanks Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto
for his briefing on developments in the situation in
Afghanistan. It also thanks Mr. Yury Fedotov and
Ms. Ghizaal Haress, member of the Independent
Commission for Overseeing the Implementation of
the Constitution, for their relevant briefings on drug
trafficking and on the strengthening of the rule of law
in Afghanistan. I also thank Mr. Mahmoud Saikal,
the representative of Afghanistan, for his extremely
instructive statement.
My delegation commends the tireless efforts of
the President Ghani and his Government to give the
brave Afghan people peace, stability and development,
which they have aspired to throughout so many years
of suffering.
My delegation also welcomes the parliamentary
elections held on 20 October, which mobilized many
Afghans. Unfortunately, the elections were marred by
deadly attacks carried out by the Taliban and the local
branch of the Islamic State. These incidents negatively

S/PV. 8426

affected voter turnout. My country condemns this wave
of violence, which once again reminds the Council
of the need to pay sustained attention to the security
situation in Afghanistan. We must recall that, 17 years
after the fall of the Taliban regime, the protection of
civilians and the delivery of humanitarian aid remain
major challenges, especially in provinces under
Taliban control. My delegation therefore encourages
the forces in the country to further strengthen joint
operations with the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in the provinces most affected
by insecurity.
An election is scheduled for April that will be
decisive for the future of Afghanistan — the presidential
election. We hope that it will be transparent, credible and
totally inclusive. In this regard, we note with satisfaction
the commitment of the countries contributing to
the Resolute Support Mission to maintaining their
presence in Afghanistan and the pledges of funding
for the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
until 2024. Furthermore, my country calls for the
implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity, which could help to
resolve the security problem in the region.
Similarly, we welcomed the participation of
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran in the Triangular
Initiative meeting, which took place on 12 December
in Islamabad, under the auspices of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. The Initiative has yielded
tangible results in the fight against drug trafficking
through the sharing of information and simultaneous
operations at the borders of the three countries.
Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire has always favoured dialogue
as a means of resolving conflict and urges the Taliban
to firmly commit, within the framework of the Kabul
process, to direct peace talks without preconditions
with a view to achieving a political settlement of the
crisis and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
In the efforts to resolve the crisis, my country
endorses the conclusions of a national conference on
women’s participation in the peace process, which
was held on 12 December in Kabul. We believe that
the greater involvement of women in the process would
ensure that it has every chance of success.
With regard to humanitarian issues, Côte d’Ivoire
remains concerned about the situation of internally
displaced persons and refugees, whose dignified and
safe return to their areas of origin is made difficult by

18-4430327/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

the lack of infrastructure, poor access to basic social
services, problems related to land management and
food insecurity risks. In this regard, my delegation
commends the outstanding work of the United Nations
and its partners in helping more than 3.5 million people
in need. We therefore urge the international community
to maintain its financial support for the humanitarian
plan for Afghanistan in order to provide the necessary
assistance to the population. Côte d’Ivoire laments
the restrictions on humanitarian agencies’ access
to vulnerable populations, as well as the attacks
on humanitarian workers, which are a violation of
international humanitarian law.
Côte d’Ivoire congratulates the Afghan Government
on its commitment to the fight against corruption and
the measures it has taken to stabilize the economy
and improve business. My country also encourages
the Government to pursue its efforts to combat drug
trafficking, which is an important source of funding for
the Taliban.
Côte d’Ivoire commends Ambassador Kairat
Umarov for his work as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and
reiterates its full support for him.
In conclusion, my delegation calls on the States
Members of the United Nations, and in particular the
countries of the region, to ensure strict respect for the
sanctions imposed on the Taliban. This would help
to bring peace and stability to this country, which is
devastated by a conflict that has lasted far too long.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
In line with note S/2017/507, I remind speakers that
they are kindly requested to limit their statements to
five minutes, so that the Council can carry out its work
in a timely manner. Delegations with long statements
are invited to distribute them in printed form and to
deliver an abridged statement in the Security Council,
because we have a long list of speakers in accordance
with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Usman (Pakistan): Millions of Afghans
continue to suffer from prolonged conflict in their
country. Instability caused by the vicious cycle of
foreign military intervention and civil war has engulfed
28/43

17/12/2018

the whole region and impeded peace, development
and progress.
Unfortunately, over the past year, we have not seen
any sign of reduction in violence in Afghanistan. If
anything, it has intensified. Thousands of Afghans have
lost their lives owing to insurgent attacks, large-scale
terrorist bombings and intensified air campaigns.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about the
worsening impact of the conflict on the population, as
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
continues to record a high number of civilian deaths.
While the international community is committed
to bringing the conflict in Afghanistan to a negotiated
end, we finally see efforts to actually achieve this goal.
The hope for a negotiated settlement was kindled by the
observance of a ceasefire by all parties earlier this year.
This was welcomed by the Afghans themselves, as well
as their regional and international partners. This could
prove to be a watershed moment in the long history of
violence in the country.
The ceasefire achieved what military surges of
the past could not — peace, albeit transitory. What
Afghanistan now needs is for all parties to the conflict
to commence negotiations for a sustainable solution.
In this regard, we welcome the announcement of a
negotiating team by President Ashraf Ghani, as well
as direct negotiations between the United States
and the Taliban. These meetings, and the recently
held Moscow-format dialogue, represent promising
openings. Pakistan also welcomes the most recent
round of talks between the United States Special Envoy
and the Taliban in Abu Dhabi earlier today. We hope
that the dialogue leads to a sustainable peace process in
which all parties show flexibility to make progress on a
negotiated settlement of the war in Afghanistan.
Other than the people of Afghanistan, Pakistan
has the most to gain from the restoration of peace
and stability in our neighbouring country. The
Government of Pakistan, led by Prime Minister Imran
Khan, is committed to extending all possible support
to facilitate an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. Pakistan envisages a future of close economic
cooperation in our region, helping Kabul realize its
ambition of becoming a regional hub for trade and
energy. To this end, during the second round of the
trilateral dialogue among the Foreign Ministers of
Pakistan, China and Afghanistan last weekend, our
countries agreed to support reconciliation, development
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

and connectivity, security and counter-terrorism as the
three areas of trilateral cooperation.
At the bilateral level, to support Afghanistan’s
economy and development, my country has taken
tangible steps over the years. Pakistan and Afghanistan
are working to improve bilateral relations through the
recently agreed Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity. Pakistan continues to facilitate
transit of Afghan goods without any quantitative
restrictions. Pakistan is the largest market for Afghan
products, accounting for over 60 per cent of its total
exports. The waiver of regulatory duties last year
resulted in a 29 per cent increase in Afghanistan’s
overall exports to Pakistan. We have actively supported
the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas
pipeline and the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project, which will not only
address energy needs of the region but also generate
significant economic activity in Afghanistan.
Over 50,000 Afghans have studied in Pakistani
educational institutions and are now working in
Afghanistan’s public and private sectors, fulfilling
their own dreams and the needs of their country. We
have announced 4,000 fresh scholarships for Afghan
students in Pakistani universities and professional
colleges. We have hosted over 3 million Afghan refugees
and are not shying away from what we consider to be
our responsibility until their safe, orderly and voluntary
return to their homeland.
Peace in Afghanistan is difficult but achievable.
It is up to the Afghan parties to acknowledge that
unconditional dialogue is the only path to peace. There
is no alternative. They are the ones that need to make
the tough but necessary compromises to get there.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I would first like to thank
Special Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Ghizaal
Haress for their insightful briefings. I would also
like to thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) for their briefings.
My remarks today will cover three themes: regional
and international support for Afghanistan, women’s
and girls’ rights and the elections.

S/PV. 8426

First, on regional engagement, I would like to
recognize the success of the recent Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan, which is a testament
to the world’s continued support for the people of
Afghanistan. Special Representative Yamamoto
and Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
contributed to the success of the Conference. I thank
them. The Conference highlighted the solidarity of
the international community as we stand with the
Afghan people and the Afghan Government in their
efforts to bring peace and prosperity to their country.
Furthermore, we urge the Taliban to respond to the
Afghan Government’s offer of peace and to negotiate
peace for the people of Afghanistan.
I am also glad to note the successful adoption by the
General Assembly on 6 December of resolution 73/88,
on Afghanistan, which demonstrated the international
community’s enduring support for Afghanistan. At
this time, I want to highlight the important role of
Afghanistan’s neighbours in supporting peace efforts,
improving regional interconnectivity and promoting
economic development opportunities with Afghanistan.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize Canada’s
support for the meaningful inclusion of Afghan women
and girls in decision-making processes. As you said so
well yourself, Mr. President, in your statement on behalf
of Côte d’Ivoire, we know that no country can achieve
true peace and prosperity without the full participation
of all of its citizens, especially women and girls, as well
as ethnic and religious minorities. That is why we have
partnered with Oxfam Canada on the Amplify Change
project, which supports the participation of Afghan
women and girls in decision-making processes. To
date, Oxfam has helped 680 women and 600 men better
understand and safeguard women’s legal rights. That
work has also included religious and political leaders
from the provinces of Balkh, Nangarhar and Herat, and
uses both an Islamic perspective focused on sharia laws
and secular laws.
Canada commends President Ghani for reaffirming,
at the Geneva Ministerial Conference, that the
Government of Afghanistan intends to continue to
defend the constitutionally protected rights of Afghan
women. Canada also commends the leadership of First
Lady of Afghanistan Rula Ghani on the empowerment
of women and girls. Leadership at the top is making
a difference. The success of many women in recent
parliamentary elections may be related to those

18-4430329/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

efforts and leadership. So far, 28 per cent of elected
parliamentarians are women — a number that is higher
than in many democracies and higher than in my own
country, Canada. In our last federal election in 2015,
only 26 per cent of elected parliamentarians were
women. Of course, that did not prevent Prime Minister
Trudeau from forming the first gender-balanced
cabinet in our history. But still, it shows that the people
of Afghanistan ought to be congratulated.
(spoke in French)
I would like to congratulate the Afghanistan’s
Independent Election Commission on its gender
equality policies and on its concrete efforts to increase
the political participation of women. I also note the
tremendous efforts of civil society actors, such as
the Transparent Election Foundation of Afghanistan
and the Afghan Women’s Education Center, for their
courage in promoting the rights of women and girls, as
well as those of ethnic and religious minorities, during
the electoral process.
We also welcome the work of the United Nations and
other partners to distribute ballots in rural areas ahead
of the elections. We encourage the Afghan national
authorities to continue to actively address irregularities
and to promote and protect the rights of those in rural
communities, especially women candidates and voters,
to participate in public affairs. Their inclusion is
essential to the integrity of the elections.
Afghanistan recently went through an important
democratic process during the October parliamentary
elections. I commend the bravery of the Afghan people
who, defying intimidation and threats of violence,
went to the polls to cast their votes. I also recognize
the courage of the Afghan elections officials and the
security sector personnel who supported the elections
process. We look forward to the presidential election
in 2019, and we hope that the lessons learned from the
October parliamentary elections will be applied to the
presidential election.
(spoke in English)
The next presidential election, to be held in 2019, is
crucial to the future of Afghanistan. It is important that
lessons be learned from the recent legislative elections.
Shortcomings must be addressed. Some initiatives must
be taken to ensure that the presidential election is free,
fair and credible. All stakeholders have an important
role to play to ensure that the country is ready. The
30/43

17/12/2018

Independent Election Commission, the Electoral
Complaints Commission, the Government, the political
parties, civil society and the international community
must all come together to ensure that Afghans can vote
freely and in security. Canada stands ready to help.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, let me too
thank all of the briefers. In particular, I would like to
thank Ambassador Yamamoto for his very profound
briefing. I also want to highlight the briefing delivered
by Ms. Haress.
These are once again crucial and testing times for
Afghanistan. We are entering what has been called the
second half of the transformation decade. Germany
will remain very active. Germany is the second-largest
donor and troop contributor to Afghanistan.
Let me briefly turn now to the Geneva Ministerial
Conference, held under the auspices of the United
Nations, which we found to be very timely and
important. It sent a clear signal of international
commitment to Afghanistan and, at the same time,
highlighted the expectations of Afghanistan. As others
have mentioned, it also demonstrated that this is a
moment of opportunity for progress towards peace.
With regard to international commitment, on the
one hand, and expectations, on the other, they were
both reflected in the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, which set both a clear sign of international
commitment and the expectations of the Afghan
Government with regard to reforms. I acknowledge the
efforts mentioned by the Ambassador of Afghanistan,
which we must commend. In particular, I want to
highlight what he said with regard to economic
connectivity and all the different initiatives he has
been taking. I also note the need for reform, to fight
against corruption and to build functioning institutions
in Afghanistan, as mentioned by previous speakers.
On the elections, I would like to echo what was
said very eloquently by my Canadian colleague with
regard to encouraging signs, including the high-level of
participation in the elections and the number of women
who have been elected. I think that that is remarkable,
and we must commend the courage of each individual
voter who went to the polls despite the threats that they
all faced. There were shortcomings, which have been
noted, and we would urge the Afghan Government
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

to take an in-depth look at those. Mr. Yamamoto and
Ms. Haress both said that those are irregularities that
are unacceptable for presidential elections.
On the peace process, there have again been
encouraging signs and there may be a real opportunity
to achieve a substantial peace process. We welcome
the efforts of the Afghan Government, including
the appointment of a peace negotiation team, and we
understand that its advisory board met for the first
time today. We hope that the Taliban will do likewise,
heeding the call from the Afghan people to come to the
negotiating table.
With regard to negotiating, I can echo only what has
been said by many, including my Canadian, Swedish
and Dutch colleagues, namely, that the peace process
has to be inclusive. Women, children and ethnic-group
minorities have to participate. Of course, as a result of
the peace process, we need a guarantee that what has
been achieved in the country, in particular with regard
to women’s rights, is not redressed.
On women, peace and security, from my perspective
let me also highlight the importance of peace processes
being inclusive. Women need to be included in
peacebuilding at all levels. Studies show that peace
processes that include women as witnesses, signatories,
mediators or negotiators lead to a 35 per cent increase
in the probability of a peace agreement lasting longer
than 35 years. Strengthening the role of women in peace
processes is therefore of the utmost importance.
The drought and climate change that have
been mentioned by several speakers, including
Mr. Yamamoto and Mr. Fedotov, are devastating.
The Chinese Ambassador also just highlighted the
contribution that China has made to alleviating the
situation. Climate change affects us all, but in a country
hit by violent conflict and poverty, its consequences can
be even more devastating. We must not let that happen.
As a Security Council member, Germany will put an
emphasis on the security effects of climate change.
The situation in Afghanistan is a case in point, as the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1092) has shown.
Finally, Germany, together with Indonesia, will
take over the role of co-penholder on Afghanistan. We
know that we have some big shoes to fill. I would like
to commend the Netherlands for its wonderful work
and engagement this year, as well as Kazakhstan for
the work in the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). As I said, they are tough acts

S/PV. 8426

to follow. Germany will continue to stand by our
Afghan friends in the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the European Union and, most importantly,
in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his excellent report (S/2018/1092) and to Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing. We also wish to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Fedotov and Ambassador Umarov for their
briefings. Further, we extend a warm welcome to
Ms. Haress. Her vibrant call to preserve the integrity
of the Afghan Constitution is a powerful and
important message.
Those briefings clearly illustrate the complex
juncture at which Afghanistan lies, starting with
persistent security challenges, which continue to exact
a heavy toll in terms of civilian victims and widespread
suffering among the Afghan population. Every day, the
National Unity Government and the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF)courageously
fight terrorist and extremist violence that seeks to
disrupt efforts for peace and stability. Italy remains
committed to strengthening ANDSF capacities in the
framework of the Resolute Support Mission.
We welcome the outcomes of the recent Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, which allowed
us to take stock of the progress made in Afghanistan’s
reform process and reaffirm the mutual commitment
between the Afghan authorities and the international
community to fostering a future of peace, prosperity
and sustainable development for the country. An
important outcome of the Geneva meeting was also
the shared awareness that not all of the reform goals
have been fully achieved. We refer here mainly to the
fight against corruption. With a view to the pledging
conference that will take place in 2020, the Geneva
Mutual Accountability Framework clearly outlines the
areas where there is scope for further progress.
With the same objectivity, we recognize the
importance of the first parliamentary elections held in
late October under Afghan leadership. Those elections
attest to the tenacious will of the Afghan people,

18-4430331/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

especially of the many women who participated despite
an intimidating climate and terrorist threats. At the
same time, taking note of the organizational, procedural
and security-related difficulties that emerged, we
believe that those elections should also function as a
blueprint of lessons learned and help to ensure that the
upcoming presidential elections are held in a credible
and transparent manner.
The only viable solution to the conflict lies in an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process. There is an urgent and unambiguous yearning
for peace among the Afghan people, as well as broad
international consensus on this point. Those factors
have allowed for a window of opportunity, enabled by
the unprecedented offer President Ghani made to the
Taliban last February, to stay open. Although the brief
ceasefire during the Eid Al-Fitr festivities was not a
forerunner of further positive gestures by the Taliban,
prospects for a negotiated peace in Afghanistan have
not been this tangible since 2001, also owing to the
positive impact of international efforts.
Italy expresses its full support for those diplomatic
initiatives, which, in full accordance with the Kabul
process, can lead to concrete progress in opening the
way towards peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
We underline, in that context, the positive contribution
that can be made by the main international stakeholders,
and especially regional partners, in creating the
conditions for peace.
Lastly, it is essential that the negotiations for peace,
which cannot be achieved at any price, involve every
component of Afghan society, especially women,
children and minorities, on the basis of a fully inclusive
approach. Women, in particular, must be able to play
an active role in negotiations and ensure that their
rights, enshrined in the Constitution, and the civil
and social gains of the past 17 years are protected and
further promoted.
I wish to conclude by expressing Italy’s sincere
appreciation for the clear commitment to this issue by
the Afghan Government, as confirmed by President
Ghani in his new road map for peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Permanent Mission of Côte
d’Ivoire to the United Nations for convening today’s
32/43

17/12/2018

debate on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his
valuable observations and the important work being
carried out by UNAMA in Afghanistan under his
leadership. I would also like to express my gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Fedotov, Ambassador Kairat
Umarov and Ms. Haress for their briefings, as well as
the Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement.
Of all the Central Asian countries, Tajikistan shares
the longest border — around 1,400 kilometres — with
Afghanistan. We have very close cultural, historic
and linguistic ties with that brotherly country, and
that very fact makes it difficult for us to watch, from
the other side of the Amu Darya, our Afghan brothers
and sisters suffer because of the instability of the past
several decades.
I think that there is general consensus in the
Chamber on the following three main messages: first,
terrorism and extremism cannot be eliminated by the
use of military force alone; secondly, the Afghan peace
process should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned; and
thirdly, without stability in Afghanistan there will be
no stability in the Central Asian region, nor will it
be possible to achieve progress on social, economic
and environmental issues. My delegation also fully
subscribes to those points.
In spite of some progress, many challenges
continue to exist in Afghanistan, the resolution of
which requires additional efforts from the international
community. In my statement, I would like to share
some of our perspectives on how to address those
challenges by utilizing the capacities and opportunities
of neighbouring countries.
Terrorism, transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking could undermine the commitment
of the region, as well as that of Afghanistan, to bring
about sustainable development. If not addressed, they
will become major obstacles on our way to the timely
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We express our great concern about the
recent strengthening and activation of terrorist groups
and their activities in the northern part of Afghanistan.
In our view, to effectively counter threats emanating
from terrorist groups, strengthening international and
regional security cooperation is therefore crucial.
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

In that regard, Tajikistan’s law enforcement agencies
have been actively engaged with their colleagues
from other Central Asian countries and Afghanistan
in information-sharing, law enforcement and border
control, in the frameworks of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme, UNAMA,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other organizations.
We welcome the outcome of the recent Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, which led
to renewed partnership and cooperation between the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community with regard to Afghanistan’s peace,
prosperity and self-reliance midway through the
transformation decade from 2015 to 2024.
As the host of the High-level International
Conference on Countering Terrorism and Preventing
Violent Extremism in Dushanbe, on 3 and
4 May, we believe that particular emphasis should
be placed on the importance of intensifying counterterrorism cooperation and coordination, as well as
information-sharing, border security, legal cooperation
and the exchange of best practices. The Conference
was particularly timely in the current context of
strengthening regional cooperation in Central Asia, and
we firmly believe that, based on our experience and the
successful outcomes of the Dushanbe Conference, such
dialogue should be continued. To that end, Tajikistan
intends to host yet another high-level event on this issue
next year and invites all stakeholders, in particular the
United Nations and its relevant bodies, to join us in
order to take joint and effective measures to counter
terrorism and extremism.
In our opinion, developing comprehensive
agricultural programmes and irrigation systems and
providing electricity supplies in rural areas will ensure
decent living conditions for the population and could
significantly contribute to the decline of drug production
in Afghanistan, as well as to solving the drought and
food insecurity problems. Tajikistan, with its vast
hydropower potential, could be very helpful in that
sense by meeting the industrial demand of Afghanistan
by providing it with stable and affordable electricity.
In that regard, enhancing cooperation to implement
regional hydropower projects is critical. It should be

S/PV. 8426

mentioned that Tajikistan exported approximately
1.4 billion kilowatt hours of electricity to Afghanistan
in 2017 and plans to increase its export to over 1.5 billion
kilowatt hours in the future. The construction of the
Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and
Trade Project, the Turkmenistan-Uzbekistan-TajikistanAfghanistan-Pakistan electricity transmission line
project and various hydropower plants, in particular the
Sebzor hydroelectric power plant in the Badakhshan
region of Tajikistan, as well as the construction of
gas pipelines and transport corridors, would further
contribute to the improvement of the living standards
and well-being of the Afghan population.
For many years, the President of Tajikistan,
Emomali Rahmon, has been actively advocating in
different forums for more coordinated action and
regional approaches to bring about prosperity and
development in Afghanistan. To that end, we consider
the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan and the Istanbul Process, the chairmanship
of which Tajikistan will assume in 2019, to be important
platforms for establishing regional cooperation.
To facilitate trade with Afghanistan, my country,
with the assistance of the international community, has
built five bridges and established two free economic
zones along its border with Afghanistan, which
has significantly increased trade between the two
countries. Our cooperation with Afghanistan in the
spheres of education and the training of personnel
are both effective and fruitful. Hundreds of Afghan
students are currently studying at the universities of
Tajikistan. My Government has also decided to grant up
to 1,000 educational quotas to citizens of Afghanistan
by 2025. We will continue to render assistance by
training Afghan military and border guards, doctors
and other specialists.
To conclude, let me reiterate the readiness of my
Government to further assist our brotherly country,
Afghanistan, in overcoming the aforementioned
challenges in order to ensure well-deserved peace,
stability and development in the country. Moreover, I
wish them every success in holding a peaceful, inclusive
and transparent presidential election. They may rest
assured that Tajikistan will continue to support the
Government of Afghanistan as it implements its reform
agenda to gain peace, development and self-reliance
during the transformation decade.

18-4430333/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

17/12/2018

The President (spoke in French): I wish to once
again remind Council members that speakers are kindly
requested to limit their statements to a maximum of five
minutes. Delegations with longer statements are asked
to distribute paper copies and deliver a summarized
version to the Council.

devastating natural disaster. Moreover, understanding
the agricultural sector and rural development as key
sectors for Afghanistan’s development and essential
for enhancing resilience to droughts, Japan provided
approximately $15 million this year to improve
irrigation infrastructure and water management.

Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate on Afghanistan. I also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his informative
briefing and the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Let me further
express my appreciation to Ms. Ghizaal Haress,
Mr. Yury Fedotov and Ambassador Kairat Umarov
for their briefings, as well as Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal of Afghanistan for his valuable input.

I welcome the fact that the briefers and speakers
have stressed the important role of women and youth
in Afghanistan. In that connection, Japan has decided
to provide approximately $17 million to promote the
Maternal and Child Health Handbook and provide
immunization against infectious diseases, including
polio. I believe that those projects will contribute to
saving the lives of many Afghan children, who will
lead Afghanistan’s progress in the future.

Japan welcomes the successful convening of the
Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, held
in November, co-hosted by the United Nations and the
Government of Afghanistan. Japan attaches importance
to the fact that, in addition to reform and development,
reconciliation was formally put on the agenda for
the first time. Japan welcomes the formulation of the
Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework and will
support the efforts of the Afghan Government to move
forward with its reforms.
Japan would like to pay its deepest respects to the
citizens of Afghanistan for their determination and
courage in casting their votes in the parliamentary
elections of October, in spite of the difficult security
situation that they faced. We also express sincere
condolences to the victims of terrorist attacks and
their bereaved families. Free and fair elections are
the backbone of democracy, and Japan expects that
the Afghan Government will review the results and
challenges that surfaced at the parliamentary elections
and take every possible measure for the upcoming
presidential election, scheduled for next April.
Improving security is fundamental to the peace and
reconciliation process moving forward. While we have
recently seen efforts in the international arena regarding
peace in Afghanistan, Japan continues to support an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
Japan is highly concerned about the severe drought
affecting Afghanistan, where millions of people are
facing serious food insecurity and a humanitarian
crisis. The Government of Japan has recently decided to
extend new assistance of $13 million in response to that
34/43

We are at an important and decisive juncture as we
near the halfway point of the transformation decade.
We should build on what has already been achieved,
and Japan stands ready to participate in and discuss
with the international community and, of course, the
Afghan Government, the way forward in order for
Afghanistan to become truly self-reliant.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Special Representative Yamamoto and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Fedotov, for their briefings, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Saikal, for his statement. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2018/1092).
At the outset, let me reiterate our heartfelt
condolences for the loss of innocent lives during the
latest heinous terrorist attacks that took place in Kabul.
We once again strongly condemn those cowardly acts
of terror. Turkey stands in full solidarity with the
Government and people of Afghanistan in the fight
against terrorism.
Afghanistan stands at a crucial juncture in terms
of its political, security and economic transformation.
As the country approaches the midpoint of the
transformation decade, it continues to face significant
and complex challenges. The highest number of civilian
casualties recorded by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the six-month
period between January and June attests to the volatile
security situation.
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

Turkey has been active in supporting the security of
Afghanistan since 2001. We have pledged $60 million
for the period 2018-2020 in support of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. As one of the
Resolute Support Mission framework nations, we will
maintain our support for Afghanistan both bilaterally
and through NATO.
Under those precarious circumstances, the
engagement of the international community remains
vital. We were pleased to see the continued support
at the recent Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan. We thank the Government of Afghanistan
and UNAMA for convening the Conference, which
provided a crucial moment to renew partnership and
cooperation for Afghanistan’s peace, prosperity and
self-reliance. It is now imperative that we live up to the
commitments made.
Turkey’s development and reconstruction assistance
to Afghanistan has been one of our most comprehensive
development programmes. The total amount of our aid
exceeds $1.1 billion. More than 1,000 projects have been
completed all around the country. We have pledged a
further $150 million of development assistance for the
period 2018-2020.
The Secretary-General indicates in his report
that insecurity, violence, poverty and unemployment
continue to heavily impact the young people of
Afghanistan. We share that assessment and dedicate the
largest part of our development assistance to education
in Afghanistan. So far, more than 700,000 Afghan
children have received education in 85 schools built by
Turkey. We attach particular importance to the education
of girls so that they can reach their full potential and
contribute to the stability of their country. Habibe
Kadiri High School for girls, which has operated in
Jowzjan since 2008, has changed the lives of hundreds
of girls and their families. The ongoing project of the
Turkish-Afghan University of Mevlana Celaleddin-i
Rumi in Kabul will constitute another significant step
in the field of higher education for young Afghans. We
also fully support regional connectivity projects, such
as the Lapis Lazuli transit agreement.
The Afghan people need peace, and that can
be reached and sustained only if it is Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned. We congratulate the Afghan
Government on undertaking key reforms on good
governance, the macroeconomy and private-sector

S/PV. 8426

development. A more focused approach is now needed
to implement long-term strategies.
With the ceasefire during Eid Al-Fitr and the
parliamentary elections, held on 20 October, Afghans
once again displayed their desire for peace and
democracy. Improvements to the electoral system and
the reinforcement of the fight against corruption will
further consolidate democracy across the country. The
upcoming presidential elections will be crucial for
Afghanistan to achieve stability, security and prosperity.
Enhanced cooperation and increased dialogue
among the countries of the region are also necessary.
In fact, it is the region itself that has the greatest role,
interest and responsibility in establishing and sustaining
a secure and peaceful Afghanistan. The Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process is a stunning example of regional
ownership for cooperation. The next ministerial
conference of that Process will take place in Turkey in
2019. As a long-standing friend of the Afghan people,
Turkey will maintain its contributions to the country
with a comprehensive and integrated approach.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and all of today’s briefers.
We congratulate the people of Afghanistan on their
courage and determination during the parliamentary
elections on 20 October. Despite violence, intimidation
and disappointing administrative failures, the Afghan
people turned out to vote in impressive numbers and
make their voices heard. Australia urges the Government
of Afghanistan to quickly address the deficiencies that
are evident in the electoral processes and ensure that the
2019 presidential election is credible and transparent
and fully reflects the will of the Afghan people.
Just as the October elections demonstrated
the desire of Afghans to participate directly in the
governance of their country, their call for an end to
the conflict and ongoing suffering is loud and should
be heard. President Ghani’s determination to take the
lead on peace through the Kabul process and his offer
to the Taliban of negotiations without preconditions
demonstrate a strong desire for a new chapter dedicated
to peace. Australia understands and shares that desire
and welcomes those initiatives. Australia believes that
the Kabul process should form the framework for the

18-4430335/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

pursuit of peace in Afghanistan and the basis for an
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process.
We were pleased that the international community
reaffirmed its support for Afghanistan and for an Afghanowned and Afghan-led peace process on 28 November,
at the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
and on 6 December, with General Assembly resolution
73/88, on Afghanistan. Australia particularly welcomes
the efforts of the United States to build on the Afghan
Government’s initiatives in 2018 and bring the parties
together in meaningful negotiations.
We are deeply disappointed that, to date, the Taliban
has refused to engage with the Afghan Government
and has continued its bloody campaign against the
Afghan people. We call on the Taliban to end its
violence, enter genuine negotiations with the Afghan
Government and bring relief to the Afghan people. In
the meantime, Australia will continue to stand with its
allies and partners in the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission and work with the Afghanistan security
forces to overcome the challenges they face. Australia
also recognizes that Afghanistan has made important
progress, especially on economic and institutional
reform. We encourage continued progress, especially
against corruption, to ensure that more resources reach
their intended destinations.
The Afghan people face natural, as well as manmade, challenges. We have seen this year how drought
has affected many Afghans. In March, we pledged
$39 million over three years to support vulnerable
groups affected by conflict and displacement, bringing
Australia’s humanitarian response to Afghanistan to
$89 million since 2014. During the Geneva Conference,
we also announced an additional $5 million contribution
to provide emergency assistance to almost 1.4 million
Afghans on the verge of acute famine.

17/12/2018

Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, and
Kazakhstan Ambassador Kairat Umarov for their
informative briefings. I would also like to thank
Ms. Ghizaal Haress for sharing with us her perspectives
on current developments in Afghanistan.
Uzbekistan traditionally pursues towards Afghanistan
a policy based on the principles of mutual respect,
equality and full support of the Government elected by
the people of Afghanistan. Given such circumstances,
the engagement in the process of finding an ultimate
solution to the current conflict in Afghanistan and the
maintenance of good-neighbourly relations with that
fraternal nation are among the main foreign policy
priorities of the Republic of Uzbekistan.
Currently, Uzbekistan actively participates
in various international negotiations formats on
Afghanistan, such as the Kabul process, the Moscow
format, the International Contact Group, the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process forum, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan contact group
and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan. Uzbekistan’s principled position arises
from its firm belief that the central Government in
Kabul should be the main party to the peace process.
As mentioned by all speakers today, only an Afghanled and Afghan-owned political process can lead to a
peaceful settlement of the current conflict.
Uzbekistan strongly supports the international
community’s efforts in facilitating the process of
resolving the situation in Afghanistan. In that regard,
I would like to cite remarks made by the President of
Uzbekistan, His Excellency Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev,
at the Tashkent-hosted International Conference on
Afghanistan held in March:

Finally, we wish to again record our appreciation
for UNAMA’s work in Afghanistan. At a difficult
time of record levels of violence, we nevertheless look
forward to a point when UNAMA can help Afghanistan
enter a new era of peace and reconstruction.

“We stand ready, at any stage of the peace
process, to create all necessary conditions
for organizing on the territory of Uzbekistan
direct negotiations between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban movement”.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uzbekistan.

In order to support a reconciliation process in the
country, the international community must invest in the
economic future and social stability of Afghanistan and
its young people.

Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to commend you, Sir, for convening today’s
quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I thank the Special
36/43

For its part, Uzbekistan is rendering practical
assistance to Afghanistan in rebuilding its social and
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

economic infrastructure. In Tashkent, we supported
projects, such as the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India Pipeline, the Central Asia South Asia
Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA1000) and the following initiatives in the areas of
transport, communications, energy, trade and education.
First, with regard to the construction of a
railroad corridor from Mazar-e-Sharif to Herat, the
implementation of the project will provide employment
for up to 30,000 Afghans and allow Kabul to generate
annual profits from the transit in the amount of
between $400 million and $500 million. In addition,
the construction of the road from Mazar-e-Sharif to
Peshawar, via Kabul, remains urgent.
Secondly, the construction of the electricity power
transmission line Surkhan-Pul-e-Khumri will allow
for an increased electricity supply from Uzbekistan to
Afghanistan by 70 per cent, or up to 6 billion kilowatt
hours, per year. The power transmission line will
switch Kabul to the unified energy system of Central
Asia. Moreover, the electricity power transmission line
Surkhan-Pul-e-Khumri may become an important part
of the CASA-1000 project.
Thirdly, with respect to the training of Afghan
specialists, at the moment the educational centre for
training Afghan citizens is operating successfully in
the town of Termez in Uzbekistan. One hundred and
thirty Afghan young men and women students attend
the centre. In the future, we plan to increase the number
of students up to 250. We call upon all countries to
unite their efforts in establishing a special international
fund to support education in Afghanistan, which was
proposed by the President of Uzbekistan.
Fourthly, with regard to the promotion of
trade with Afghanistan, Uzbekistan has opened an
international logistics centre in Termez, with a customs
terminal to assist with an increasing export-import and
transit cargo flow. Uzbekistan has also created a free
economic zone — the Termez Cargo Centre — at the
border with Afghanistan, where we plan to establish
industrial production lines to manufacture the readymade items necessary for the projects and programmes
that are currently being implemented in Afghanistan.
Uzbekistan has also opened trading houses in Kabul
and Mazar-e-Sharif, with the aim of facilitating trade
between the two countries so as to gradually increase
volume to $1 billion annually. We have also established
a direct air link between Tashkent and Kabul to provide

S/PV. 8426

support for bilateral exchanges. An Afghan Consulate
recently opened in Termez in order to facilitate
exchange between the two countries.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Uzbekistan is making consistent efforts to assist in
advancing the peace process in Afghanistan. Therefore,
in Tashkent we are strongly committed to continuing
close collaboration with the Government of Afghanistan
and other stakeholders in that quest.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Sir, for organizing
today’s debate. We also thank the Special Representative
of Secretary-General, Mr. Yamamoto, and the other
briefers for their briefings, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for sharing his
perspectives on the recent developments in his country.
While the situation in Afghanistan continues
to cause concern, there have also been several
positive developments of significance. Millions of
Afghans — women and men — who turned out to
vote in the recently held elections, despite the Taliban
threat, demonstrated their courage and strong desire to
work for a better future by exercising their democratic
right. It was a bold refusal to be cowed by the terrorist
groups. We commend the National Unity Government,
the Independent Election Commission and the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, which
made sure that the elections went ahead despite the
serious challenges and threats. Democracy is clearly
taking firmer root in Afghanistan. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General stated earlier,
those elections were the first to be completely run
by Afghan authorities since 2001. They indeed mark
an important milestone in Afghanistan’s transition to
self-reliance.
Many Member States attended the recently
concluded Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan last month, thereby reaffirming the
commitment of the international community and the
United Nations to Afghanistan. Ten days ago, the
General Assembly also reiterated its support to the
cause of Afghanistan through its adoption of resolution
73/88. However, that is clearly not enough.
Even as the reports of the Secretary-General have
continued to stress that the violence and terror in
Afghanistan show no signs of abating, terrorists are

18-4430337/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

now attacking places never imagined before, including
hospitals, schools, mosques and even mourners
at funerals. Sadly, one-quarter of all terrorismrelated deaths in the world were caused by attacks
in Afghanistan last year. Despite all the signs of the
deterioration in the security situation, the international
community and the Council, with all its tools, have
simply been unable or unwilling to deal effectively with
the source of the problem.
The Council’s actions against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant can serve as a template for action
against terrorists and their supporters in Afghanistan.
The illicit narcotics, illegal mining and other criminal
industries controlled by those terror groups are stealing
the resources of the Afghan people and funding
ever more violence. The sanctuaries and safe havens
provided to those terror networks for years are well
known. The activities of the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network, Da’esh and Al-Qaida and its proscribed
affiliates, such as the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaysh
Muhammad, must be stopped. The Security Council
sanctions committee, which refuses to designate the
new leaders of the Taliban or to freeze the assets of its
slain leader, is falling short of what is expected of it by
the Afghans and the international community. Based
on lessons of the past, we in New York are aware that
peace in Afghanistan is tied to peace and security in the
entire world.
Even as the challenges of security, peace and
development continue to mount, there has also been
considerable progress over the past 17 years, especially
in the areas of promoting education and health care;
protecting the rights of women, children and the
marginalized; improving governance and reforms;
generating livelihoods and moving Afghanistan
towards self-reliance.
India has age-old historical, cultural, civilizational
and economic ties with Afghanistan. We are working
closely with our Afghan partners in implementing
development projects and will continue to do so in this
transformation decade. Building reliable connectivity
for landlocked Afghanistan is a key component of our
regional partnership. We are mindful to ensure that all
such projects respect State sovereignty and territorial
integrity and are based on universally recognized
international norms, transparency and principles of
financial responsibility, ecological and environmental
protection and preservation standards. It is in that spirit
that we are engaged in various connectivity projects
38/43

17/12/2018

in the region, including the Chabahar Port project
and the direct India-Afghanistan air freight corridor,
which have been successfully operationalized. We will
continue to build on the gains made and to work with
all those who share the spirit of helping Afghanistan
without conditions.
We support an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and
Afghan-controlled inclusive peace and reconciliation
process that promotes and protects unity, sovereignty,
democracy, inclusiveness and prosperity of Afghanistan.
Any meaningful progress towards sustainable peace
requires the cessation of terrorist violence, renunciation
of links with international terrorism, respect for the
rights of common Afghan people, especially those
of women, children and minorities. We hope that the
courage, resilience and determination of the Afghan
people can be matched by those of the international
community in doing what needs to be done on its part
to bring peace to that war-torn country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Christiane: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 28 Member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2018/1092) and Special
Representative Yamamoto and the Ambassador of
Afghanistan for their statements.
The EU highly values and welcomes the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and Special Representative Yamamoto to
support peace and development in Afghanistan. The EU
also welcomes the outcome of the Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan, where the EU was
represented by High Representative Federica Mogherini
and by the European Commissioner for International
Cooperation and Development, Neven Mimica.
Four weeks ago, the EU adopted Council
Conclusions on Afghanistan, reaffirming the EU and
member States’ long-term commitment to supporting
the people of Afghanistan in their efforts towards
peace, security and prosperity. We acknowledge the
current momentum for peace in Afghanistan. We
consider the coming months to be key for advancing the
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

peace agenda. To that end, at the Geneva Conference
the EU High Representative made a concrete offer to
support peace in Afghanistan, including but not limited
to helping the Government to make the peace process
more inclusive; supporting post-conflict reforms,
including security sector reform; providing incentives
for ex-combatants; having the EU as a guarantor of
the peace process; and supporting cross-border trade,
infrastructure and connectivity. We are currently
working with the Afghan Government to develop that
offer into concrete actions.
The EU firmly believes that any peace process
should include mechanisms to represent the interests of
all Afghans, women and minorities in particular. Civil
society is also a key actor and can provide important
perspectives, not least those witnessed here today.
We support a possible peace deal. The EU will stand
strongly behind the protection of human rights. Peace
must not come at the cost of progress made over the
past 17 years. All international efforts to bring peace
are welcomed. However, in order to guarantee full
Afghan ownership of an eventual peace process, direct
peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban cannot be delayed much longer. The
international community needs to bring all negotiation
formats under the Kabul process.
I would like to address three points. The first
point is about reforms. At the Geneva Conference,
the international community took stock of the
implementation of the reforms by the Government of
Afghanistan and agreed on new benchmarks for the
future years. The EU signalled once more its firm
commitment to that endeavour. It announced a support
package of €474 million for Afghanistan, including
€311 million for the State and Resilience Building
Contract for the years 2018-2021.
It is, however, of utmost importance that
Afghanistan focus not only on the adoption, but also on
the implementation of reforms. In that context, the EU
notes the finalization, ahead of the Geneva Conference,
of the development policy framework consisting of the 10
national priority programmes linked to the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework, as well
as the progress made in their implementation. Notably,
progress has been made with regard to a more enabling
environment for business and promoting private sector
growth, public finance management reforms, trade
facilitation, and security sector reforms. We encourage
the Afghan Government to continue those reforms.

S/PV. 8426

The fight against corruption needs also to continue
and deliver concrete results, which will help maintain
and increase people’s confidence in Afghan institutions.
The same applies for the protection of human rights,
with particular focus on areas such as the elimination
of violence against women, the implementation of
the national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), the protection of children and
the prevention of torture and ill treatment. In that regard
the EU would like to emphasize the need to implement
the law on the elimination of violence against women
and to adopt the child protection law, which has been,
deplorably, recently rejected for the fourth time in the
Afghan Parliament.
The second point I would like to address is about
elections. The EU concurs with the United Nations
assessment and finds it positive that elections took place
in October and that many Afghans — including women
and young people — actively participated despite
security threats. However, we note that the polling
was negatively affected by substantial organizational
and technical difficulties, as well as suspicions of
large-scale fraud.
For the preparation of the presidential elections,
the coming months will be essential to address those
shortcomings and draw lessons from them so as to
ensure credibility and transparency and to preserve the
inclusivity of the political process. There is no need to
say that strong and swift measures that will ensure the
safety, transparency, accountability and credibility of
this ballot need absolutely to be taken.
The coming elections and the peace process are
two separate things. The international community
must remain firm in supporting both a Kabul-led
peace process and presidential elections that are
transparent and strengthen the legitimacy of the
resulting Government. It is also important that the
presidential elections take place on time. To that aim,
the EU is gladly providing electoral assistance to the
tune of more than €18 million, both through the United
Nations Development Programme Electoral Support
Project and through a separate project to help reduce
the vulnerabilities of the election process. We are ready
to work with the international community, especially
the United Nations, on the identification of how best to
further support the Afghan electoral process.
The third and last point I would like to address is
about security. The EU remains deeply concerned about

18-4430339/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

the security situation in the country, particularly by the
high level of civilian casualties — more than 8,000
since the beginning of the year — and grave violence
affecting children, as documented by UNAMA. All
parties should comply with their obligations under
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law to ensure the protection of the civilian
population, including women and children, and protect
and respect humanitarian and medical personnel, their
means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals
and other medical facilities.
Considering the scope of the humanitarian needs
and the dire situation of internally displaced persons,
humanitarian principles must be respected and upheld.
The vital role of humanitarian agencies and the
humanitarian space must be preserved in order to meet
the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable persons.
Conflict-related violence must not destroy another
generation’s livelihood, homes or property, or displace
families and limit access to education, health care and
other services.
With regard to migration, we would like to
assure the Security Council that the EU continues its
comprehensive dialogue on migration in the framework
of the EU-Afghanistan Joint Way Forward and by
addressing the regional dimension of migration.
The climate-related security risks at play in
Afghanistan include water shortages and droughts in
the majority of provinces, with direct consequences for
harvest and cattle, which in turn risks triggering and
exacerbating local conflicts over land and water and
increasing recruitment into armed groups. To make
our peace efforts more efficient, we need adequate risk
assessments in this regard.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support to
the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission efforts aimed
at providing further training, advice and assistance to
the Afghan security forces and institutions. I would also
like to reconfirm that the EU strongly acknowledges
the crucial role played by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people. The
EU remains committed to working alongside UNAMA
and international partners to achieve a democratic and
self-sustainable Afghanistan.
I have personally been several times in Kabul and
I sincerely hope that many kites will soon fly again in
the beautiful sky of this city.
40/43

17/12/2018

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the European Union.
Like others, I would like to thank Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing, but also for his tireless
efforts towards lasting peace in Afghanistan. I also
thank Commissioner Ghizaal Haress, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime Yuri Fedotov, and His Excellency Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), for their briefings.
I would like to highlight three points: the elections,
the peace process, and the international community’s
support for Afghanistan.
First, Belgium congratulates the Afghan authorities
and citizens on the parliamentary elections held on
20 October, which marked another important step in
the consolidation of democracy in the country. It is now
important to learn from these elections. The Afghan
Government and institutions owe it to the courageous
citizens to have orderly, inclusive and credible
presidential elections in 2019. Electoral commissions
must maintain their independence and carry out their
mandates on the basis of experience they have acquired
thus far.
In addition to addressing the serious security
threat, logistical and technical problems must also
be addressed and investment made in transparency
and communication. The heinous attacks on schools
and medical facilities in the pre-election period
further remind us of the importance of full respect for
international humanitarian law. In this regard, Belgium
remains deeply concerned about the high number of
civilian casualties and calls on all parties to protect the
civilian population, in particular women and children.
My second point is on the peace process. The
Kabul process must form the basis for a comprehensive
and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-controlled peace
process. Belgium calls on the Taliban leaders to respond
to President Ghani’s unprecedented peace offer and to
engage in direct peace talks. The Afghan Government
can already establish an inclusive and high-level
negotiating team. The international community,
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8426

including regional actors, must support this process by
acting in unison.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General and
the recommendations contained therein (S/2018/1092).

As the Council knows, Belgium attaches great
importance to the role of women in peacebuilding. I
am proud to announce a new Belgian contribution of
€2 million to UN Women in Afghanistan to support
the implementation of the national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
this regard, we welcome the technical revision of the
Law on the Elimination of Violence against Women,
which is currently under way. Belgium notes with
concern shortcomings in the application of this law,
such as the use — not provided for by the law — of
mediation. We also encourage the Afghan Government
to redouble its efforts to increase women’s participation
in public institutions.

We are emphasizing today the central and
impartial role of the United Nations in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan, expressing our
appreciation and strong support for all of the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Afghanistan. The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes
the adoption of the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, as reflected in the communiqué adopted
at the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
held on 27 and 28 November 2018.

Thirdly, Belgium joins in international support for
peace and progress in Afghanistan. The success of the
Geneva conference and the adoption of the resolution
on Afghanistan at the General Assembly (resolution
73/88) demonstrate the willingness of the international
community to unite to support progress, sustainable
peace and development.
Belgium is an unconditional ally of Afghanistan
through our membership in the European Union and
NATO. We will substantially increase our contribution
to the NATO mission and also contribute to the training
of the Afghan National Army. We also support the
humanitarian response to the drought through our
contributions to the Central Emergency Response
Fund, which Belgium will increase considerably.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the victims of
violence in Afghanistan and the resilience of the Afghan
people and security forces. The objective of peace is
achievable in Afghanistan, and Belgium supports a
peaceful settlement led and controlled by Afghans and
will continue to support it in the future as well.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset,
let me thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, for their briefings today.

We reiterate our serious concern about the security
situation in Afghanistan. We wish to stress the need
to continue addressing the threat to the security and
stability of Afghanistan caused by region-based
terrorist groups and other illegal armed groups and
criminals. We call upon all States to strengthen their
international and regional cooperation in enhancing
information-sharing, border control, law enforcement
and criminal justice.
The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes the steps taken by
the Government of Afghanistan to promote an Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace through the Kabul Process
for Peace and Security Cooperation, including through
the offer of unconditional talks, a temporary ceasefire
and a request to the Taliban to respond to the call for
peace from the Afghan people and their Government.
We welcome the achievements of the National Unity
Government in political, economic, governance and
social reforms and in the management of the transition.
We further welcome the holding of parliamentary
elections in October 2018, which marked another
important step towards the consolidation of democracy
in the country.
Kyrgyzstan considers Afghanistan to be a
significant regional partner and attaches great
importance to cooperation with Afghanistan in the
implementation of regional projects, including the
CASA-1000 energy project. That will contribute to
the economic development of the country, as well as
resolving a number of socioeconomic problems.
The Kyrgyz Republic is promoting an initiative
to establish a trilateral agro-industrial consortium
among Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan.
We also note that the education sector plays an
important role in the process of restoring a peaceful

18-4430341/43

S/PV.8426

The situation in Afghanistan

17/12/2018

Afghanistan. In that regard, we express our readiness
to consider the possibility of teaching Afghan students
in our educational institutions, with financial support
from foreign donors — countries and international
organizations. Currently, the Government of the Kyrgyz
Republic and its Afghan partners are implementing
a pilot project to teach children from ethnic Kyrgyz
families living in the Big and Little Pamir mountains of
Afghanistan in educational institutions of Kyrgyzstan.

In the political field, the holding of the parliamentary
election was a successful development despite the
security threats. It strengthened and will continue to
further consolidate the foundations of democracy in
the country. We congratulate Afghanistan on that
achievement, which must be complemented by the
presidential election in April 2019. Iran stands ready to
extend all possible assistance for the successful holding
of that election.

On 11 and 12 July, at the initiative of Kyrgyzstan,
representatives of the countries of Central Asia,
Afghanistan, UNAMA and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the issue of
deepening cooperation between the Central Asian
countries and Afghanistan was discussed. That included
the establishment in Bishkek of an international
centre for Afghan research and a regional cooperation
platform for politicians, experts and scientists to discuss
topical issues regarding Afghanistan’s development
and to prepare relevant recommendations, including
on strengthening cooperation among the countries of
Central Asia and Afghanistan.

We also welcome the renewed efforts for peace
and reconciliation in Afghanistan. Currently, there is
a strong national, regional and global consensus that
there is no military solution in that country. Therefore,
the time is ripe for an inclusive political solution, which
should be owned and led by the Afghan Government
and people. The complementary Kabul, Tashkent
and Moscow formats attest to that momentum, which
must be seized. The international community should
facilitate intra-Afghan dialogue and inclusive and
comprehensive talks. Genuine strong international
support and domestic and regional inclusion are the key
to success.

In conclusion, I would like to note that we support
the commitment of all Central Asian countries to joint
long-term cooperation with Afghanistan. Together
with our international partners, we are ready to fully
cooperate in order to resolve the issues before us.

Furthermore, in order to lead to a durable solution,
such efforts need to take into account the underlying
causes of instability and insecurity in the country over
the past four decades. One such cause of instability is
the presence of foreign forces, which has traditionally
provided a recruiting ground for extremists. That
is why we have never believed that such forces have
contributed to Afghanistan’s peace and stability.
We therefore continue to urge that all foreign forces,
regardless of their mandate and structure, be withdrawn
from Afghanistan in a time-bound and responsible way.
Instead of deploying foreign forces, every effort should
be made to support and strengthen Afghanistan’s
military and security forces. That is one of the main
requirements for the long-term stability of Afghanistan
and should therefore be pursued as a high priority.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I thank Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Kairat Umarov of Kazakhstan, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, and Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for
their valuable briefings and input.
To promote its political-security conditions and
socioeconomic development, Afghanistan needs
sustained international support. From that perspective,
the recent Geneva conference on Afghanistan
demonstrated the international community’s unwavering
support for the country in its endeavour for peace,
stability and prosperity.
42/43

It is particularly essential to combat terrorist groups,
such as Daesh, whose introduction into Afghanistan
has led to increased bloodshed and dangerous sectarian
tendencies. That alarming and horrific trend needs to
be stopped before it reaches catastrophic proportions.
Since terrorism and drug trafficking have
always been mutually reinforcing in Afghanistan, a
two-pronged strategy to simultaneously fight drug
trafficking and terrorism should be adopted. That is
essential given the rise in terrorist activities, as well
18-44303

17/12/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

as the fact that, according to the Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2018 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, opium poppy cultivation is still at the secondhighest level since 1994. At the same time, in order
to fight the drug threat effectively, the international
community should continue to support Afghanistan’s
economic development. In that regard, we will continue
our assistance to promote Afghanistan’s socioeconomic
development. Currently, certain efforts are under
way to ensure that such measures are carried out in a
systematic and sustained manner.

S/PV. 8426

We support the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and underline
the need for a strong partnership between the United
Nations agencies and the country.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the resolve of
the people and the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to continue their support to the fraternal people
and the Government of Afghanistan in their search for
peace and prosperity.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

18-4430343/43
