asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6879

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6879th meeting
Wednesday, 5 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2012/894)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-62873 (E)

*1262873*

S/PV.6879

objectives of the process. The national dialogue is now
scheduled to take place during the second week of
December.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Mali (S/2012/894)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs; Mr. Kadré
Ouédraogo, President of the Commission of the
Economic Community of West African States; and
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/894, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I would like to thank members of the
Council for this opportunity to introduce the report of the
Secretary-General on Mali (S/2012/894). As requested
by the Security Council in resolution 2071 (2012) of
12 October 2012, the report provides an overview of
developments in the country since January, and outlines
the efforts of the United Nations system, as well as
those of national, regional and international actors, in
responding to the crisis in Mali and in implementing
resolution 2071 (2012). The report also provides
recommendations on the way forward.
The Secretary-General fully shares the profound
sense of urgency of the Security Council and of
regional Member States regarding the crisis in Mali.
The political situation in Bamako has become more
complex, especially as a result of deep divisions between
Malian political stakeholders over how to implement
key national priorities. The national dialogue, which
is expected to serve as the forum to discuss and agree
on the implementation of those priorities, has not been
convened due to disagreement over the modalities and

2

Even before the national dialogue convenes,
regional partners are moving forward to address the
pressing need for a viable political process. Following
talks convened by the Mediator of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
President Blaise Compaoré, on 6 and 16 November
in Ouagadougou, two of the armed groups based in
northern Mali — the Mouvement national pour la
libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) and Ansar Dine — have
confirmed their participation in negotiations facilitated
by him. On the basis of that agreement, President
Compaoré wrote to the interim President of Mali,
Dioncounda Traoré, on 21 November inviting him to
send a delegation of the Malian Government for a first
formal round of talks. On 4 December, the ECOWAS
Mediator facilitated a meeting between a delegation
from the Malian Government, led by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Tiéman Coulibaly, and representatives
of Ansar Dine and MNLA in Ouagadougou. According
to a communiqué issued by the ECOWAS mediation
following the meeting, the parties agreed on some
principles, including the primacy of dialogue, respect
for the national unity and territorial integrity of Mali,
respect for human rights and the freedom of religion,
and the rejection of terrorism and extremism.
Our collective sense of urgency derives in part,
of course, because the security situation in the north
of the country has continued to deteriorate. On
16 November, the MNLA launched an offensive against
the Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de
l’Ouest (MUJAO) in the north-eastern region of Gao.
Clashes between the two groups also took place on
19 November in the town of Menaka, near the border of
the Niger. MUJAO has since claimed that it has seized
control of the town. Both groups have also reported
that Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) backed
MUJAO in the clashes. Reports indicated that many
civilians have fled from the region of Gao and moved
closer to the border of the Niger or the surrounding
desert due to the fighting. Twelve civilians have
been reportedly killed during the attacks. As further
evidence of the increasing insecurity in the north, on
27 November, a spokesman for Ansar Dine announced
that the group had wrested control of the town of
Lere, south west of Timbuktu, from the MNLA. In the
meantime, there are continuing reports of jihadists and

12-62873

S/PV.6879

terrorist elements arriving in the north of the country to
join with the armed groups.
We share the alarm of the Council about the human
rights situation in northern Mali. Gross human rights
abuses continue to be perpetrated against the population
in the north of the country, including cases of summary
and extrajudicial execution, sexual and gender-based
violence, the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and torture. Moreover, Ansar Dine has continued its
destruction of historical, cultural and holy sites in
Timbuktu. On the humanitarian front, over 412,000
persons have been forced to flee northern Mali, half of
them crossing the border into neighbouring countries.
An estimated 5 million people have been affected by
the conflict, the majority of whom are at risk of food
insecurity. About 600,000 children under the age of
five are facing severe malnutrition.
Since the adoption of resolution 2071 (2012), the
United Nations system, recognizing the urgency and at
the direction of the Secretary-General, has intensified
and accelerated its efforts in Mali along two main
tracks. The first is to give strong impetus to the Malian
political process. The second is to support ECOWAS
and the African Union in planning for an international
force to support the Malian authorities in restoring the
territorial integrity of the country, if this cannot be
achieved through the political process, and addressing
the threat posed by terrorist and affiliated groups.
With respect to the first track, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for West Africa,
Mr. Said Djinnit, has significantly increased his
political engagement with the authorities in Mali and
key regional stakeholders to provide momentum to a
Malian-owned political process focused on three main
objectives: first, broad-based and inclusive national
dialogue aimed at formulating a road map for the
transition; secondly, negotiations with armed groups
in the north that renounce violence and terrorism; and
thirdly, preparations for the holding of elections.
The Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the
Sahel, Mr. Romano Prodi, has also been active on the
broader Sahel issues and will host a meeting of special
envoys to the Sahel in Rome on 7 December to discuss,
inter alia, the United Nations integrated strategy on the
Sahel and the division of labour among special envoys.
It is vital that we address transnational Sahel issues as
part of the solution to the crisis in Mali.

12-62873

Moreover, in response to a request by the
transitional Government, a needs assessment mission
was deployed by the Secretary-General to Bamako from
19 to 30 November to make recommendations aimed at
addressing the challenges facing the electoral process,
including those related to developing a framework
for inclusive consultations and confidence-building
measures. The assessment mission is finalizing its
report. In the meantime, three high-level electoral
experts have also been dispatched by the SecretaryGeneral to work with the Resident Coordinator and the
United Nations Development Programme to assist the
Malian authorities in developing a detailed and realistic
operational plan, including a timeline and budget, for
the holding of transparent and credible elections.
Despite concerted international efforts, the political
landscape in Mali remains complex and fragmented. It
is critical that the key political actors arrive at a unified
vision as soon as possible if they are to effectively focus
efforts on the main transition challenges, in particular
national dialogue and negotiations with the armed
groups. The support of the international community
will continue to be critical in helping the Malians to
bridge differences and arrive at a national consensus. It
is in this context that the Secretary-General intends to
establish a full time United Nations political presence
in Bamako, which will be responsible for interacting
with key Malian stakeholders on a daily basis under
my direction, and who will report to both his Special
Representative for West Africa and his Special Envoy
for the Sahel.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, a
military operation may be required as a last resort to
deal with the most hard-line extremist and criminal
elements in northern Mali. In this regard, United Nations
military and police planners have worked closely with
ECOWAS and the African Union, in close consultation
with the Malian authorities, in developing a strategic
operational framework for the proposed Africanled international support mission in Mali. Under the
framework, an international force would support the
Malian defence and security forces in operations to
restore the territorial integrity of Mali.
There are, however, remaining questions about
how the international and Malian forces would be led,
sustained, trained, equipped and financed. Moreover,
the division of tasks between the forces, command and
control, civilian oversight over the Malian forces and
timelines are issues that still need to be addressed.

3

S/PV.6879

While the operational aspects are being refined, we
envisage that the very existence of the military option
can provide useful and complementary leverage to the
political process, which remains the priority option for
Mali.
Should the Council decide to authorize the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission in Mali, any operations conducted by the
force will need to be well planned, coordinated and
implemented. Furthermore, if the effectiveness of the
operations and their minimal adverse impact on the
population are to be ensured, they must be carried out
in strict compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law. The early deployment of human
rights officers as part of a strengthened United Nations
presence in Mali, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
could provide an important capacity for monitoring
such compliance and help to ensure accountability.
Moreover, the Secretary-General’s proposals that the
Council request the African Union and the Malian
authorities to use benchmarks in determining when
military operations would commence, and consider
requesting the African Union to report to it on the
activities of the international support mission once
it is established, would also be helpful in ensuring
accountability.
As the Secretary-General has proposed, benchmarks
for the commencement of military operations, could
include, first, the demonstrated operational readiness
of the international and Malian forces; secondly,
positive developments in the peace process, including
on the part of the leadership in Bamako; and thirdly,
the effective training of the personnel of both forces
on their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law. These benchmarks would
help address important questions that are intended not
to delay addressing Mali’s security crisis but to make
sure that any military intervention can be successful
and in conformity with international standards.
Both the international support mission in Mali and
the Malian forces would need the requisite capacities for
carrying out operations against terrorist and affiliated
groups in northern Mali. That will require the timely
and well-coordinated provision of a significant amount
of support by international partners, including general
and specialized equipment, logistics and funding.
With respect to funding for the proposed force, the
United Nations has a limited ability to deliver a support

4

package in the near term to a combat force. Such
operations could be supported through contributions
by Member States. Once their objectives have been
achieved, the Council could consider the option of
the United Nations providing a logistics package
for stabilization operations undertaken by the force.
Consideration could also be given to the deployment of
a peacekeeping operation following the completion of
combat operations. The United Nations, drawing on its
comparative advantages and international experience,
could also support planning in key areas that need to
accompany or follow combat operations to ensure a
progressive extension of State authority. It is vital that
early preparations be undertaken for a stabilization
phase so as to prevent a security and administrative
vacuum as areas in northern Mali are recovered.
As members of the Council are aware, both the
President of Benin, in his capacity as the Chairman of
the African Union, and the President of the ECOWAS
Commission have sent letters to the Secretary-General
conveying their views on the report and expressing
certain reservations with respect to the approach adopted
by the United Nations concerning the authorization of
an African-led international support mission for Mali.
Both messages call for urgent action to be taken with
respect to the authorization of the deployment of the
African-led force to Mali.
The Secretary-General’s position is clear. He
shares the sense of urgency about the horrendous crisis
facing Mali, and he believes, at the same time, that
the international response must be multidimensional
and well-conceived. With respect to the military
option, his report makes clear that the strategic
operational framework, which was endorsed by the
African Union, provides a good basis for the Security
Council to consider the African Union’s request for
its authorization of the mission under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter. The Secretary-General’s
report also encourages additional planning before the
actual deployment of any such force.
The Malian people, the victims of this crisis,
are, understandably, looking to the region and the
international community for help. As the SecretaryGeneral indicated in his report, Mali’s complex crisis
requires a multifaceted and integrated response in
which the political, security, humanitarian, human
rights and stabilization dimensions are well coordinated
and mutually reinforcing, and whose challenges must
be seen in the broader context of the Sahel region.

12-62873

S/PV.6879

As a first step, international support should
be focused on supporting the Malian authorities in
conducting an inclusive national dialogue aimed at
reaching a national consensus on a transitional road
map that addresses the full return to constitutional
order and the grievances of groups in the north.
Secondly, efforts to bring about a negotiated political
settlement with armed groups that have disavowed ties
to terrorist groups should continue in earnest. Finally,
a well-conceived and executed military intervention in
the north should be conducted as a last resort to address
terrorist and criminal elements, and planning should be
undertaken for stabilization efforts in recovered areas.
Finally, let me say that while there is, for obvious
reasons, a strong focus at this time on the international
response to the requests of Mali and the region, it bears
underscoring that the Malians themselves need to be
at the centre of any efforts to restore their democracy
to health and fully recover their territory. The Malian
leaders must shoulder their responsibilities and work
together, inclusively, for the interests of the Malian
people and the region. The international community
must with urgency do all it can to assist.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Ms. Traoré (Mali) (spoke in French): At the outset,
let me convey to you, Sir, the warm congratulations of
the delegation of Mali on your country’s assumption
to the presidency of the Council for the month of
December and to assure you of the full cooperation
of our country, Mali, which is pleased to have such
excellent relations with the Kingdom of Morocco. I
should like also to reiterate to the Indian presidency my
delegation’s congratulations on the outstanding manner
in which it guided the work of the Council last month.
The Government of Mali wishes to reaffirm its
gratitude to the Secretary-General for the attention he
has devoted and all of the efforts that he is undertaking
to bring about a lasting resolution to the serious crisis
that is currently facing Mali. We are also grateful to
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), our broader family; the African Union;
the European Union; the United Nations system as
a whole; and all of Mali’s bilateral and multilateral
partners for their strong mobilization with respect to
the issues facing Mali in its quest for peace, stability
and development.

12-62873

In September, the Government of Mali requested
the adoption by the Security Council of a resolution
authorizing, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, the deployment of an international
military force in order to assist the Malian army
to recover and secure its territory. Following that
request, the Council adopted resolution 2071 (2012) on
12 October, which, inter alia, requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to it a report. We are considering that
report (S/2012/894) this morning.
The Government reiterates to the SecretaryGeneral its gratitude for the outstanding manner in
which the report was drafted, which reflects the great
interest that the Secretary-General is taking in the
situation in Mali. The Government of Mali has taken
note of the report and remains convinced that following
this consideration, the Security Council will authorize
the deployment of an African-led international support
mission for Mali in order to ease the suffering of the
people who have been under occupation for nine months
and to spare the subregion and even the rest of the world
an even more serious disaster whose repercussions
cannot be predicted.
The Government fully endorses the statements to
be made shortly by the representatives of ECOWAS
and the African Union. We participated in the process
leading to the conclusions contained in those statements
and share the views expressed therein.
We also take this opportunity to make a number
of comments concerning points that the Government of
Mali wishes to make following its reading of the report.
My delegation wishes first to underscore the urgency
of deploying the force in northern Mali. In reading the
report, we have understood that the Secretary-General
does not really believe that the deployment is urgent.
We say this because the daily plight of the people of
Mali under occupation is sufficiently well known. It
includes daily floggings and amputations. Only in
Mali are citizens’ limbs amputated under the pretext
of the so-called implementation of sharia law. Other
Islamic countries do not carry out such acts. There are
summary executions. The Secretary-General recalls
that child soldiers of all nationalities are being recruited
to carry out jihad in northern Mali. There are stonings,
pillaging and the destruction of cultural and historical
sites and monuments that are categorized as UNESCO
world heritage sites. The most basic human rights are
continually violated by a hoard of terrorists and other

5

S/PV.6879

criminals in organized groups who are not even Malians.
They are so firmly convinced of their conquest that we
have heard that they have called for reinforcements.
Infiltrations of terrorists and extremists from the north
and from the south have also been reported regularly
by the security forces. This painful and disturbing
conclusion has led the Malian transition authorities to
call for the deployment of the international force.
Since independence, the rebellion has always
been dealt with by the Malian authorities and previous
authorities in accordance with their resources and
together with the neighbouring countries, in particular
through dialogue. However, the rebellion’s recent
connection to terrorism requires us to change our stance.
I take this opportunity to specify that the Government
of Mali has requested international aid to drive out the
terrorists, extremists and other organized criminals,
who are most often foreigners and not Malian nationals.
We have not asked for the international force to fight
ethnic minorities. The Government wishes to assure
the Council of that.
In addition, the Government of Mali would like to
reassure the Council that the request for the deployment
of the force is not aimed at destabilizing neighbouring
countries. Our neighbours’ security and stability and
the excellent relations we enjoy with each of them are of
the highest concern to us. That is why the Government
continues to believe that the Security Council, given
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with
the Charter, will act quickly to avert a catastrophic
upheaval of security and the culture, cultural space
and human rights in Mali and the region, which would
entail serious and systematic violations of the most
basic human rights. The force is sought to ensure that
we have a certain amount of security in those spheres.

and relations between the different components of the
force. We recall that all these issues have been ironed
out in open discussion among military experts. Better
yet, the strategic concept that was the outcome of those
discussions is a consensus document. It is the result
of the active and joint participation of all the parties
involved: ECOWAS and West Africa, the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union, the
core countries — Algeria, Mauritania, Niger and
Mali — France, the United States, Canada and Germany.
Participation was broad and the document presented is
consensus-based.
We note the enthusiasm and commitment of the
European Union, France and certain troop-contributing
countries to supporting Mali in training, equipping and
financing the force, in accordance with resolution 2071
(2012). I wish to convey to each one our gratitude. In
our view, the Security Council could encourage and
support this international mobilization by adopting a
resolution authorizing the deployment of the force. All
countries that want to intervene wish to do so within
the framework of international legality.
In his report, the Secretary-General underscores
the need for the ruling class of Mali to find lasting
solutions to the recurring grievances of the Tuaregs
and the northern communities. The Government
of Mali would like to point out that the historical
advancement of our people clearly demonstrates that
our leaders have, since independence, always favoured
negotiated solutions that are the outcome of dialogue
and consultations, with the mediation of neighbouring
countries, in order to resolve crises. Mali is known for
its commitment to settling disputes by peaceful means
because it is firmly attached to the ideals of dialogue
and lasting peace and stability.

The deployment of the force is urgent; merely
discussing it acts as a deterrent. We have noted a
measure of calm since the meeting held in Bamako
on 19 October, but it has been precarious and a
certain reversal has since been observed. When it was
announced that there could be no war before September
2013, the terrorists have stepped up their activities and
sought reinforcements to wage jihad from Mali. Mali is
on its way to becoming a breeding ground for terrorism
in West Africa, Africa as a whole and throughout the
entire world.

Drawing on this tradition of dialogue, since the
outset of the current crisis in January the Malian
authorities have continually reaffirmed their
commitment to dialogue with those of our compatriots
who are not terrorists or instruments of organized
crime, and do not challenge the territorial integrity,
national unity or secular nature of the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with the commitment to dialogue with
our fellow citizens who accept the conditions that I have
just underscored, the Government will work tirelessly
to set up a national negotiating commission in order to
begin negotiations, with ECOWAS mediation.

In his report, the Secretary-General rightfully
raises questions about the financing, training, equipping

Several days ago, the Government sent to
Ouagadougou a delegation of mediators led by the

6

12-62873

S/PV.6879

Minister for Foreign Affairs, as recalled by the
Secretary-General, in order to begin direct dialogue with
the Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad
and Ansar Dine. We have received information with
regard to the conclusion of that agreement. They are
ready to withdraw.
The report tends to limit United Nations action
to the option of negotiating at the expense of the
requested intervention. The Government of Mali draws
the attention of the Council to the shortcomings of that
approach, which would not be sufficient to overcome
the entrenched terrorists. Mali has always addressed
this question through dialogue, but this time the nexus
with organized terrorism calls for military intervention.
We note that the passages of the report portraying
the Tuareg community as a marginalized minority
in Mali do not reflect the reality on the ground. The
Tuareg community represents barely 35 per cent of
the total population of northern Mali and less than
4 per cent of the total population of the Republic. The
census statistics confirm that there are 447,650 Tuareg
out of more than 14 million inhabitants. I recall that
this community does not support the rebellion; a few
Tuareg have joined the rebellion, but not the Tuareg
community as a whole.
Owing to travel constraints, not all members of my
delegation were able to come to New York. However,
the Vice-President of the Assembly of Mali is a Tuareg
and has been a member of the National Assembly for
more than 20 years. It is regrettable to note that that
small minority — perhaps calling it a small minority
is not quite appropriate, because a minority is already
a small number — but that tiny minority, which claims
the right to speak on behalf of all the communities of
the north, is a condensation of people that are entire
ethnic mix. The rebel Tuaregs are only a small minority.
It should be emphasized that in the past ten
years, three of the four prime ministers who led the
Government came from the north, and one of them
was a Tuareg. Some institutions of the Republic,
including the High Council of Communities, which
is the equivalent of the Senate in some countries, are
led by Tuaregs. Moreover, in accordance with the
provisions of pacts and agreements signed to manage
the rebellion, the Government adopted a policy of
positive discrimination. That has led to representation
of the Tuareg community in each governmental team
that has been set up. For more than 10 years, there have
been one or two Tuaregs in the Government.
12-62873

The Government decided on full integration in
the public service of young graduates from the north,
whether Tuareg or of other ethnicity, without taking
the national civil service examination. As members
know, in many developing countries, entry into the
civil service is governed by an examination. Positive
discrimination has enabled citizens of the north to join
the civil service without taking the examination.
The Government also decided to integrate 2,500
ex-combatants in the armed forces — the army, the
police, the gendarmerie, the national guard, customs
and the forest and wildlife service. Those young people
have been integrated at the grade proposed to the
Government by their movement. That is clear positive
discrimination. If people from the south wanted to rebel,
that would be a reason for them to do so, but they were
understanding. Everyone in Mali, the Government and
the people, wanted to resolve the situation in northern
Mali and the Tuareg issue.
In addition, there is the reintegration of more than
9,000 ex-combatants in the implementation of the small
development projects and programmes administered
directly by the population of the north. Furthermore,
Mali committed itself to a democratic process with State
decentralization and devolvement, which provide the
opportunity to all Mali citizens to actively participate
in the development of their community.
With the support of some partners represented
in this Chamber, the Government has established
development programmes in the areas of road
infrastructure to open up the country’s interior. It has
implemented agricultural, water, drinking water supply
and grazing projects and the building of health-care
centres and schools. A special characteristic of the
north is that the schools and health-care centres are
under the Tuareg communities. That is an example of
positive discrimination.
As the Council can note, the Government benefits
from that policy to assure the Security Council that the
Tuareg community has never been marginalized. It is
not marginalized and never will be. It certainly lives in
an area abandoned to nature, namely, the Sahara. There
are very intense development efforts. They cannot be
matched by the efforts undertaken in the south, but the
Government, gravely concerned about that, decided
nationally and in a fully balanced way to implement a
policy of positive discrimination.

7

S/PV.6879

The Government shares the concern of the
Secretary-General regarding human rights in the
context of deploying the force. We have just talked
about that. The Government solemnly reaffirms its
commitment to prevent human rights violations and
to fight against impunity. In that connection, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his readiness to
assist Mali in its capacity-building in that regard.
The Government also takes this opportunity
to inform the Council that, apart from the forced
displacement of populations, the crisis has already
undermined access to education for more than
500,000 school-aged children, of whom 300,000 were
already attending school before the crisis. Educational
institutions and equipment have been damaged. The
crisis has caused the displacement of 85 per cent of
teachers and 10,000 pupils towards the south and
50,000 school-aged children to neighbouring countries.
In other words, the population’s fundamental rights
have already been significantly violated.
The concern of the Secretary-General is well
founded, and we share it. But we need to strike a
balance. Between ensuring the rights of the populations
in the north in times of war and those of the people
whose rights are violated daily, we believe that it is out
of step. The Government of Mali believes that the best
way to protect human rights is to rapidly establish the
conditions to enable the State of Mali to fully exercise
its authority throughout its territory. The planned force
must be quickly set up to that end.
The Government of National Unity of Mali
established last August recognizes that a lasting
settlement to the crisis necessarily means achieving
a unified Mali leading class with regard to the major
goals of restoring the country’s full territorial integrity
and of holding credible elections. The Under-SecretaryGeneral mentioned that in his presentation. There will
be national consultations in a few days, on 11, 12 and
13 December. By then, the road map will exist.
The transition Government has two basic goals,
namely, restoring territorial integrity and convening
elections for the transition so that legitimately elected
authorities can administer the country. The road map
will be shared during the consultations and will be
finalized. A national negotiations committee will
be established. Also, the process of organizing the
elections has been started. The electoral list is being
audited with the support and commitment of certain

8

partners. The Government itself is also worked to draw
up a budget for the 2013 tax year.
On the Government’s behalf, allow me to underscore
the responsibilities of the Security Council to rapidly
act for peace and security in Mali, the region, Africa
and the world. That is indeed urgent, first, to ease the
plight of the Malian population and also to prevent
a similar, if not much more serious, situation for the
people of the Sahel. Urgent action is also required in
order to ensure that northern Mali does not become
a permanent safe haven for terrorism and organized
crime, which is now happening.
Today, the people of Mali are seriously affected
but they hope that members of the Security Council
will give positive attention to their Government’s
request for the deployment of the force. It is a matter of
maintaining international peace and security, which is
the primary task of the United Nations system.
On that note of hope, the Government of Mali
requests that Council members, in the light of our
remarks, consider deciding to deploy the mission and
international force in northern Mali. It is an urgent
matter for the security and the entire world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Ouédraogo.
Mr. Ouédraogo (spoke in French): Allow me first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council. I also wish to thank the
Security Council for this opportunity to address it on
behalf of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to affirm our commitment to finding
a rapid solution to the crisis in Mali.
Before I go any further, allow me to pay a strong
tribute to the Chairman of the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, Mr. Alassane Ouattara; to
the Chairperson of the African Union, Mr. Thomas
Boni Yayi; and their colleagues, the ECOWAS Mediator
for the Malian crisis, Mr. Blaise Compaoré, and the
Associate Mediator, Mr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, for
the solidarity they have steadfastly displayed towards
the people of Mali and for their determination to
resolve the institutional and security crises sweeping
the country.
I also take this opportunity to commend the
unstinting efforts of the Secretary-General to resolve
the Malian crisis and to commend him for his
comprehensive report (S/2012/894) on the current state

12-62873

S/PV.6879

of events. The report comes at a critical phase and calls
for concrete, positive steps to put an end to the suffering
too long endured by the Malian people at the hands of
terrorist groups that indulge in massive human rights
violations before our eyes.
The Security Council, in adopting resolution
2056 (2012) in July, demonstrated the international
community’s political commitment to supporting
the efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union to
resolve the crisis in Mali. Another very important
milestone was the Council’s unanimous adoption on
12 October of resolution 2071 (2012), bespeaking the
Security Council’s readiness to follow up the request of
ECOWAS and the African Union for the deployment of
an international force to help re-establish control over
the occupied areas of the northern Mali and to combat
terrorism.
In the context of the widespread mobilization
on Mali’s behalf, the strategic concept, outlining a
comprehensive and coordinated approach to settle
the crisis in the country, was adopted on 19 October
in Bamako and then endorsed by the African Union
Peace and Security Council. Similarly, the coordinated
operations concept for the deployment of the Africanled international force was adopted by the ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government on 11 November and
then ratified by the African Union after a series of
broad consultations with regional and international
military planners, including from the United Nations.
I emphasize that those significant documents, which
were called for by the Council in resolution 2071 (2012)
and have been delivered to the Secretary-General, were
arrived at through a collaborative, inclusive process
with the full support of the Malian authorities and all
parties concerned: the African Union, ECOWAS, the
United Nations, the European Union, the countries of
the region, including Mali’s nearest neighbours, as well
as our multilateral and bilateral strategic partners. That
testifies to the consensus enjoyed by those documents
in the search for solutions to the Malian crisis.
The extreme urgency of the situation in northern
Mali requires more than ever that the firm stance taken
by the Council in resolution 2071 (2012) be maintained.
It requires us to advance to a further, more assertive
stage in implementing the initiatives taken on all levels,
in keeping with the agreed strategies to end the crisis.
With every day that passes, any retreat from our resolve
entails the clear risk that the situation will deteriorate
and the suffering of the affected population — who are
12-62873

the victims, as the Council is aware, of grave human
rights violations — will be exacerbated.
In the view of ECOWAS, the political
dialogue — which should always enjoy pride of place
in crisis resolution — must in Mali’s case be combined
with the military option if we are to help the country
to regain its territorial integrity, dismantle the terrorist
networks and restore State authority throughout its
national territory. Non-intervention in northern Mali or
any backing down from the urgent need to send a force
could further aggravate the security and humanitarian
situations, which are already greatly troubling.
Notably, it could encourage the further entrenchment
of terrorist and criminal groups, with the threat of dire
consequences for regional and international security.
That is why, on the recommendation of the sixtyninth ordinary session of the ECOWAS Council of
Ministers in Abidjan from 30 November to 2 December,
and in accordance with the previous decisions taken
at the ECOWAS Conference of Heads of State and
Government, I ask the Council, upon consideration of
the Secretary-General’s report, to recognize the urgent
need for a resolution authorizing the deployment of
the African-led international support mission in Mali,
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
I have also delivered to the Secretary-General, for
the consideration of all members of the Council, the
communiqué issued by the ECOWAS Council of
Ministers on the Secretary-General’s report, outlining
our position, which enjoys the support of the African
Union.
At this point, I would like to share with the Council
the vision shared by ECOWAS and the African Union
of the approach to be taken and the measures to be
adopted in the days and weeks to come, to deliver a
coherent response to the settlement of the Malian crisis.
First, the strategic concept for the international
community’s intervention in Mali follows the dual
approach of engaging, on the one hand, in dialogue
and negotiation with those armed groups that respect
human rights and have already clearly cut their ties
with terrorist groups, and on the other hand deploying
military force against terrorist groups.
Secondly, we believe that the deployment of
the international force is crucial to restoring Mali’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. To that end, it
is essential that the Council resolution authorizing
deployment be adopted before the end of the year.

9

S/PV.6879

Thirdly, in support of our initiatives, ECOWAS
and the African Union call for greater coordination
of political and security efforts to strengthen national
cohesion; organize credible, transparent, open elections
meeting international standards; and conceive and
implement a reform of the Malian armed forces.
Fourthly, we count on the involvement of the United
Nations and its expert support for the international
force expertise in matters of politics, human rights,
peacekeeping and logistics.
The request that we reiterate here today has the
full support of the African Union and the Malian
Government. We expect the Council’s response to be
fully focused on ensuring that the efforts which have
enjoyed unanimous regional and international support
since the outbreak of the crisis will not be watered down
and stripped of all their impact on the ground. The
deployment will of course be funded by the countries
of ECOWAS and the African Union and their strategic
partners, including the United Nations. For that reason,
once the resolution is adopted, a round table on the
financing of the operation will be convened to identify
the pledges already made.
A robust resolution of the Council is necessary. It
is eagerly awaited by the people of Africa, especially
those suffering in northern Mali. It will rescue and
strengthen the political dialogue launched with the
assistance and mediation of ECOWAS, and pave the
way to a rapid resolution to the crisis in Mali.
In conclusion, please allow me to again thank all
Council members and our bilateral and multilateral
partners for their continuing support for Mali and for
their assistance in the peacebuilding process and in
restoring security in West Africa.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Ouédraogo for his statement.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: Let me start by conveying
the apologies of Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
would have loved to join this meeting, but could not
attend due to other commitments on the continent. She
has therefore instructed me to represent her here.
I wish also to salute the presence of Minister
Traoré Rokiatou Guikine of Mali and Mr. Kadré
Désiré Ouédraogo, President of the Commission of

10

the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).
I congratulate Morocco on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and thank the President for inviting the
African Union (AU) to this very important meeting.
We are highly appreciative of the efforts of the
Security Council regarding the situation in Mali and the
support extended so far to the AU and ECOWAS. I would
like in particular to highlight the adoption of resolutions
2056 (2012) and 2071 (2012) as a demonstration of the
commitment of the Security Council and its members
fully to shouldering their responsibilities on an issue
that clearly and obviously threatens international
peace and security, as underlined by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/894) that was just introduced
by Mr. Feltman, whom we also thank.
I also would like to reiterate the AU’s appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the invaluable contribution
of the United Nations towards the elaboration of the
strategic concept for the resolution of the crisis in
Mali, as well as for its active involvement, including
through experts dispatched to Bamako, in the process
of developing the concept of operations for the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission in Mali.
As all Council members are aware, the situation in
Mali is of utmost concern to ECOWAS, the countries of
the region and the AU. It poses a serious threat to Mali,
the region and far beyond, particularly in view of the
entrenchment of terrorist and other criminal groups in
the northern part of the country.
The situation also calls into question the basic
principles of the AU and the larger international
community. Let me highlight here respect for the unity
and territorial integrity of Mali, the repudiation of the
recourse to armed rebellion to further political claims,
and the rejection of terrorism and criminal activities.
Because those principles are so fundamental to the
maintenance of peace, security and stability on the
continent, we need to react swiftly and strongly against
any attempt to undermine them.
Since the outbreak of the crisis in Mali, ECOWAS
and the AU have exerted sustained efforts to address
the situation, as demonstrated by the initiatives taken
by the ECOWAS Chairman, President Alassane
Ouattara, and its Mediator, President Blaise Compaoré;
the encouragement to the Malian stakeholders to adopt
12-62873

S/PV.6879

an inclusive road map on the conduct of the transition;
and the planning for the deployment of an operation.
The Chairperson of the AU Commission, Ms. DlaminiZuma, has appointed former President Pierre Buyoya
the AU High Representative for Mali and the Sahel. He
has since travelled to Mali and elsewhere in the region
to further the strategic concept and related Peace and
Security Council decisions. He is working in close
coordination with the region and with international
partners, in particular the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, Mr. Romano Prodi.
Both ECOWAS and the AU are certainly mindful
of the complexity and multifaceted nature of the crisis
facing Mali. They are equally mindful of the need to
take into account the regional dimension in the broader
context of the challenges facing the Sahelo-Saharan
region. The strategic concept that I alluded to earlier
aims precisely at providing an overall framework that
can guide the efforts of the international community.
Our efforts revolve around three key components.
The first is dialogue with the Malian armed groups
willing to seek a peaceful response to any legitimate
grievance they may have, within the strict framework
of the principles articulated by ECOWAS, the AU and
the United Nations, namely, respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of Mali — which are not up for
debate — the rejection of armed rebellion to further
political claims, and the repudiation of terrorism and
criminal activities. Second is the development by the
Malian stakeholders of an inclusive road map to achieve
the transition objectives, and third is the deployment
of the international support mission to help the Malian
authorities restore the country’s unity and territorial
integrity and dismantle the terrorist and other criminal
networks active in the northern part of the country,
including the strengthened capacity of the Malian
defence and security forces.
Clearly, the deployment of the international support
mission is a key component of the strategic concept.
We strongly believe that the urgent establishment of the
mission will go a long way in furthering our overall
objective of facilitating the creation of the conditions
necessary for a stable and democratic Malian State that
responds to the needs of all its citizens, fully exercising
its authority over its national territory, and effectively
assuming its responsibilities in addressing regional
security and other challenges.

12-62873

In that respect, the AU notes that the report
submitted by the Secretary-General stresses the need
for further planning and preparation, while recognizing
nonetheless that the concept of operations developed
with the support of the United Nations provides a
useful basis for considering the AU request to the
Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to authorize AU member
States to establish the international support mission for
an initial period of one year, and to take all measures
necessary to assist the Malian authorities in recovering
the occupied regions of the north, in order to restore
the unity and territorial integrity of Mali and reduce
the threats posed by terrorists and affiliated groups,
including transnational organized criminal networks.
It is therefore our hope that the Security Council
will authorize the deployment of the African-led
international support mission in Mali without delay.
We view the political track regarding the transition
in Mali, the negotiations with the Malian armed
groups, and the deployment of the international support
mission as mutually reinforcing. Any perception of a
lack of decisiveness on any of those tracks may send the
wrong message to the terrorist and criminal networks,
as well as to the armed groups that are not committed
to a negotiated solution, while prolonging the suffering
of the civilian population and increasing the threat to
regional and international peace and security.
The deployment and operations of the international
support mission would require strong United Nations
support. Experience in the Darfur region of the Sudan
with the African Union Mission in the Sudan, and
currently in Somalia with the African Union Mission
in Somalia, has clearly shown the limitations of and
constraints linked to support provided on a voluntary
basis.
I would like therefore to echo the call made by the
AU Peace and Security Council, in its communiqué
of 13 November, for the establishment of a United
Nations support package, funded through assessed
contributions, to ensure sustained and predictable
support to the mission. Equally important is the need to
extend the required support to the Malian defence and
security forces through the establishment of a dedicated
trust fund.
Mali is at a crossroads. Time is of the essence. We
need to act fast and send a clear and strong message
on the resolve of the international community and
its support for the African-led efforts. In particular,
11

S/PV.6879

and in line with the Peace and Security Council
communiqué of 13 November, we call on this body to
take the following steps: first, to extend full support to
the strategic concept in all its components and to the
efforts under way to ensure its effective and speedy
implementation; secondly, to authorize the deployment
of the international support mission as provided for in
the harmonized concept of operations endorsed by the
Peace and Security Council, it being understood that
ECOWAS and the AU will continue, with the support
of the United Nations and in collaboration with all
stakeholders, to work on outstanding planning and
operational issues; thirdly, to put in place a United
Nations support package for the international support
mission funded through assessed contributions; and
fourthly and finally, to establish a trust fund to support
the Malian defence and security forces, especially in
view of the lead role expected of them in addressing the
security challenges in their country.

12

The AU is committed to building a strong
partnership with the United Nations and Mali. Indeed,
it is only through joint efforts that we will be able to
effectively support the Malian people and authorities as
they strive to overcome the very difficult circumstances
facing their country, and contribute to the promotion of
lasting security, stability and development in the entire
Sahel region.
At the AU, we have no doubt that, as in the past,
we can count on the Security Council’s commitment
and continued support to Africa’s efforts in Mali and
elsewhere on the continent.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

12-62873
