S/2001/416

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 April 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 24 April 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
As requested by the members of the Security Council at their consultations on
18 April 2001, I have the honour to transmit to you the action plan prepared by the
Chairperson of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources
and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ms. Safiatou
Ba-N’Daw.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-35166 (E) 260401

*0135166*

S/2001/416

Annex
Action plan
1.
In accordance with the request made by members of the Security Council on
18 April 2001 at the informal consultations on the final report S/2001/357 of 12
April 2001 of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources
and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the panel
presents its action plan for the extension of its mandate by three months, until the
end of July 2001. This action plan is consistent with the one the panel submitted in
February 2001 and takes into consideration the views expressed by the Council.
2.
The panel wishes to recall that in transmitting the final report and in the action
plan submitted in early February, the panel indicated that approximately 70 per cent
of the information and work were covered. On this basis, the panel wishes to work
on the remaining 30 per cent, mainly on two themes: the activities of criminal
cartels and the mining and deals on copper and cobalt. In addition to these two
themes, the panel would also compile comments and reactions from various
stakeholders and actors cited in the report and prepare answers to those parties.
3.
The panel wishes to emphasize that the first theme, “Activities of criminal
cartels”, covers a wide range of issues all related to the continuation of the conflict.
These issues include: money-laundering; counterfeit currency and its use for the
purchase of natural resources; financial networks; and arms transactions to support
the continuation of the conflict. The second theme is complementary to the work
done in the report on numerous deals that were signed by some private companies
on copper, cobalt and other natural resources. The panel will work primarily on
investigating the stocks of copper and cobalt that existed in some regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo before the beginning of the war.
Tentative travel plan
4.
The panel anticipates that a number of trips to the field would be necessary,
some in the region, others outside the region. The aim of these visits would be either
to follow up on some of the existing leads or to gather more information on the
multiple networks and routes allegedly used for criminal activities. Some visits may
also be necessary in the event that new leads appear.
(Signed) Safiatou Ba-N’Daw
Chairperson

2
