S/2008/188

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 March 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 18 March 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
convey the attached letter, dated 3 March 2008, which I received from the High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union,
transmitting the report on the activities of the European Union Police Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2007 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

08-28132 (E) 030408

*0828132*

S/2008/188

Annex
Letter dated 3 March 2008 from the Secretary-General and High
Representative of the Council of the European Union addressed
to the Secretary-General
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2007. This report marks the end of the first follow-on
mission.
On 19 November 2007, the Council of the European Union adopted Joint
Action 2007/749/CFSP providing for a second extension of the Mission’s mandate
until 31 December 2009 following the invitation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to continue its activities.
Although considerable achievements have been made since the initial launch
of the Mission on 1 January 2003, effective results in the fight against organized
crime and in the establishment of key State law enforcement agencies such as the
Border Police of the State Investigation and Protection Agency are a long-term
endeavour. The recent arrests of prominent figures allegedly involved in organized
crime activities represent, however, a significant breakthrough.
The adoption of the Mostar Declaration in October 2007 by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities will furthermore pave the way for police reform, the
implementation of which has been stalled over the last three years in the absence of
political agreement among the stakeholders.
Under its renewed mandate, the Mission will therefore continue to focus on a
concrete operational approach while further reaching out to the judiciary and, in
particular, the prosecutors. Improved cooperation between police forces and the
prosecutors’ offices is a critical factor in the fight against organized crime and other
forms of serious crime.
The Mission will also assist the domestic authorities in the implementation of
police reform, contributing in particular to the harmonization of their laws on police
officials and on internal affairs.
I propose to provide the Security Council with a written update on the progress
of the Mission. I should be grateful if you would transmit the enclosed report to the
President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

08-28132

S/2008/188

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2007
Introduction
1.
The European Union Police Mission is the first operation undertaken under the
European Security and Defence Policy. Initially with a three-year mandate starting
on 1 January 2003, the Council decided in November 2005 to extend the Mission
from 1 January 2006 to 31 December 2007 with a refocused mandate. In view of the
remaining challenges, the Secretary-General/High Representative had recommended
an extension of the Mission for another two years at its current strength,
organization and mandate during the reporting period. With Joint Action
2007/749/CFSP of 9 November 2007, the Council decided on another extension,
until 31 December 2009, in view of a possible transfer of Mission activities to
community assistance after 2009. Brigadier General Vincenzo Coppola (Italy) was
Head of Mission during the reporting period. The Council extended his appointment
until 31 December 2008.
2.
The European Union Police Mission aims through monitoring, mentoring and
inspecting to establish in Bosnia and Herzegovina a sustainable, professional and
multi-ethnic police service operating in accordance with European and international
standards. The Mission benefits from the local political guidance and coordination
of the European Union Special Representative. The Mission contributes to the
stabilization and association process with the goal of setting Bosnia and
Herzegovina irreversibly on track for European Union membership by strengthening
the rule of law and developing an effective and accountable police service free from
undue political interference.
Staffing and methodology
3.
On 31 December 2007 the Mission had 421 staff (173 international police
officers, 28 international civilian experts and 220 national staff). All 27 EU member
States contribute to the Mission as well as six non-EU countries. The Mission takes
due account of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security in all its activities, as well as the EU operational paper on practical
measures for taking work forward on resolution 1325 (2000) in the context of the
European Security and Defence Policy.
4.
The Mission reviewed its structure and priorities in order to increase its
effectiveness in assisting the Bosnia and Herzegovina police in the fight against
organized crime. It also completed an assessment of organized crime as part of its
regular review process.
General situation
5.
On 1 July, Miroslav Lajcak took over from Christian Schwarz-Schilling as
European Union Special Representative and High Representative of the
international community.

08-28132

3

S/2008/188

6.
The ruling of the International Court of Justice on the genocide in Srebrenica
continued to dominate, during the summer, the political debate, in particular the
demands by Bosniak politicians for a special status for that municipality. The strong
engagement of the international community, including the appointment of United
States Ambassador Clifford Bond as envoy of the European Union Special
Representative and High Representative, contributed to reducing tensions in the
Srebrenica region. On 25 June, the High Representative issued a Decision Enacting
the Law on the Centre for the Srebrenica-Potocari Memorial and Cemetery for the
Victims of the 1995 Genocide, which, inter alia, obligates Bosnia and Herzegovina
to provide protection through the State Investigation and Protection Agency, thus
removing the municipality from the exclusive competence of the Republika Srpska
police. Furthermore, the Mission advised on the appointment of Bosniak Deputy
Station Commanders in Srebrenica, Bratunac and Vlasenica. On 10 July, the High
Representative took a decision leading to the suspension by the Republika Srpska
authorities of 36 police officers under investigation by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
State Prosecutor for alleged involvement in war crimes, among them the former
Director of the Republika Srpska police, Dragomir Andan. Despite these
developments, the Republika Srpska police, together with the State Investigation
and Protection Agency, the police of the Federation, the Border Police and the
police of Tuzla Canton, took all necessary measures to provide a safe environment
for thousands of people who travelled to and attended the various commemoration
events in the area of Srebrenica around 11 July, marking the anniversary of the
tragic events. The Mission praised the Republika Srpska police and the cooperation
and coordination between the different police services.
7.
In September, the Special Representative/High Representative submitted to the
political parties, after consultations with the Mission, his draft protocol on meeting
the police reform requirements necessary for initiating and signing a Stabilization
and Association Agreement, which constituted the basis for political negotiations.
Five rounds of technical talks with representatives of the six Government parties
(HDZ, BiH, HDZ 1990, PDP, SBiH, SDA and SNSD) and the two opposition parties
(SDP and SDS) were organized and chaired by the office of the Special
Representative/High Representative with the Mission in an observer capacity.
8.
After several rounds of negotiations, the six main political parties eventually
adopted on 28 October the Mostar Declaration on police restructuring, endorsing the
three EU principles. The Declaration also included the acknowledgement that
certain questions pertaining to police restructuring can only be solved in the context
of broader constitutional reform. The Declaration also entailed an agreement to
adopt two State laws, a law on police officials and a law on the Bosnia and
Herzegovina police service. Bosnia and Herzegovina leaders subsequently agreed on
22 November on the Sarajevo action plan for police reform, which included a clear
political commitment to deliver, as well as a timetable for concrete institutional
steps. These were welcomed as positive developments, and the European
Commission assessed that sufficient progress had been made to initial the
Stabilization and Association Agreement on 4 December 2007 in Sarajevo.
9.
The Council of Ministers subsequently set up a working group to draft
legislation for the implementation of police reform. The working group held its first
sessions on 18 and 27 December. Representatives of the Mission and the Special
Representative/High Representative attended as observers and will monitor progress.

4

08-28132

S/2008/188

The draft legislation is expected to be submitted by the Council of Minsters for
enactment by 15 February 2008.
10. This outcome was preceded by a political crisis resulting by the end of October
in the resignation of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Nikola Spiric
(SNSD), and in a stalemate in the work of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of
Ministers. The Special Representative/High Representative engaged intensively with
Bosnia and Herzegovina political actors to defuse the crisis while upholding his
imposed measures of 19 October (on the efficient work of the Council of Ministers
and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament). This engagement led to a turnaround
in the political atmosphere on 30 November, when both houses of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly adopted amendments to their rules of
procedure which met the criteria specified by the High Representative. Parallel
consultations were held with Republika Srpska representatives to solve Republika
Srpska concerns pertaining to the High Representative’s decision on the functioning
of the Council of Ministers. On 3 December, the High Representative enacted an
Authentic Interpretation on the Law on Changes and Amendments to the Law of the
Council of Members. The Authentic Interpretation clarified the amendments on
19 October and addressed specific concerns of Republika Srpska political
authorities. The same day, the Council of Members adopted the Mostar Declaration
of 28 October and the action plan on police reform of 22 November, paving the way
for the initialling of the Stabilization and Association Agreement. On 11 December,
the governing parties reached an agreement in Laktasi (Republika Srpska) on
several outstanding political issues, including the prompt reappointment of the
Council of Members with an identical composition.

Achievements during the reporting period
1.

Support to the police restructuring process
11. Against the backdrop of the political process, the Mission has continued to
differentiate between the police restructuring process and police reform efforts,
police restructuring being the institutional process linked to the constitutional
reforms, while police reform covers technical measures that may be implemented
ahead of the police restructuring process. As previously indicated, the Mission was
actively involved throughout the negotiation process surrounding police reform.
Harmonization and coordination within the existing structures
12. To facilitate the police restructuring process, the Mission continued to support
and advise on the implementation and harmonization of the legal and regulatory
framework at State, entity, cantonal and Breko District levels. The Mission
continued its engagement with senior police management and with Ministers of the
Interior at all levels to improve existing police structures and legislation. Many of
the recommendations step from the Mission’s main priority to support the fight
against major and organized crime.
13. The Mission developed concepts on the independent selection and review
boards, an improved internal structure of the State Investigation and Protection
Agency and, in particular, the integration of the INTERPOL Office into the Agency
as the International Police Cooperation Department.

08-28132

5

S/2008/188

14. Since July, the Mission has promoted the development of a Bosnia and
Herzegovina-wide collective agreement between police employers and trade unions.
A collective agreement for all levels and in particular for the State Investigation and
Protection Agency and the Border Police has been drafted by representatives of all
trade unions.
15. The Mission, in coordination with the Special Representative/Office of the
High Representative and EUFOR, continued to monitor and raise serious concerns
about the decision of the Republika Srpska Government to establish a Public
Company for the Security of Persons and Property of Republika Srpska. Following
the intervention of the Head of Mission, the Republika Srpska Minister of the
Interior agreed on the participation of the Mission, EUFOR and the Special
Representative/Office of the High Representative in the drafting of the statute of the
company. However, the Working Group established by the Republika Srpska
Government could not overcome the concerns raised by the international community
in particular on the role, remit and size of the company.
16. These concerns were brought to the attention of the Republika Srpska Minister
of the Interior and presented by the Mission to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities during the European Commission reform process monitoring session on
5 July 2007. The Mission, the Special Representative/High Representative and
EUFOR requested Republika Srpska to suspend this initiative until the outcome of
the police restructuring process. Only then would it be possible to evaluate how
such a company would fit into the security sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Mission’s recommendations to put on hold the Republika Srpska initiative were
underpinned by findings made through a comparative analysis of the private security
sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2.

Support to the fight against organized crime
17. The Mission’s advice on the planning and conduct of investigations and
operations remained focused on the 20 main “targets”. At Mission level, the
anti-organized crime department coordinated and tracked progress. Success and
monitoring indicators include police-prosecution aspects such as the opening of
indictments and the final verdict by the judiciary.
18. The Mission’s work continued to be supported by the Mission-led EU
Coordination Board. The Board met at least every two weeks and included
representatives of the office of the Special Representative, EUFOR, the Special
Department for Organized Crime of the Office of the State Prosecutor, the EU
Customs and Fiscal Assistance Office, the European Commission delegation and the
Office of the High Representative. The Mission-EUFOR common operational
guidelines were reviewed in October 2007 and continued to be a solid and wellfunctioning basis for operational coordination and cooperation. Their next review is
due by the end of April 2008.
19. The Mission also puts an emphasis on international police cooperation aspects,
in particular by assisting the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities in the
implementation of the strategic agreement with Europol as well as other EU
mechanisms.

6

08-28132

S/2008/188

Police-prosecution relations
20. The professional relations between police and prosecutors still need further
improvement at all levels of jurisdiction. Although basic communication and
cooperation problems still occur, the Mission continued to identify positive
developments. An increasing number of regular contacts, working meetings and
case-based consultations have been established. The Mission has noted an increase
in jointly established and developed investigative strategies and operational plans as
well as target-oriented investigative approaches. To date, these investigative
elements have however lacked the necessary expertise on both the prosecutors’ and
the police side. However, with mentoring from the Mission steady improvements
have been observed.
21. The key problems continue to be the lack of a clear and shared understanding
about the respective roles, rights and obligations of prosecutors and police in
accordance with the criminal procedure legislation. As a result, both partners lack
initiative in their respective fields of investigative competencies.
22. The Mission advised improving these formal aspects of the investigations. In
order to enhance the process of adaptation to the new criminal legal and procedural
system, the Mission continued to promote relevant joint police/prosecutor training
modules through local judicial training institutions and supported joint training
initiatives.
23. The Mission organized and facilitated three police/prosecutor seminars as
follow-up events to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Conference on Police/Prosecutors’
Cooperation held in May 2007. The seminars consisted of selected police and
prosecutorial experts focusing on general formal aspects of investigations,
integrated financial investigations and special investigative measures. The Mission
is working on these issues in close cooperation with the Special Representative, as
foreseen in his mandate.
Police certification
24. In July, the Office of the High Representative made a presentation to the
Police Steering Board on the letter dated 30 April 2007 from the President of the
Security Council on de-certified police officers. The Police Steering Board
subsequently released a press statement indicating its readiness to further explain
the provisions of the letter to individuals denied certification by the International
Police Task Force. The letter has been forwarded for direct implementation to all
law enforcement agencies in the country. Copies of the letter were also distributed
and discussed at the meeting of Federation police commissioners held on 26 July.
On 16 August, the Federation Minister of the Interior and the Police Director
forwarded model amendments to the Law on Police Officials to cantonal Ministries
of the Interior and police commissioners in order to initiate legal procedures for
their adoption in cantonal assemblies, while amendments are also awaiting adoption
at the Federation level. These amendments should enable former police officers
denied certification by the International Police Task Force to apply for vacant
positions in law enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, under the
conditions defined in the letter from the President of the Security Council.

08-28132

7

S/2008/188

25. At State level, the amendments are still under consideration. In Republika
Srpska, the amendments were incorporated into the draft law on police officials
which has still to be finalized. In Breko, the amendments were adopted.
3.

Strengthening internal/external control, inspection and accountability of
the police
26. Attempts at political interference in police work persisted. At several junctures
the Mission had also to address demands for national balance in senior police
management, while encouraging the domestic owners of the process to accept the
basic principle that professional criteria should prevail in police matters.
27. In the Federation, the relations between the Minister and the Director of Police
have normalized following the appointment of a new Minister. This in turn triggered
the inclusion of the Federation Minister and all cantonal Ministers of the Interior in
regular monthly meetings with all police commissioners.
28. Cantonal Ministers have proved themselves to be constructive partners at those
meetings. The Mission recognized a need to clarify the role of ministers in the
appointment, assessment and removal of police commissioners. To further
strengthen accountability, the Mission launched a thorough update of the existing
cantonal laws on internal affairs in partnership with local police representatives.
29. During the reporting period, the Mission’s inspection teams concluded two
audits relating to the storage by the police of seized weapons and seized drugs. A
preliminary audit was conducted to collect and study the actual legislation
regulating the matter. After this first step, a number of inspections were made in the
Federation and Republika Srpska during visits to several police stations to verify
how the police services are dealing with drugs and weapons after their seizure.
Preliminary results show certain practical problems related to the lack of
cooperation with the Courts, which fail to order the destruction of the seized items.
The storage areas are often inadequate, either insecure or with weapons and
ammunitions stored together.
Independent Selection and Review Board
30. On 24 July, the Working Group of the Federation Parliament’s Commission for
selection and appointments finalized the selection process for the Federation
Independent Selection and Review Board, proposing the appointment of seven
candidates (3 Bosniaks, 2 Croats, 1 Serb and 1 other). On 25 July, the Federation
House of Representatives appointed the proposed candidates, and the House of
Peoples followed on 26 July.
31. The Working Group fully accepted the concerns of the Mission and the Office
of the High Representative about two candidates. It is encouraging that the
protracted process of selection and appointment of the new Federation Independent
Selection and Review Board is finally completed; however, the new Board will
immediately have to deal with several highly complex and sensitive issues around
the status of the current Federation Director of Police and the selection of a new
Director of Police.
32. The Mission reviewed the latest version of the draft concept paper on the
Independent Selection and Review Board. This version included all detailed
elements of the foreseen new selection and appointment system. Mainly it suggests

8

08-28132

S/2008/188

modifying the role of the Board in order to grant more authority to the Minister and
the Government in the appointment of the police chiefs.
33. In comparison with the current system, the draft concept paper suggests a
compromise introducing a division of responsibilities between the Independent
Selection and Review Board, the Minister and the Government during the different
phases of the selection and the appointment process.
4.

Further support to the development of the State Investigation and Protection
Agency and the Border Police
34. The State Investigation and Protection Agency was established as the main
authority to investigate crimes designated by the State Prosecutor. It is still a young
police agency which was established in 2003. At the moment the investigation
departments are understaffed, owing to the priority in staffing given to the
protection department. Management posts are mainly filled, but the Agency is still
short of operational investigators, which leads to operational difficulties when
conducting investigations. In short, technical and legal issues often affect their
capabilities and capacity.
35. The State Investigation and Protection Agency, with the assistance of the
Mission and the Office of the High Representative, has managed to secure the
necessary funds to go ahead with the construction of the new Mission headquarters
building in 2008 and 2009. The 2008 budget request negotiated with the Ministry of
Finance and Treasury has been significantly increased. It will allow the Agency to
advance in its full establishment through further staffing and purchase of equipment.
Funds for special purpose expenditures will also be provided to informant handling
and witness protection expenditures.
36. During the period under review, the selection of a new Director and other
senior officials has been marked by certain political difficulties. In September, the
Mission, the Office of the High Representative and the United States Embassy
agreed that the Minister of Security should be urged to request that the relevant
selection commission relaunch the selection process for the Agency Director, as the
first round failed to generate a sufficiently broad pool of suitable candidates. At its
session on 27 December, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
eventually appointed, out of five eligible candidates, Mirko Lujic (former head of
the Agency’s Department for Operational Support, Serb) as Director.

08-28132

9
