THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
nd
MEETING:

NEW

18 MARCH

1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2072)

Adoption

of the agenda

, , ., . . ... . .. , .. ,, .. .. ... . ,I.. .

Pug;

. . , , . ,, , .. .. . . ... . .. . ,. .. .,. . ... .. ,., .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12607) ,

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2072nd

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday,

18 March 1978, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Crganization)
took places at the Council table and
Mr. Abdel
Meg&d
(Egypt),
Mr Nuseibeh
(Jordan),
Mr. Kikhia [Libyan Arab Jamahiriya). Mr. Al-Hussamy
(Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr- AI-Haddad (Yemen) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, VenezueIa.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite him to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2072)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12607)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cu Dinh Ba (Viet
Nam) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw the attention of
members to a new document regarding the matter under
discussion, issued under the symbol S/ 12609.
5’. The first speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

6. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and the other members of the Council for
inviting me to participate in the debate on this serious and
dangerous matter by which my country cannot be left
unaffected.

?%e agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12606);
Letter dated 17 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to
tile President of the Security Council (S/12607)

7. Once again the Council is faced with a serious situation
in the Middle East resulting from the deliberate policy and
irresponsible actions of Israel’s gradual expansion. The
consequences of this naked Israeli invasion of Lebanon are
not confined to Lebanon but extend to the whole area and
adversely affect the efforts aimed at reaching a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. This Israeli aggression
against Lebanon was very aptly described by the SecretaryGeneral as a violation of the boundaries of a sovereign State
and the massive use of force, whatever the motivation of
this action may have been.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at its 2071st meeting, I invite the
representatives of Lebanon, Israel, Egypt, Jordan, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yemen to participate in the debate without the right to
vote.
2. In accordance with the decision taken at the same
meeting, I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.

8. This is indeed the case, since, on the one hand, the
Lebanese Government, in the letter addressed by its
representative to the Secretary-General [S/12602],
has
declared that Lebanon had no connexion with the operation on the road between Haifa and Tel Aviv or with any
other commando operation, and, on the other hand, the

At the invitation of the President, Mr. TuCni (Lebanon),
Mr. Herzog (Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
I

are numerous and are not confined to the latest Israeli
attack. I should like to draw the attention of the Council to
a particular observation by the Chief of Staff in his previous
reports. He said: “Israel forces personnel continued to
occupy six positions on the Lebanese side of the armistice
demarcation line”.

Israeli leaders themselves admit that the massive use of
force is not in retaliation for the sad and tragic events that
took place in Israel last Saturday, 11 March, but to
establish a security zone in Southern Lebanon from which
they have so far no intention of withdrawing.
These
statements are rather ominous. Are they the preface for the
occupation of yet another Arab country?

13. A permanent presence of Israeli forces on Lebanese
territory has always been a cherished aim of Israeli policy.
The scope and nature of the latest Israeli act of aggression,
coupled with various statements by Israeli leaders concerning the establishment of what they call a security belt in
Southern Lebanon from which Israel will certainly not
withdraw, go very far towards proving the true &tent of
Israel’s latest endeavours.

9. This is not the first time that the Council has discussed
the subject of Israeli attacks on, incursions into and
invasions of Lebanon. The Council has adopted many
resolutions. Let me refer only to some of them. There was
resolution 262 (1968), which was adopted unanimously
and in which the Council condemned Israel for its
premeditated military action in violation of its obligations
under the Charter and the cease-fire resolutions and
solemnly issued a warning to Israel that if such acts were to
be repeated, the Council would have to consider further
steps to give effect to its decisions. There was resolution
270 (1969), in which the Council condemned the premeditated air attack by Israel on villages in southern
Lebanon in violation of its obligations under the Charter
and Council resolutions. There was resolution 280 (1970),
in which the Council deplored the failure of Israel to abide
by resolutions 262 (1968) and 270 (1969), once again
condemned Israel for its premeditated military action,
declared that such armed attacks could no longer be
tolerated and repeated its solemn warning.

14. The statements that emanate from Israel to the effect
that it has no intention of occupying Lebanese territory are
belied by the facts. The Council should bear in mind that
similar statements have been made before by Israeli leaders,
yet 10 years after the occupation of territories belonging to
three States Members of the United Nations those territories remain occupied, with the addition now of territories
belonging to a fourth Member State, namely Lebanon. The
Council should by now be wary of such statements and
should assert itself in the face of the arrogant behaviour of
Israel.
15. Egypt considers the massive Israeli aggression carried
out by land, air and sea to be a serious development in the
course of events in the Middle East and a new Israeli
violation of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. It also adds a new obstacle to the achievement of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

10. The list of Council resolutions goes on and on. There
are also resolutions 313 (1972), 317 (1972), 332 (1973),
337 (1973) and 347 (1974). These resolutions do not
exhaust the list of aggressive acts carried out by Israel
against the political independence and territorial integrity
of Lebanon, for there are many cases of which the Council
was not seized. The latest case took place on 9 November
1977, in which more than 100 persons were killed.

16. Israel’s resort once again to acts of aggression is all the
more serious since those acts are aimed at liquidating the
Palestinians because they are Palestinians. Those acts of
aggression constitute a systematic attempt at the ektemination of the Palestinian people, and a flagrant violation of
the sovereignty of a Member State. In this context, the
Foreign Minister of Egypt, in his statement on 15 March,
pointed out the gravity of the statements made by the
Israeli Chief of Staff on Israel’s intention of establishing a
so-called Israeli security belt inside Lebanese territory.

11. All those attacks by Israel had two characteristics:
first, they were premeditated attacks, as the Council
determined in its resolutions; secondly, they were coupled
with the use of massive force which resulted in great loss of
civilian life.
12. But the latest Israeli action, although it followed the
pattern of previous attacks, was greater in scope and
magnitude. The Israeli generals pride themselves on their
accuracy in hitting refugee camps and other civilian targets,
where untold losses have occurred among innocent civilians.
I will not go into details about the Israeli attack; my
colleague the representative of Lebanon has done that in
the complaint he sent to the Secretary-General on 15 March
[S/12602] and in his statement before the Council [2071st
meeting]. But I should like to draw the attention of the
Council to the report of 15 March of the Chief of Staff of
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO) on the status of the cease-fire in the IsraelLebanon sector [S/l1663/Add.53],
In spite of the limited
manpower at the disposal of the Chief of Staff, and in spite
of the fact that some of his posts came under fire and were
destroyed, he was able to report on some aspects of the
Israeli attack and in particular on its ferocity and indiscriminate nature. The reports of the Chief of Staff of UNTSO
on what Israel calls its incursions into Lebanese territory

17. Those acts and aggressive policies mean that Israel still
believes that its security can be achieved through aggression, occupation and expansion, rather than through a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East based on the principles
of the Charter and recognition of the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people.
18. In view of the policy of the Israeli Government, its
attempts
to impose interpretations
of resolution
242 (1967) which have no basis in logic or law, its
continued policy of establishing settlements and its aggrcssion against both Lebanese and Palestinian civilians, which
Egypt strongly condemns, Egypt affirms that these developments impede peace efforts and herald more serious
developments in the future.
19. Egypt therefore believes that the whole world, and
especially the five permanent members of the Security
2

Council, should assume their responsibility to put an end
forthwith to the Israeli aggression, so that the necessary
climate may be created to allow the efforts towards the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
to be pursued on the basis of respect for the rights of the
Palestinian people and Israel’s total withdrawal from the
occupied territories.

26. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to express my admiration for you and to thank
you for your efforts in observing impeccable impartiality. I
should also like to apologize to the members of the Council
and the press for ruining their week-end. However, we are
not in fact the ones who planned to ruin their week-end, it
was Prime Minister Begin.

20. It is now apparent that Israeli attacks on Lebanon in
recent years have not brought security to Israel but have led
only to untold losses among the civilian population,
whether in Israel or elsewhere, and also to acts of violence
against and inside Israel. The fallacy of Israeli aggression on
the pretext of self-defence is also apparent. This vicious
circle will not be broken unless Israel comes to grips with
the core of the Middle East problem and addresses itself
directly and quickly to the resolution of the Palestinian
question. Israel can no longer deny or postpone a&nowIedgement of the truth: that there is a Palestinian people
which has the same right to live in peace and security as all
other peoples, Security will not prevail unless a just peace is
based on complete Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied
Arab territories and unless there is a solution of the
Palestinian problem in all its aspects, recognizing the rights
of the Falestinian people. That has been Egypt’s declared
policy; it is Egypt’s policy; and it will remain our policy in
future. Let that be crystal clear in everybody’s mind.

27. The Council is dealing with a problem which has more
than any other preoccupied the whole world. The Israeli
invasion of Lebanon on 14 March is derived from and is a
consequence of the tragedy which befell the people of
Palestine in 1948.
28. The present invasion by Israel of Lebanon’s territory
has by far exceeded previous raids on Lebanon, which are
well known for their frequency, ruthlessness and destructiveness. It is a well-co-ordinated and premeditated invasion
in which the navy, air force and army are participating. It
has shown the extent of Israel’s unbridled lust for new land
and new territorial gains. The area has never seen tranquillity, and blood is intermittently spilled there thanks to
Israel’s scorn for human rights and the territorial integrity
of its neighbours. The Government of Israel launched its
forces to invade Lebanon on 14 and 15 March, but the
invasion was not arranged overnight; it was prepared a long
time before its implementation.
29. There has always been an Israeli plan to invade
Lebanon, in conformity with the expansionist designs of
zionism. The Israeli Government, in order to avoid the
political complications of invading Southern Lebanon in
the presence of Arab deterrent troops, objected to the
deployment of those troops in that part of Lebanon. It
wanted to exercise its hegemony over the area and at the
same time maintain its freedom of action. If Israel had no
designs on Southern Lebanon, why did it oppose the
deployment of Arab deterrent troops there? Why did it
make such a hue and cry about the red line? The mission
of the Arab troops in Lebanon is the maintenance of law
and order in the aftermath of the bloody civil war.

21. Denying the most basic of human rights to the
Palestinian people, namely, its right to self-determination,
will, unfortunately, only lead to more violence and bloodshed, Nobody-Israel least of all-will benefit from such a
shortsighted policy. It will only lead to more tension in the
areaand endanger peace and security in the world.
22. As I said earlier in my statement, the situation is
serious and calls for immediate action on the @art of the
Council. It is my Government’s conviction that the first
order of business before the Council is to call urgently for
the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all Israeli
forces from Lebanon and for Israel to cease forthwith its
encroachment on the territorial integrity of a Member
State\ Every hour that passes without action from the
Council adds to the loss of life among innocent people.
Such prompt action is dictated by the gravity of the
situation and imposed on the Council by the Charter.

30. It is obvious that Israel wants unlimited freedom to
act as it pleases in Southern Lebanon, and it has acted
ruthlessly and recklessly. The casualties are numerouscivilians, innocent women and children are being killed even
at this very moment, The figures are rising every hour.
According to The New York Times of today, the Pope has
expressed indignation at this outrage.

23. The Council should not allow itself to be distracted
from dealing with the very real situation of the occupation
by Israel of Lebanese territory by permitting dilatory
tactics to consume precious time.

31. Israel’s military operations are expanding far and wide
throughout the country. The damage done to Lebanon’s
national wealth and property is enormous. Lawlessness has
been the unavoidable ensuing result. The raids have brought
about the indiscriminate massacre of both Lebanese and
Palestinians, the majority of whom are not involved in this
endless cycle of bloodshed. It is interesting that such a
massacre should have prompted the Prime Minister of Israel
and his impressive entourage to pose smilingly before the
international press on Lebanese soil. He apparently revels in
seeing the blood of innocent people being spilled now, since
he never shied away from shedding innocent blood when he
was in charge of the terrorist organization known as the
Irgun Zvai Leumi. I saw hjm on television, and he looked
very nostalgic for his own personal past.

24. The Council might also wish to request the Secretary
General to report on Israel’s compliance with the decisions
to be taken by the Council on the withdrawal of the Israeli
forces. The Secretary-General would be assisted in this
respect by the United Nations presence in the area, that is,
the members of UNTSO stationed in the Israel-Lebanon
sector. Therefore, members of UNTSO should return to the
posts from which they were evicted.
25. We believe that the Council should remain seized of
the present situation in Lebanon until all its decisions are
complied with-first
and foremost that concerning the
immediateand total withdrawal of Israel.
3

The Palestinian people were forcibly evicted from their
homeland and their properties were confiscated. They see
what is left of their homeland being eroded by the
unscrupulous implantation of Jewish settlements in the
West Bank and Gaza, which the United Nations has already
decreed to be the future independent Palestinian State.
Every day they see new evidence of a creeping annexation
that shatters any hope for the creation of a Palestinian
homeland.

32, What has Lebanon d.one to deserve this fate? Why
should the strongholds of its ancient culture and civilization
be demolished by the Israeli invaders? Why should its
economy be devastated by the war planes, tanks and armed
fleet of Israel? Why should its most fertile lands and most
beautiful towns and villages be subjected to Israeli occupation?
33. There is absolutely no justification for the wanton
attack on Lebanon; the attack violates all the sacred
provisions enshrined in the Charter. The territorial integrity
and the political sovereignty of Lebanon cannot be subject
to the whims and caprices of Israel’s militant leaders. The
Israeli invasion of Lebanon is a challenge to the United
Nations, to the Security Council and to world public
opinion. It demonstrates complete disregard for the rule of
law and shakes the very foundations of the structure of
international security. It makes a mockery of the United
Nations. In his statement yesterday (207Ist meeting/, the
representative of Jsrael implicitly accused the Council of
being a kangaroo court.

37. The Prime Minister of Israel, as well as his Cabinet,
calls the Wesi Bank and Gaza “Judaea and Samaria” and
has repeatedly declared that this piece of land is part and
parcel of ancient Israel from which his forces can never
withdraw. He wants to revive King David’s kingdom. He
admires the ancient and glorious past of what he calls his
“kith and kin”. He has his own interpretation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) on the question of withdrawal-an
interpretation which renders the resolution
inapplicable to the West Bank and Gaza. He brags about his
plan for civil rule for the Palestinians under Israeli
occupation and describes it as the best arrangement they
could have. He scoffs at their right to self-determination
and denies them the ,right to have a State of their own. He
describes their leaders as a “bunch of terrorists”, ignoring
the fact that they are merely fighting to regain their lawful
rights, which he usurped. Meanwhile, the United Nations
has recognized the right of the people of Palestine to
self-determination and to a State of their own in Palestine.
Only the naive would expect the Palestinians to accept the
fate Mr. Begin prescribes for them. Life in refugee camps
that subsist on international help is surely not a healthy
substitution for statehood. No wonder the Palestinians
resent statelessness and life in the wilderness. The
remedy for their problems is the attainment of freedom in
their own country. They live on international contributions
that barely keep their heads above water.

34. Israel occupies Southern Lebanon and resorts to deceit
and dissimulation in its attempt to stay there indefinitely.
It is already expanding towards the north, according to
today’s news. This is intolerable; it takes the world back to
the law of the jungle, in which might prevails over right. NO
Member State can condone such flagrant aggression; to do
so would tear apart the fabric of international society. The
first imperative for the Security Council is to demand the
unconditional withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon.
The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon are
being violated. Lebanon is a peaceful country with an
outstanding record of respect for the Charter. The Council
should therefore condemn Israel for its barbaric action in
Lebanon, whose sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity are gravely endangered by the wanton aggression
carried out by Israel. That aggression should be unequivocally condemned and eliminated.

/

’

:

only

38. Mr. Begin has made it more difficult than ever for the
Palestinians to have a State of their own. It is understandable if despair leads them to acts which reflect their
resentment and bitterness, They are not superhumanalthough their tribulations and grievances are beyond
human endurance. Mr. Begin has deprived them of any
hope for a better life with dignity in their homeland.

35. The Israelis should not be allowed to squat on
Lebanese territory. This constitutes an outright invasion of
the territory of a Member State. It will launch the Middle
East on a path fraught with incalculably grave consequences. It will kill what is left of the glimpses of hope
for reaching a peaceful settlement, It will create a new
situation in which the forces of conflict will triumph. It
cannot be tolerated because, I repeat, it is an invasion of
the territory of a Member State. It will bring havoc to the
area and ruin aII prospects of peace and stability. The Israeli
invasion sets a dangerous precedent and makes brute force
the sole arbiter in international relations. If States are
allowed to take the law into their own hands, then the
whole fabric of international society will crumble. This is a
dangerous exercise, which threatens the very existence of
independent and sovereign States, on which international
society is founded.

39. This fundamental question must be asked: what is
next? It has been established beyond any shadow of doubt
that the Palestinian people wilI not acquiesce in their
uprooting and privation. Like all peoples, they are entitled
to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination.
There is no point in talking about the stability of the
Middle East if, first and foremost, the aspirations of the
people of Palestine are not fulfilled. Israel will never attain
peace through expansion, raids or occupation of other
peoples’ territory. Only the attainment by the peopIe of
Palestine of the right to self-determination will ensure
coexistenceand, subsequently,peace.The military power
of Israel may delay the fulfilment of theselofty goals,but
it will never liquidate the resistanceof the Palestinians.It
can bombard their camps but it will never crush their
determination to achieveindependence.

36. NO one can find happiness in the death of innocent
people except those who seek to reap the fruits of their
aggression. The invasion of Lebanon by Israel was designed
to annihilate the people of Palestine. It has rightly been
described as a campaign of genocide against the Palestinian
people. Terrorism is bound to produce counter-resistance.

40. The Palestinianshave been treated for 30 years as
subhumans,living in conditions that barely keep body and

,’

4

soul together. It is unrealistic to ask them to accept such an
ignoble and degrading life. Like any other people, they
yearn to settle peacefully in their own homeland. No one
should expect them to go on wandering this world
aimlessly. The world has not fully understood the depth of
the wound in their hearts. Their determination to have a
State of their own is not well appreciated. They are victims
of the ugliest, form of injustice. And in their despair they
may be driven to extremes which are alien to their true
nature.

Organization which year after year endorsed the right of
the Palestinian people to repatriation or compensation.
Hence the United Nations is in duty bound to stop Israel’s
campaign of terror and brutality in Southern Lebanon
designed to destroy the national identity of the Palestinian
people. The Security Council must in clear terms tell Begin
that the genocide perpetrated by his troops must stop
immediately.
45. It was the Charter which proscribed the acquisition of
territory by force, an affirmation of the fact that all
measures taken by Israel to change the physical character,
demographic composition, institutional structure or status
of the occupied territories are null and void. The Security
Council cannot now acquiesce in the occupation of
Southern Lebanon by Israel,

41. The Government of Israel claims that the West Bank
and Gaza are part of ancient Israel, and it states that it
therefore will not terminate its occupation of these
territories. It states also that the Syrian Golan Heights must
be retained for its security. That is a dangerous approach to
international relations. If a State uses the need for security
as a pretext for expansion, it definitely must encroach upon
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbours.
That is exactly the situation the Council is facing now.

46. The Council must act, and act swiftly, It must act in
the name of the national identity of the Palestinian people
and their human rights. It must act to prevent genocide. It
must act to preserve the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Lebanon. It must act to maintain the rule of law. It must
act to preserve the noble principles enshrined in the
Charter, and it must act before its status declines to that of
a debating society deprived of any authority or efficiency,
It must act to prevent the Middle East from becoming the
scene of endless strife and anarchy. It must act immediately; it must act now.

42. The invasion of Lebanon and the subsequent occupation of its territory in the south has been carried out on the
pretext of obtaining more security for Israel. The same
classic pattern used earlier against Syria, Egypt and the
West Bank is being scrupulously applied in Lebanon, The
Israelis claim that Southern Lebanon is vital to Israel’s
security. Israel may try in stages to occupy all the Arab
countries on the grounds that such a measure is dictated by
its security needs. Reliance on brute force and military
might for the acquisition of territory is contrary to the
Charter. Only through mutual understanding do borders
become secure. Israel has long coveted Southern Lebanon.
It struck on the flimsiest pretext. Soon it will say that even
the occupation of Southern Lebanon does not guarantee its
security and that consequently it will expand further
towards the north. This is not a conclusion made in haste.
The precedents speak for themselves. It happened in 1956,
when Israel invaded Egypt on that pretext. It has been
much emphasized as an excuse for retaining the Syrian
Golan Heights since 1967. And time and again it will be
offered to a world that is willing to condone expansion and
territorial aggrandizement. There is a lot of apathy in the
world in the face of brute force.

47. Mr. HUSSON (France) (interpretation from French):
Once again the Security Council is meeting as a result of
serious events which have heightened the concern of the
international community about the very precarious situation prevailing in the Middle East. Once again my delegation feels it must here deplore the blind and dangerous
chain of violence in that part of the world. While it is clear
that France regards terrorist acts as totally reprehensible, it
is also clear that we have the same attitude towards acts of
reprisal, Attempts to justify or explain the one by the other
necessarily lead to an unacceptable situation of constant
escalation, causing much loss of human life and challenging
and endangering international security. These futile and
bloody outbreaks hamper efforts to quieten passions and to .
end the conflict. They further reduce the chances of
attaining peace inasmuch as they involve acts of force
against the territorial integrity and sovereignty of a State.

43, There are two aspects to the illegal occupation of
Southern Lebanon. The first is Israel’s determination to
destroy the national identity of the Palestinian people.
Israel is chasing Palestinians wherever they may be-in
refugee camps, in the valleys or in the mountains. It wants
to send them out of this world, to erase them from this
earth. Perhaps it wants to send them to Mars or to the
moon. The other aspect, or course, is Israel’s desire to plant
new settlements in Southern Lebanon and its thirst for new
land. If the Israelis are reluctant to abandon their settlements in the scorched sands of the Sinai Desert, how can
one expect them to give up the fertile valley of Southern
Lebanon?

48. In the case of Lebanon, a peaceful country with which
France is bound by so many historical and personal ties, my
delegation cannot but with force and conviction express its
deep concern and anxiety. After its ordeals of the recent
past, Lebanon’s population is above all familiar with the
tragedies of war and exodus. It behoves us immediately to
end that intolerable situation and consider all necessary
measures to ensure that the violence will not recur. We are,
of course, desirous of furthering the best interests of the
population, but also of preserving the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Lebanon.
49. For these reasons my country joins in the call for a
cease-fire and the immediate withdrawal
of the Israeli
troops now in Lebanese territory. The French delegation is
ready attentively to consider any proposal-including
the
stationing of a United Nations force-aimed at restoring

44. The United Nations has always been responsible for
the life and destiny of the Palestinian people, It was the
United Nations which partitioned. Palestine; it was the
United Nations which upheld the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to a State of their own. It was the world
5

peace and strengthening security in the region, provided, of
course, that the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon are constantly respected and
provided that all Governments concerned, and in the first
place the Government of Lebanon, agree.

Uganda,and they are now trying it out in Lebanon.I wish
they would try it out in other parts of the world. Let them
come to Nigeria. I think the samepattern hasbeenseenin
WesternSahara,where the French tried to police that part
of Africa. I hope they try it alsoin Nigeria.

50. In conclusion I should like to stress that the decisions
the Council is called upon to take cannot in themselves
provide a definitive safeguard against new outbursts of
violence in the region. We should recall that the consideration of the situation in Southern Lebanon cannot be
divorced from the broader question of the quest for peace
in the Middle East. Only in the global context, with
account being taken of all aspects of the question, and with
the participation of the parties concerned, will it be
possible truly to ensure peace and to protect from further
troubles countries and populations which have already
suffered too long.

57. Israel’s refusal to co-operate with the world to
introduce a yardstick for socialjustice and to affirm the
right of the Palestinianpeople to a homelandin determining the future of the Middle East will continue to leadto
the destabilizationof that areaand to an unhappy stateof
affairs in that part of the world. As in southern Africa,
where the racistscontinue to herd the ownersof the land
into reserves,so Israel continuesto deprive the ownersof
the land and to settle Arab landswith Israelis.Like South
Africa and Rhodesia,Israel continuesto abusepower and
to expressin wordsand deedsits disdainfor international
law.

51, Mr. HARRIMAN
(Nigeria): I believe that the Council
and all who have listened to the debate so far will have seen
a clear pattern in the pronouncements of the aggressor and
the victims of aggression.

58. In today’s world, where we are debating the noble
issuesof human rights and larger freedoms,it is, to my
delegation,an anachronismto debatenational rights. They
areclear in the Charter andin international legalcodes.

52. We listened to the emphatic righteous cry of the
representative of Lebanon, He said “Let my people live”. I
believe,we should let the people of Lebanon live. They have
suffered too long from the lack of concern of the
international community and from the intrigues of Israel in
the Middle East.

59. I remembervaguely that sometimein the 1960sAbba
Eban made a similarstatementto that madelast night by
Ambassador Herzog [2071st meeting/. I have a strong
impression that the representative of Israel read that
statement over and formulated his remarksyesterday along
similarlines. Abba Ebanhad saidat that time that Israeldid
not wish to remain in the occupied lands; they are still
there today. I think the only difference between Abba
Eban’sstatementand that of the representativeof Israellies
in the factor of arroganceand the abuseof privilege-the
privilege of being allowedto speakbefore the Council. The
invectives, the vituperative and bad language that he
utilized in condemningnon-Westernmembersof the Council who disagreed with his belief that the Palestine
Liberation Organization should be excluded is typical of
that arrogance and contempt for propriety-a contempt
that hasled to and perpetuatedthe threat to international
peaceand security in the Middle East.

53. The action of Israel on 14 and I.5 March was a
full-scale war against Lebanon. There were massive’ land, sea
and air attacks, and my delegation hereby reiterates its
condemnation already conveyed by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries [see S/12609], We shall
continue to condemn Israel as long as it continues to be the
vehicle of instability in the Middle East.
54. Judging from the voting pattern yesterday, it was easy
to see that, whether with its connivance or not, Israel has
been armed to promote the interests of the West in the
Canal area, just as South Africa and its camps in Rhodesia
have also been armed by the West to protect their interests
in the southern tip of Africa.

60. To quote a few examples,AmbassadorHerzog said
that the Council, asrepresentedby the majority, would not
evaluatethe issueon its merits. He went on to say that we
had forfeited our right to passjudgement. He talked about
blatant partiality that hascast doubts on the credibility of
the Council, about double standards,about the Council’s
betrayal of its principlesand purpose,about prevarication
and doubIe-talk and about the erosionof the prestigeand
moral standingof the Council.I supposethe Council should
have agreedthat the PLO, the victim of aggression,should
not sit in the Council chamber,I believe we would then
have had encomiumsand praisefrom the Israeli delegation.

55. The existence of the Pretoria-Tel Aviv axis has been
very clear to my delegation and to the Special Committee
against Apartheid of which I am Chairman. That axis-an
axis of collaboration, an axis of tcrrorization-continues
to
intimidate and harass local populations in the neighbouring
areas in southern Africa and the Middle East. They
continue to terrorize neighbouring States in the same
manner and according to the same pattern. The acceptance
by both of the notion that the policy of “hot pursuit”,
leading to the invasion of neighbouring territories, the
destruction of life and property and the killing of innocent
refugees is now the new world order of things is nothing
but gangsterismand racism; it is againstthe fundamental
principle of the territorial integrity of States.

61. As Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Drafting of an International Convention againstthe Taking
of Hostages,I wish to say that I regardthe commentsby
AmbassadorHerzog concerningthe action of that Cotnmittee as unfortunate. Half the problemsthat we face in
that Committee concern things such as how one defines
“terrorism”. Israel’sinvasionof innocent Lebanon is an act
of terrorism. The Committeeworking againstthe taking of

56. Israel and its allies even wish to mount, outside the
ambit of the United Nations, an international squad to
police the world againstterrorism. They have done so in
6

hostages will continue to do its best to find a formula
acceptable to the whole world-not
a formula dictated by
Israel,

MiddIe East unanimously considered the question of
Palestine as the hard core of the Middle East question
which cannot be settled without the participation of the
PLO.

62. Here I wish to reiterate that my Government does not
believe that any liberation movement should damage its
prestige by taking hostages, and that the noble fights for
liberation should be based on very high values. I believe
that the PLO at no stage in its war for liberation has abused
privilege; at no stage has it terrorized; it is at war.

71. The recent Israeli armed invasion hasarousedgreat
indignation among the world’s people. The Vietnamese
delegation hasjoined its voice to those of the membersof
the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries to
condemn this blatant aggressionagainst Lebanon and
reiterate its Full support for and solidarity with the
Palestinianpeople and the PLO in this critical period of
struggle.

63. My delegation joins the non-aligned movement in
unequivocally condemning Israel and in calling on Israel to
withdraw unconditionally and immediately from Lebanon.

72. In the face of Israeli obduracy and Israel’scontinued
actsof aggression
and expansion,the Palestinianpeoplewill
undergo more difficulties and hardshipsin their just
struggle.But the more they meetwith difficulties, the more
they becomeunited and the more they receiveinternational
solidarity; certainly they will win final victory.

64. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,
65. Mr. CU DINH BA (Viet Nam): Mr. President, I would
express to you and, through you, to the other members of
the Council my thanks for giving me the opportunity to
participate in this debate. I have requested to be allowed to
speak before the Council to express our full support for and
solidarity with the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples in their
struggle against the Israeliact of flagrant aggression.

73. The Vietnamese people consistently and resolutely
support the struggle of the Palestinianpeopleand other
Arab people to regain all the territories occupiedby Israel
and to restore the fundamental national rights of the
Palestinianpeople, including the right to set up a Palestinian State,

66. During these recent days, the world’s people have
witnessed the most barbarous aggression,launched by
Israeliland, air and naval forces againstLebaneseterritory,
causinggreat losses
in humanlives and property amongthe
Lebaneseand Palestinianpeoples. This is a blatant act of
direct aggressionagainst an independent and sovereign
State, in contravention of the Charter and the elementary
normsof internationallaw.

74. At the extraordinary meetingof Ministersfor Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries on the situationin the
Middle East and the questionof Palestinelast September,
our Deputy Prime Minister andMinister for ForeignAffairs
said:
“The 30-year-long history of the Middle Eastproblem
demonstratesthat no force can annihilate the Palestinian
people’s forces of resistance;any schemedesignedto
intensify Israel’s strength and weaken the Palestinian
forces will only set back the peaceful settlementof the
Middle East problem. But so long as Israel’swill for
aggressionis encouragedand not yet defeated,and so
long as the Palestinianpeople’snational rightsarenot yet
fully respected, peacein the Middle East will merely be
illusory or fragile.”

67. Theserecent developmentsin the Middle East situation have givenclearerproof of the systematicmanoeuvres
of Israel and its supporters,First, Israel is trying by every
meansto negatethe role of the Palestinianpeople and its
only genuinerepresentative,the PalestineLiberation Organization and to exclude the PLO from a solution of the
Middle East problem, Secondly, it is doing its best to
destroy the international prestige of the PLO. Thirdly,
Israel is striving, at any cost, to annihilate the liberation
75. We call upon the Council to condemnthis new act of
farces of Palestine.Fourthly, it is doing its utmost to SOW
armedaggression
by Israeland to take the mostappropriate
confusionand dissension
amongthe Arab countries andto
and effective measuresto compel Israel immediately to
deceiveworld public opinion,
withdraw its troops from Lebanon,put an endto its attacks
68. We consider this the true substanceof the recent againstLebanon and respectthe independence,sovereignty
eventswhich have taken place systematically in the Middle and territorial integrity of the Arab countries.
East.What the representativeof Israelpresentedbeforethe
Council
was nothing but a justification of the crimes 76. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the reprecommittedby Israelagainstthe Palestiniansand other Arab
sentative of Yemen, whom I invite to take a placeat the
peoples.
Council table and to makehisstatement.
69. In reality, the recent Israeliarmedattacks andinvasion
arenot the first of their kind: this is the tenth attack since
20 February 1973 against Lebanon. Obviously, it is a
vicious manoeuvreaimed at achieving a solution of the
Middle East questionwithout the participation of the PLO.

77. Mr, ALHADDAD (Yemen): Mr. President,I wish to
thank you and the membersof the Security Council for
giving me this opportunity to speakbefore the Council in
thesecritical circumstanceswhen the internationalcivilized
community has been once again confronted with a grave
situation resulting from the recent brutal Israeli-Zionist
aggression
againstthe LebaneseandPalestinianpeoples.

70. During the last sessionof the GeneralAssembly,most
of the representativesspeaking on the situation in the
7

PalestineLiberation Organization, to self-determination
and
78. I neither wish to speak at length nor do I see fit to
statehood in Palestine. Secondly, Zionist forces must
dwell on the barbaric aggression which is a continuation of
withdraw from all occupied Arab territories andthe ~~~~~~
the Zionist expansionist policy of the last three decades
settlements
in those occupied Arab lands must be elimi.
that has manifested itself in the policy and Practice of
nated.
terrorism systematically conducted by the Zionist authorities in occupiedPalestine.However,what is now at stake
83. In concluding my short
statement, I wish to quote
and a sourceof graveconcernto usis the lossof humanlife
from
a
statement
made
by
the
late PresidentEisenhower
i,,
among Lebaneseand Palestiniancivilians, as well asthe
order
to
refresh
the
memory
of
members
of
the
Council
danger
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
of the United States.The
Lebanon, a StateMemberof the United Nations.They have and that of the represelltiltive
statementwasmadefOlIOWing
tile
Zionist
attack
on Egypt
been the targets of criminal and premeditated acts of
in
1956,
and
he
said:
aggression
by the Zionist-Israeliterrorists,
in complete
defianceof and disregardfor the priIICip]eS
of international
“Should a nation which attacks and occupiesforeign
law,. and in violation of the basicnormsOf international
territory
in the face of United Nations disapproval
be
civdrzedbehaviour.
allowedto imposeconditions on its own withdrawal?
79. The delegationof Yemenhasno Intention of dwelling
on the history of Zionist terrorismin the Middle East.But
the indisputablefact remainsthat the Israeli-Zionistentity
wasborn of terrorismandcold-bloodedmurder,which have
continued to be the policy andpracticeof that entity since
then. The storming of the King David Hotel at Jerusalem,
the barbaricmassacre
of the Deir Yassinvillagers,the brutal
bombardmentsof the Babr Al-Bakar primary schoolin
Egypt and the unprecedenteddowningof the Libyan civil
aircraft in which 115 innocent civilian passengers
were
killed are only a few examplesof the State terrorism
preachedandpractisedby the Zionist authorities.
80. My delegation,whoseGovernmentand peoplehave
unshakablefaith in the UnitedNationsandin the principles
of the Charter, deploresin the strongesttermsthe arrogant
and indecent performanceof the Zionist representative
yesterday afternoon before this augustbody whoseduty is
the maintenanceof international peaceand security, We
therefore demandthat thosedebased
remarksby which the
Zionist representativetried, with suchmockery andslander,
to downgradethe integrity and credibility of the Organization and its sovereignmembership
shouldbe eliminated,to
saythe least,from the recordof yesterday’sproceedings.
81. In the nameof my Government,I earnestlydemand
that the Council shouldact immediatelyand effectively to
bring about the immediatecessationof aggression
and the
unconditional withdrawal of Zionist forcesfrom Southern
Lebanon.The Council is in duty bound to bring a halt to
the war of genocidebeing wagedagainstthe people of
Palestine.

“If we agreethat the armedattack can properly achieve
the purposesof the assailant,then I fear we will have
turned back the clock of the international order.”
84. I wish to say that the soul of the late Presidentmay
rest assuredthat the international civilized communitywill
not let the Zionist aggressiongo unpunishedand that the
Internationalorder will never be turned back by the Zionist
aggressor.May the soul of President Eisenhowerrestin
peaceand comfort.
85. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof Lebanonhas
askedto speakbefore we adjourn this meeting,and I now
call on him.
86. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): I want to say only two things.
First, I want to expressmy thanks to you, Mr. President,
for your patience in bearing with us, to the SecretaryGeneralfor the documentation he has provided and the
concern he has consistently shown, and to the various
members who have expressed what I believe is the
near-consensus-ifnot the consensus-sentimentof this
body.
87. I alsowant to say that people die on weekends.They
die on the Sabbathand they die on Sundays.I wishthat the
Chaircould find it possible,by somemeanswithin ther&s
of procedure here, to have us reach some form cf
agreementthat would bring an early end to the deathsof
people, to the exodus of thousandsof refugeesthat are
plodding into my country’s capital, and to the chaotic
situation that may again overwhelm us, enslavedby the
logic of despair, a situation that this international cornmunity would then very much regret and suffer from.

82. The road to peacein the Middle Eaststartswith the
redressingof the injustice inflicted on the people of
Palestine.First, any peaceinitiative should aim at a just
peace that is permanentand that recognizesthe national
right of the peopleof Palestine,whoserepresentativeis the

The meetingroseat 12.45 p.m.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite4
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Lea publications
des Nations
Units sont on vente clans les librairies
et les agences
dkpositaires
du mondo ontier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
b : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou C&n&e.

Litho

in United

Nations,

KAIC

IIOJlNULiTh

COMO

CONSEGUIR

ElBAAHMR

OPrAHH

PUBLICACIONES

BAItHI%

DE

LAS

OIS76EAMHRHHhIX

NACIONES

HAI&MH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S. 1.00

(or equivalent

currencies)

78-7OOOS-January

1980-2,200
