THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

18 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2436)

1

....................................

...............................................

1

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of Nicaragua on the Security
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15746) . . . ..I.

1

Adoption of the agenda

WPV.2436

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
1 it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Councit, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2436th
Held

MEETING

in New York on Wednesday,

18 May 1983, at 10.30 a.m.

di LUTETE

(Sao Tome and Principe), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles) Mr.
de Pinies (Spain), Mr, El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela)
and Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

President: Mr. UMBA

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of the foilowing States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

2. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of the Dominican Republic and Greece in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2436)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746).
The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Knipping Victoria
(Dominican Republic) and Mr. Dountas (Greece) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn French): The
first speaker is the representative of Argentina. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

1. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings
devoted to this item [2431st to 2435th meetings], I invite
the representative of Honduras to take a place at the
Council table. I also invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Grenada, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Panama, Sao
Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Uganda, Venezuela and Viet Nam to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

4. Mr. MUl%Z (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Security Council for the opportunity to take part in this debate. I should also like to
congratulate you on assuming this high office. I am sure
that your ability and experience bode well for the debate.
5. Previous speakers at this series of Council meetings,
which is taking place at the request of the Government of
Nicaragua, have warned us of the dangers inherent in
any further worsening of the situation in Central America. This situation is especially marked by political destabilization, violence and the constant threat affecting
brother nations. Mounting tension and the clear deterioration in the political climate endanger international
peace and security.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table. Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. MuAiz (Argentina), Mr. Alblfn Holguln
(Colombia), Mr. Zumbado Jimenez (Costa Rica), Mr. Roa
Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Resales-Rivera (El Salvador), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. QuiironesAmkzquita (Guatemala), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic
Republic of Iran), Mr. Vongsaly (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Traore (Mali), Mr, Maudave (Mauritius), Mr. Mufloz Ledo
(Mexico), Mr. Ozores Tvpaldos (Panama), Mr. Cassandra

6. The Central American region cannot and must not
become one more of these chronic zones of conflict that
afflict the world today. It is absolutely clear that international security is a basic element in international relations and, therefore, part of the Central American set of
problems. But for the countries of the region security is
1

13.
WC believe it is not possible to delay any furthera
peacehll solution to thC conflicts besetting our central
American brothers.

not just a military concept; first and foremost, it has a
social and economic dimension.
feels that the deep-rooted causes of this
crisis lie both in the anachronistic pOliticd
and
WkP
economic situations which eliminated justice as a principal guideline
of coexistence and in the persistent
violations of the principle of non-intervention and non*
interference in the internal affairs of other States. MY
country, faithful to its political tradition, reaffrms its
complete adherence to the full observance of these Principles codified in international law, an observance that is
absolutely essential for political understanding anlong
nations.
7. Argentina

14. The responsibility lies with us ali: with tile great
Powem, which must make a genuine effective effort to
support the! peace irdk~thw;
with the other Members of
the world Qrganization; and, above all, with the Central
American countries, v&ose persistent lacerations in a
WU~& which n&s to the suffering and sacrifice of their
PtfOPkS ITIUSI end, SO that they CBII develop in freedom
and with fill respect for their national identities,
Is. h this regard %:c wish to mention once again the
noble and brotherly attitude of the member countries of
the C’nntadora Group, whose concern to achieve a final
solution IO the conflicts affecting the Central American
peoples deacrves the most broadly based and unreserved
support. On this occasion Argentina reaffirms its full solidarity with those endcaoours and promises its total support for all the peace initiatives.

8, We consider that the situation under discussion in
the Council clearly shows that the principle of nonintervention 1sof particular importance in this instance.
Latin America is the continent which is trying to assert
genuine independence, to develop and to better its institutions and to ensure the social and economic progress of
its peoples. At the present time, it is precisely in Central
America where the difficulties of these effort5 Clan bC
most clearly seen.

I6. Wr: are confident that these objectives can be
successful-as they deserve to be-so that tension canbe
reduced and the foundations laid for a permanent atmosphcre of p+%zcful cocxistcncc and mutual respect among
the Stntes.

9. It is not encouraging that, despite the repcatcd
expressions of willingness to talk and the endeavours of
the Contadora Group to find ways and means to make
that possible, there have as yet been no talks.

(irrterpretation from French):The
17. The PRESIDENT
next spcnker is the representative of the Congo. I invite
him to trike a place at the Council table and to make his
statrmcnt.

10. On 18 April, when consultations were held in Panama by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela with the Central American Foreign Ministers, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Religion of my country sent a message to the Foreign Minister of Panama in order to reaffirm, on behnlf
of the Argentina Government, our adherence to the principles set forth in the Contadora information bulletin ot
9 January,’ as well as the actions taken after that date to
promote a peaceful settlement of the Central American
conflicts which are of concern to us all

18. Mr. GAYAMA (Congo) (interpretarinnf?otn French):
It gives me gnut pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, the
distinguished representative of Zaire, the worthy President of the Security Council, who since practically the
beginning of this month have been constantly eugagedin
intensive activities that arc directly relevant to the uncertain times in which WClive and which urgently call for the
Council’s mare-necessnry-than-ver assistance. The qualities which everyone recognizcs in you are no surprise to a
representative of the People’s Republic of the Congo who
knows very well that you have had to draw on them more
than once in maintaining the relations between our two
countries when you were at the head of the diplomatic
service 0r Zaire.

11, As emerges from the information bulletin on the
meetings held at Panama on 20 and 21 April [S/15727,
annex], the Central American Foreign Ministers agreed
on their joint endeavour for talks and reaffirmed that the
responsibility for arriving at agreements ta guarantee a
stable and lasting peace lies “mainly” with the Central
American countries themselves,

19. I wish also to extend congratulations to Mrs. Kirkpatrick, representative of the United States, for the effective way in which she guided the Council’s work last

12, In meetings on 11 and 12 May, the members of the
Contadora Group appealed for the strengthening ofprin
ciples which should guide the activities of States ln the
international arena and once again called upon the ccn.
tral American countries to help attain the goal of peace
and, to that end, to apply their political will to the search
for waYaleading to dialogue and understanding to settle
their current differences. The successof the peace initiatives 1aWlY depends on such an open-minded and constructive attitude. To achieve those objectives
tllcy
formab invited the five Foreign Ministers of bentral
America to hold a working meeting at Panama from 2g to
30 May.

month.

20. I should like also to discharge an important duty,
that is, to salute the memory of Mr. Tsogtyll Narkhuul
the rcprescntativc of Mongolia, who died a few days ago
leaving a great void in the hearts of all those here in the
United Nations who respected his outstanding Persona1
qualities and admired his profound feeling for human
xclations and his great diplomatic attributes. May these
wards be, for the bereaved family and his colleagues! the
expression of the heartfetf sympathy of all members Of
the Mission of the Congo.
2

21. When it rid itself, not so long ago, of the sinister
dictatorship of Somoza, the people of Nicaragua did not
imagine, nor did we, that nostalgic Somozists would have
the termerity to prevent the people of Nicaragua from
dressing its wounds and getting down without further ado
to the uplifting task of national reconstruction. For that
we would have had to reckon without the active complicity of certain neighbours, hostile in principle to anything
that would mean a radical change in the political, economic and social fields.

27. In March the Council was convened to consider the
situation resulting from a similar crisis, and at that time
my Government did not conceal its indignation. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo, on 24 March,
denounced the imperialist subversive manouevres against
the people of Nicaragua and vehementiy condemned the
machiavellian acts of sabotage and the imperialist fury
directed against that country. In that statement my
Government affirmed its constant support for the valiant
people of Nicaragua in their just and salutary struggle for
the total liberation of their country and made an urgent
appeal to the international community and the peoples of
the world that cherish peace, justice and freedom to give
the Sandinist National Liberation Front all necessary
assistance to bring about the triumph of their just cause.

22. Placed in the American general context, the Sandinist revolution, like the Cuban revolution before it, could
in no way be to the liking of the Republican Administration of a neighbouring super-Power, which has made no
secret of its options in favour of the forces of reaction and
conservatism and which more than once has indicated its
firm determination to harass all those who favour change
in this hemisphere.

28. Many speakers before us here have elaborated on
the idea of negotiation as an essential instrument for safeguarding and promoting peace. As such, negotiation
expresses the will to seek the implementation of norms
governing relations among nations which are really aware
of the mutual advantages of their freedom.

23. Such a situation is not merely fraught with disastrous consequences for international peace and security;
it sows the seeds of perpetual suspicion more likely to
exacerbate mistrust than to create a climate of trust,
although we are convinced that the latter is sought by the
peoples themselves.

29. The Congo, for its part, cannot fail to give its firm
support not merely to the laudable efforts undertaken by
the Latin American countries called the Contadora
Group-that
is, Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and
Venezuela-but
also to the various indispensable, if not
cardinal, initiatives mentioned a few days ago by the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua to establish fruitful contact with Honduras and other neighbouring
countries. Any delaying tactics in this regard must, in the
opinion of my delegation, denote an unavowed attitude of
confusion designed to play into the hands of the superPower whose interests coincide exactly with those of oligarchies established on poverty and exploitation of the
majority.
’

24. For the simple purpose of subscribing to the proposals for a solution already mentioned in this chamber,
the Congolese delegation would like to sum up its statement of today in a simple appeal: an appeal to respect the
norms of international law, the only method of guaranteeing peacefttl coexistence and harmony among regimes
and States; an appea1 for dialogue and a peaceful settlement of disputes as the key for safeguarding the principle
of good-neighbourliness. Indeed, respect for the norms
of international law certainly remains the basic guarantee
without which differences in political systems and differences in size or economic or military power would in
themselves constitute elements of discord rather than
complementarity.

30. In conclusion, I should like here to reaffirm the sincere and firm support of my country for the proposal to
the effect that the Security Council should play a greater
part than heretofore in resolving the crisis in Central
America, through the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and, we sincerely hope, the co-operation of all its
members.

25. It is appropriate to stress here the concordance of
approaches prevalent in the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and other international forums such as the
General Assembly or the Security Council. This concordance derives quite simply from the conviction shared by
most countries, which is basic, not merely to show
respect for the territorial integrity and the sovereignty of
other States, without any interference in their affairs, but
also to ensure that force is not used as a way of settling
problems. In this context, it is even more specious to
consider aggression or premeditated attack as a preferred
method of establishing a system of values and lasting and
sound relations.

31. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Uganda, and I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
32, Mr. OTUNNU (Uganda): Mr. President, I am grateful to you and the members of the Council for allowing
my delegation to participate in this debate. First of all I
should like to convey to you the warm greetings and congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. We are
delighted and proud to see you, an eminent son of the
Republic of Zaire, a State that is a friend and neighbour
of my own country, Uganda, presiding over the Council
during this very important month. We know that, under
your skilled and experience guidance, the Council will
discharge its responsibilities with resolve and speed.

26. In this particular case, my delegation has no hesitation in saying that this is a plot that was hatched with the
idea of casting Nicaragua in the role of the aggressor,
although it has been subjected to various forms of harassment designed simply to distract that country from its
priority tasks and to embroil it in acts of diversion which
serve the enemies of its system.
3

33. I also take this opportunity to express, our deep
appreciation to Mrs. Kirkpatrick of the United States for
the dynamic and wise leadership she gave the Council
during April.

“We have come before the Council to respond to
aggression and death with an invitation to frank and
constructive dialogue.” [See 2431st meeting, paras. 4.5
and 46.1

34. There is a fire burning in and around the Central
American nation of Nicaragua. Over the past months
that fire has spread steadily; today it has reached very
dangerous proportions, which is the reason for the present debate in the Council.

The Council must encourage all the parties involved in
this conflict to show this constructive spirit of conciliation and dialogue.
39. Fortunately, the,foundation for dialogue and negotiation has already been laid by the Conta.dora Group,
consisting of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela.
To these four countries we pay a special tribute for their
initiative and efforts in favour of peace in Central America. By their commitment
and impartiality they have
shown an example worthy of emulation in other parts of
the world where disputes and conflicts are rife.

35. My delegation is concerned about this development
for two reasons: first, because this tire is affecting the
well-being of Nicaragua, and secondly, because, if
unchecked, this fire will engulf the whole Central American region, with some flames extending beyond that
region, For the sake of international peace and security,
we cannot overemphasize the need for definite and
speedy action to put out this fire. Although the situation
in and around Nicaragua has reached very dangerous
proportions, it has not yet got out of control. The Council therefore has an opportunity to take preventive action
in the area by easing tension and searching for a just and
durable solution.

40. It is our hope that the Security Council will not leave
the Contadora Group to carry out alone the task of evoiving a viable framework for peace. After all, the responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security rests primarily with the Council. It should therefore devise a mechanism to build on the efforts of the
Contadora Group in order to maintain the momentum
for dialogue and negotiation.

36, In our view, three elements are critical to this process. First, the Council must underline the obligation of
all States to respect the principles of the Charter and the
norms of .general international law, Foremost among
these principles and obhgations are the following: noninterference in the internal affairs of other States, selfdetermination for all countries and peoples, strict respect
for the territorial integrity of other States, strict respect
for the political independence and sovereignty of all
States, the obligation not to allow the territory of a State
to be used for the commission of acts of aggression
against other States, the obligation not to resort to the
threat or use of force to resolve conflicts and the commitment to resolve all disputes through peaceful means.
These principles and obligations should be self-evident.
However, recent events indicate the need for them to be
restated even more strongly than ever.

41. Finally, I wish to stress one more point. It is well
known that the people of Nicaragua have just emerged
from a long and harrowing war of liberation that set the
country free from the Fascist dictatorship of the Somoza
regime. The people of Nicaragua, like the other peoples of
Central America, do not need another war; they do not
need further destruction and waste. What all the peoples
of Central America need is a period of genuine peace-a
period in which to devote all their energies to the urgent
tasks of economic and social development.
42. I hope the Council will not disappoint the peoples of
Central America, who have been brutalized and exploited
for far too long. It is our hope that the Council will take
definite steps to put out the fire that is now raging in
Central America before it gets out of hand.

37. Secondly, the Council should reaffirm the right of
the people of Nicaragua, no less than the right of all the
peoples of Central America, to determine their own destiny in total freedom, without outside interference. This
means that all the peoples of Central America must be
free to choose their own political and social systems without fear of harassment or interference from outside.

43. Meanwhile, the Government and people of Uganda
take this opportunity to reaffirm their continued solidarity with the peoples of Central America in their just struggle for freedom and social justice.
44. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): As a
recent occupant of the chair you now till, Sir, may I say
how much I have admired the clarity and authority which
you have already demonstrated. These qualities make it
easy to understand the value which your Government
clearly places on your services. It is evident that the Council will be indebted to you on many occasions in this
unusually busy and difficult month. Your predecessor,
Mrs. Kirkpatrick, commands our respect and thanks. She
presided with tact and good humour and notably
advanced the work of the Council on the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

38. Thirdly,
the Council should steer the parties
involved in this conflict away from the course of war and
on to the path of dialogue and negotiation, In this connection, we noted with appreciation the spirit of dialogue
and conciliation
shown by the Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua, Mr. Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann, before the Council on 9 May, when he stated:
“We have not come here to engage in recriminations or to seek compensation for damage.. . .
4

peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition
the threat or use of force to resolve conflicts.”

45. In the course of the past eight weeks the Council has
devoted, I think, 13 sessions to the problems brought
before it by the delegation of Nicaragua. The speech I am
now giving is, I believe, the ninety-second statement in
these two debates. Some of the speeches we have heard
seem to have been directed primarily not so much at solving the problem as at publicizing it. I should like to bring
the Council back to our role as problem-solvers.

of

My delegation would like to see these principles, which
are the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
upheld by this Council. They are, as I have said, apparently acceptable to all; they are Charter principles and
their acceptance would make a good starting point.

46. We have weighed up as objectively as we can the
facts as they are known to us and the arguments that have
been put to us. As members of the Council, we feel a
responsibility not merely to listen to speeches but to contribute to decisions which will, we hope, reduce the sharpness and extent of differences between Members of the
United Nations and at least point in the most promising
direction for further progress,

49. Immediately following the passage I have just read
out, the Contadora bulletin calls upon the Central American countries-and again it says all the Central American countries“to help attain the goal of peace and, to that end, to
apply their political will to the search for ways leading
to dialogue and understanding to settle their current
differences, This constructive and open attitude will
largely determine the success of the peace initiatives.”

47. To judge from some of the speeches we have heard,
the main issue between the parties concerned is whether
to try to make progress by bilateral discussion or by
multilateral discussion. If that is really the crucial point,
it ought not to be too difficult to resolve. At least all seem
to be agreed that there should be some discussion. All
have welcomed the efforts of the Contadora Group and
all have praised the principles upon which the Group has
been operating. My delegation considers that there are
elements here on which we can build something useful.

It goes on to issue a formal invitation to the five Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Central America to hold a
working meeting at Panama on 28, 29 and 30 May. We
hope and believe that this invitation will be accepted by
all. We consider that it would be unwise to try to cut
across this apparently agreed meeting. Indeed, we hope
that nothing said in this Council will make that meeting
more difficult.

48. The first step, in our opinion, would be to reaffirm
the passage dealing with principles in the bulletin issued
by the Contadora Group on 12 May [S/15762, annex]. I
should like to read the relevant part of that bulletin:

50. What we should try to do is help the Contadora
Group over the difficulties which its members encountered at their last meeting. These seem to centre on the
form of the next meeting in Panama. The Contadora
Group bulletin referred to discussion both in working
groups and to plenary meetings. My delegation does not
know precisely what this means in practice, but it sounds
a judicious mix.

“The Ministers for External Relations of Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela note with deep concern the development of the Central America
conflict”-note
that phrase, “the Central American
conflict”-“
over the past few days and the repeated
violation of essential principles of the international
legal order.

51. Everybody admits that there is, in the words of the
Conta.dora Group bulletin, a “Central American conflict” or problem, We hope the countries of the area will
be able to agree to discuss their conflicts or problems in
multilateral talks or, if you will, plenary meetings. It
would seem to us sad if all the countries in the area were
to assemble in one place but were not able to meet each
other in one room. At the same time it has been the
experience of my delegation that there has never been a
multilateral international meeting which has not been supported by bilateral discussions on the side. Why should
the situation in Central America be an exception to this
normal practice?

“These circumstances have given rise to various
initiatives aimed at seeking the intervention of multilateral organizations. The initiatives include the recent
requests made by Central American countries to the
United Nations Security Council and the Permanent
Council of the Organization of American States.
“It would be highly desirable that in the deliberations taking place in the aforementioned forums, and
especially those currently under way in the Security
Council, there should be a strengthening of principles
which should guide the activities of States in the international arena.

52. Indeed, if I heard correctly, the representatives of
Panama, Venezuela and Colombia each in his own way
recommended regional solutions to Central American
problems. The Colombian representative [2435th meeting]
spoke of bringing all the countries of the region to the
table. He sought global solutions while in no way being
opposed to bilateral negotiations. That, if I may say so, is
the right path. We hope that the Council will add its
authority to these wise words from the Contadora Group.

“These principles include: self-determination and
non-interference in the affairs of other States, respect
for the territorial integrity of other States, the obligation not to allow the territory of a State to be used for
committing acts of aggression against other States, the
5

53. We bave been impressed by some of the othe; suggestions that have emerged during the course of the
debate. For example, the representative of Honduras said:

we may in a small way have done something to help the
next meeting of the Contadora Group at the end of this
month.

“MY country would be prepared, together with the
other Central American countries, to conclude serious
and responsible agreements guaranteeing that none of
those countries will take any action to destabilise the
internal order of other States.” [see 243Zst meeting,

56. Mr. LIANG
Yufan (China) (interpretation fhom
Chinese): Mr. President, at the outset I wish in the name
of the Chinese delegation warmly to welcome you to
New York. I have no doubt that, equipped as you are
with your outstanding qualities and extensive political
and diplomatic experience, you will distinguish yourself
in your important role as the representative of your country on the Security Council and contribute positively to
the Council’s work. Meanwhile I am pleased to see you
presiding over the Council this month and wish to offer
you my hearty congratulations. I would also like to take
this opportunity to express appreciation to your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick of the United States, for
her presidency last month.

para. 89.1

That is an idea worth considering. Similarly, we were
impressed by statements from the Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua [2431st meeting] that he had not
come here looking for condemnations
and that his
Government would resist attempts to isolate it. We found
attractive the view put forward by the representative of
Guatemala [2433rd meeting] that Central American problems should have Central American solutions. Many
speeches have referred to the background of poverty and
deprivation in Central America. Clearly, social conditions
are the seed-beds of politics. Finally, we were much struck
by the concluding appeal of the representative of Costa
Rica. I should like to repeat his words:

57. We have listened carefully to the statements made
by the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, Mr.
D’Escoto Brockmann,
and by the representatives of
other countries. The Chinese delegation set out its views
on the Central America issue at some length during the
Council’s debates on 29 March 1982 [2339th meeting]
and again on 24 March 1983 [2422nd meeting]. I will
recapitulate briefly.

‘&We do not believe that this Council should weaken
subregional or regional mechanisms. Nor do we believe
that the Council should, by issuing a mandate, limit the
autonomy of the Secretary-General.. 1.

58. Since the Council’s previous consideration of this
issue the situation arounci Nicaragua, far from improving, has continued to deteriorate. This has led to
increased tension in the whole of Central America,
thereby alarming the international community. The Chinese Government and people are greatly concerned over
this development.

“The Council should leave the initiative in the hands
of the four Latin American Foreign Ministers.” [,See
2435th meeting, paras. 62 and 63.1
54. It may be objected that there are questions of face
involved for one or more delegations. That is, unfortulately, one of the by-products of so much public speechiying. It was with this thought in mind that my
elegation threw out the suggestion at the close of our
st debate, on 29 March [2427rh meefing], that there
;ght be a role for the Secretary-General.
We believe
!t if all the countries in the area would declare that in
nciple they were ready for multilateral
dialogue but
nd difficulty in agreeing on certain modalities, such as
precise agenda, the date and place for a meeting and
)n, it might then be reasonable to ask the Secretaryleral, through his personal mediation, to sort out, in
;ultation with the parties, such modalities. We do not
k it is reasonable to throw the whole problem at the
,etary-General without any agreement between the
ies as to what the problem is or what his role is to be.
t puts him in an impossible position and tends to
Ice his usefulness in the future. As X say, it is another
.cer if he is asked by all the parties to undertake a
ited task after they have agreed in principle.

59. As has been pointed out by a number of representatives, the prolonged tension and unrest in Central America can be traced to various profound factors, domestic as
well as external. Meddling by outside forces, especially the
attempts of the super-Powers to extend their rivalry to
Central America, has multiplied the complexity of the
issue and constitutes an underlying cause of the present
tension in the region. One super-Power has felt free to
intervene on the pretext that the struggles of the peoples
of the region for political rights and social reforms are
allegedly a “threat” to its own “security and prosperity”.
It has stepped up military assistance programmes in the
region on the plea of stemming outside intervention. Such
a policy can only inflame the contradictions in Central
America and aggravate tension there.
60. China opposes any outside interference from whatever quarter, under any pretext or in any form, in the
affairs of the Central American States. We are of the view
that in order to ease the tension in Central America it is
imperative to stop all outside intervention, especially
super-Power intervention or intimidation. The independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Nicaragua
and other Central American States must be respected and
the affairs of the Central American States should be left to
the peoples of the respective States.

Wit11 these considerations in mind, my delegation
s that the most important elements for the fhxritY
lncil to emphasize are the reaffirmation
of the princiset out in the Contadora Group bulletin and support
+e further efforts of the Contadora Group to make
essthrough multilatera1 dialogue, which will Permit
-al talks on the side. If we can agree at least on this
6

/
$
)

61. We would like to reaffirm our hope that the differences and disputes existing among various Central American States will be settled peacefully and rationally without
outside intervention and in conformity with the norms of
international relations enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, especially the principles of respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in
internal affairs, non-aggression and the peaceful settlement of disputes through negotiations.

the United States. The statement made by the United
States representative in the Security Council [2431st
meeting] also confirmed that interventionist policy of
Washington vis-d-vis Nicaragua. In fact that statement
did not even attempt to refute the fact that the acts of
aggression prepared and perpetrated against Nicaragua
were the work of the United States acting, as has often
happened in the past, through other countries and using
other hands.

62. Recently Latin American countries, especially those
of the Contadora Group, have actively worked towards
an easing of the tension in Central America by pushing
the parties to the conference table with a view to reaching
a peaceful solution there. Those endeavours have been
welcomed by the peoples of Central America and widely
acclaimed and supported by the international community.
We whole-heartedly hope that they will achieve positive
results.

69. I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to the following point. The Nicaraguan statement contained nothing about the internal system of the
United States, At the same time, official representatives
of the United States, including at the highest level, consider it quite normal for them to discuss the exclusively
internal affairs of Nicaragua, Furthermore, they cast
doubt on the legitimacy of the Government of that country merely because its policies are not to the liking of
Washington. Is that not an eloquent example of direct
interference in the internal affairs of a sovereignty State?

63. Some countries have requested the United Nations
to play a role in helping to bring about a solution in
Central America. We lend our support to all efforts conducive to the easing and elimination of tension in the
region.

70. We come across such examples literally every step
of the way. Stating its preparedness to negotiate with
Nicaragua, the United States puts forward preconditions
known to be unacceptable-for example, its demand that
the Government of Nicaragua confirm its commitment
to so-called pluralism and a mixed economy. It is not
difficult to imagine how the United States Government
would react if as a pre-condition of certain negotiations,
there were to be a demand, for example, that the United
States introduce a planned economy.

64. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me at the
outset, Sir, to welcome you as President of the Security
Council for this month and to express my conviction that
under your guidance the Council will successfully discharge the many tasks facing it. I should like to take this
opportunity to pay a tribute to the representative of the
United States for having guided the work of the Council
last month.

71. It is not a question here of Nicaragua’s economic
system. The fact is that one country wants to dictate to
another what economic system it should have.

65. The Soviet delegation would also like to express sincere condolences on the recent demise of our colleague
the representative of Mongolia, Mr. Tsogtyn Narkhuu.

72. Something else is noteworthy. It was recently stated
at the highest level in the United States that the former
Somozist National Guards, well known for their bloody
crimes against their own people and now being infiltrated
by the United States into Nicaragua, are no more and no
less than “freedom fighters”. Apparently their direct
armed intervention in Nicaragua, their acts of terror and
violence, are virtually sanctified by all the canons of international law and order, while at the same time the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), for example, which has many times been recognized by the United
Nations as the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, is declared to be a terrorist organization.
How many times have we heard it said that violence is
inadmissible, that SWAP0 is not entitled to carry on the
struggle for liberation from the racist regime of Pretoria
by all the means at its disposal, including the use of arms?
This is a strange, perverted type of logic.

66. The Security Council has again been urgently convened at the request of the Government of Nicaragua.
The reason is the continuing expanding acts of aggression against that country.
67, The Soviet delegation, like everyone in this
chamber and many beyond these precincts, listened carefully to the cogent and constructive statement made by
the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, Miguel
D’Escoto Brockmann. The many facts he gave in his
statement show incontrovertibly
that a second, even
more dangerous, stage in the direct armed intervention
against his country has begun. The Minister’s statement
stressed that that intervention is being directed, financed
and armed by the United States. All the facts that the
Council has at its disposal testify to that.

73. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned countries, held at New
Delhi in March, quite rightly denounced

68. Further, what we have here is an unusual situation
in which the actual country being accused does not deny,
but in fact virtually admits, the charges hurled against it.
Direct evidence that the United States is grossly interfering in the internal affairs of Nicaragua is contained in the
well-known statements made recently by the President of

“acts of aggression against Nicaragua, particularly the
violation of its air space and territorial waters, utilization of the territory of foreign countries, in and out7

seriousness of the situation is borne out by the mere fact
that the Council was convened to discuss the matter last
year and has twice been convened to discuss it this year.
It is therefore the Council’s duty to follow closely the
development of the situation and to take all necessary
measures to safeguard the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country.

side the region, as bases for aggression and the
training of counter-revolutionary
forces, the commission of terrorist actions and sabotage, particularly the
attacks of armed groups of ex8omoza guards through
its northern border, which had resulted in considerable loss of life and property, as well as measures of
economic pressure at the international level. These
were considered part of a deliberate plan to harass and
destabilize that country, as has been acknowledged by
a foreign Power.” [See S/15675 and Corr.1 and 2,

7% The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
call on the representative of the United States, who has
asked to speak.

annex, section I, para. 136.1

74. It is clear that it is precisely this dangerous policy of
the United States, which seeks by all possible means to
prevent peoples, including the peoples of Central America, from determining their own future, which shows how
well justified are the fears of the Secretary-General when
he said in his annual report on the work of the Organization: “We are perilously near to a new international
anarchy.“2

80. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
I should like to reply briefly to certain of the assertions
made by the representative of the Soviet Union.
81. I should like to note, first, the stunning cynicism of
his remarks, because it is indeed stunningly cynical for
the representative of the Soviet Union, whose country
undertook to flood the region of Central America with
heavy weapons which had never been seen there before,
and with an extraordinary assortment of military advisers from countries which have in common a particular
relationship with his own country, a relationship which is
characterized by the hegemony of the Soviet Union vis-hvis its various client States. They are the people who have
introduced heavy weapons into Central America. They
are the people who have undermined economic progress
and development in the region, which were proceeding at
quite a steady rate before the deliberate efforts at militarization and destabilization of the region.

75, The Soviet Union rejects the attempts of imperialist
forces to force their will on the peoples of Central America and the Caribbean, to try to repress their desire for
freedom and national independence. We decisively
oppose the threats, acts of provocation and pressure
against Cuba, Nicaragua, Grenada and other countries of
the Latin American continent.
76. Speaking in this chamber, the Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua quite justifiably demanded that
the United States cease its “undeclared war”, as he put it,
against his country. We fully support that just, legitimate
demand. Despite the dangerous situation that has arisen,
the statement of the Nicaraguan Minister was permeated
with faith in the strength of his people. At the same time it
contained many constructive and positive elements. He
stressed that the main purpose of Nicaragua’s coming to
the Security Council was a desire to attain a peaceful
political settlement of this dangerous situation, The Minister officially stated that his Government was prepared to
engage in honest, constructive dialogue, The Soviet delegation completely supports that approach.

82. The suggestion was also made by the representative
of the Soviet Union that the United States was seeking to
determine the internal affairs of the Government of Nicaragua and that it should be indifferent to-should
“bug
off’ from any concern about-the
organization of the
politics and economics of Nicaragua. I should just like to
say that the United States does not attempt to influence
in inappropriate ways the organization of any country’s
economic system. We hope that all countries in the world
will organ&e their economic systems in such a fashion
that they will be productive of goods and will take care of
the well-being of their peoples; but that we regard as
wholly their decision. We also regard the form of government of other countries as their decision. We cannot,
however, be indifferent to gross violations of human
rights by other Governments, and the Charter of the
United Nations does not suggest that we should be.

77. Pursuant to its policy of principle, the Soviet Union
advocates the just settlement of international disputes at
the negotiating table. As has been stressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the Soviet Union, Mr. Andrei
Gromyko:
“The Soviet Union has stated many times that it is
firmly convinced that the strengthening of peace in
Central America and the Caribbean is possible only
on the basis of respect for the sovereign right of each
people to determine, without interference from outside, its own future and to manage its own natural
resources, We commend the proposals of Venezuela,
Mexico, Nicaragua and certain other countries, which
seek a political settlement by developing a dialogue
based on equality.”

83. The Charter in fact identifies respect for human freedom and other human rights as central concerns of the
Organization and of its Member States. The United States
also belongs to some other organizations and takes cognizance of obligations which are contracted vi+&is other
organizations. We have noted here, for example, that the
Government of Nicaragua undertook some solemn commitments to the Organization of American States (OAS)
concerning the kind of Government which it would organize were it in fact to become the Government of Nicaragua; it undertook commitments to organize democratic
institutions, to provide its people with democratic institutions and respect for their human rights, and rule of law-

78. We believe that the continuing disquieting situation
surrounding Nicaragua calls for constant attention. The
8

regular, civil rule of law, quite specifically. We have
suggested that those commitments have not been fulfilled
and that, since the ruling clique of Nicaragua secured the
assistance of the OAS in its rise to power on the basis of
those commitments, it raises some questions about the
bases of their Government.

speak during this series of meetings, convened at the
request of Nicaragua.
8X. The delegation of the Dominican Republic again
comes before the Security Council to express its very
great concern at the worsening situation in Central
America. We are similarly concerned to note that since
the Council’s meetings in March no significant progress
has been made towards resolving this crisis; rather, the
latest developments show that the situation has deteriorated, despite the efforts made to alleviate tension in the
area.

84. The representative of the Soviet Union also referred
to--” bloody crimes” of the United States I think was his
phrase. The phrase reminded me of an item which I read
yesterday in a European newspaper concerning the death
of some 3,000 Afghan civilians last week due to bombing
of civilian populations by the nearly 150,000-I think it
now is-Soviet occupation troops in that beleaguered
country. The article that I read also stated that neither the
Security Council nor any other body of the United
Nations had taken any note of this mass slaughter of
Afghans, and I should like, while we are talking about
“bloody crimes”, to draw attention to the suffering of the
Afghan people.

89. This latter observation should prompt us to wonder
whether it might not be timely to take a self-critical look
at the failures of the Organization to promote, foster and
take effective measures for the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the guiding principles of the
Charter, justice and international law.
90. We again reaffirm our support for creating a climate conducive to conciliation among the parties to the
conflict so that through dialogue and negotiation there
can be thorough scrutiny of the social and economic
causes that are giving rise to instability in the region.
Now, in order to promote this climate of confidence
which is essential for bringing the parties to the negotiating table, it is imperative that both the parties directly
involved and the other members of the international
community
should refrain from taking any action or
adopting any policy that might increase tension.

85. I should finally like to say that it has been suggested
by the Soviet representative and some .others that there
should be and that they support regional efforts to
achieve peace. I would emphasize that that is, of course,
precisely I think, what we all support. If they support
regional efforts to achieve peace then there is indeed
unanimity, because certainly the rest of us support
regional efforts to achieve peace. The United States, for
its part, stands ready at any time to support any agreements designed to end the importation of all arms and
foreign military advisers into the region-any agreement
to do so which is verifiable and indeed can be verifiedand to support any agreement which provides for the
mutual respect of borders by all countries in the region,
non-interference in the affairs of one another and an end
to all efforts at destabilization.

91. The Dominican Republic’s delegation most fervently appeals to all the parties committed to peace in the
region to seek the mechanisms they deem fit to halt such
bloodshed among brothers, so much suffering and so
much pain. We must redouble our efforts to find peace
through the means of peaceful settlement afforded us by
international
law.

86. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom French): I still
have three speakers on my list. Unless the Council decides
otherwise, I shall close the list, I shall, when the occasion
arises, call upon those members who wish to speak in
exercise of the right of reply, The next speaker is the
representative of the Dominican Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

9%. In this context, we wish to express our gratitude for
the work which is being done to bring about peace in the
Central American region by the Contadora GroupColombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela. That
Group’s work greatly encourages and is very much
appreciated by the Dominican Government, and we reaffirm our continued readiness to make an effective contribution in the search for peaceful solutions.

87. Mr. KNIPPING
VICTORIA
(Dominican Republic) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, I should
first of all like to express the pleasure of the delegation of
the Dominican Republic at seeing you conducting the
Council’s business, With you presiding over the work of
the Council and in view of your acknowledged professional ability and your undeniable diplomatic talents, the
Council is guaranteed a successful search for just solutions conducive to peace and harmony among peoples.
We also should like to express our gratitude to the representative of the United States, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, for the
efficient and dynamic way she conducted the Council’s
business last month. My delegation also wishes to thank
all the members of the Council for their kindness in
allowing the delegation of the Dominican Republic to

93. We have been following with particular interest the
efforts of those brother countries, and we call on them to
use to the full their negotiating abilities for the benefit of
Latin American brotherhood. If, as we hope, these initiatives lead to a consensus in the Central American region
through which the foundations can be laid for a just,
viable and lasting peace, the Group will have rendered an
inestimable service to the cause of inter-American solidarity and earned not only the support of the entire
American continent but also the gratitude of the international community as a whole.
94. Finally, we reaffirm our conviction that any political
settlement of the upheavals in Central America must be
9

in this direction is to adopt a resolution reaffirming the
right of Nicaragua to live in peace and security, free from
outside intervention and the threat or use of force. The
Council should warn all concerned to refrain from open
or covert interference in Nicaraguan internal affairs. New
possibilities should be opened for dialogue and a negotiated solution, with the assistance of the Contadora
Group and the United Nations.

based on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly
those concerning non-intervention,
the self-determination
of peoples, the prohibition of the
use of force or the threat of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of States, and the settlement of international
disputes and conflicts by peaceful
means.
95. Mr. NATORF
(Poland): Since this is my first statement this month in the Security Council, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of this body. We are convinced that your diplomatic skill
will help us to deal effectively with the difficult tasks
before us now and those facing us in the future. I should
like also to take this opportunity to express our appreciation of the way in which the representative of the United
States, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, guided our deliberations
during the month of April.

101. Those ideas are expressed in the informal draft
resolution which is being drawn up by the non-aligned
members of the Security Council. The time has come to
adopt an appropriate resolution on acceptable and necessary action to overcome the present crisis.
102. Before I conclude my statement I wish to make
two further brief comments. First, it is essential that the
Council take action in this case, since the accumulation
of political, economic and social problems affecting Central America constitutes a dangerous threat to regional
and international security. We share the view that these
problems have nothing to do with East-West relations.
Secondly, we wish to commend the position taken by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on this issue, both
in the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting at Managua in
January and in its Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government, held at New Delhi in March. It is also
with appreciation
that we follow the efforts of the
Governments of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela to find a solution to the problems that affect Central American countries.

96. My delegation presented the position of the Polish
Government on the Nicaraguan complaint to the Security
Council and on the serious increase of tensions in Central
America in its statement of 28 March 1983 [2425th meeting]. Since then the situation has not improved; it has even
deteriorated,
97. We followed with great attention the statements
made on 9 May [2431st meeting] and 16 May [2#33rd
meeting] by Mr. Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann, Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua, describing the armed
attacks on his country from the territory of Honduras,
which were openly supported by United States Government circles.

103. My delegation hopes that strict adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations and a sense of the serious
responsibility which falls on the Council will guide us on
the path of peace and justice in this case of such vital
importance not only to Nicaragua but to peace and stability in the entire region.

98. My Government is deeply concerned at the build up
of tensions in the Central American region in general and
on the Nicaragua-Honduras
and Nicaragua-Costa Rica
frontiers in particular,
Open and covert aggression
against Nicaragua may soon lead to open military conflicts, threatening international peace and security. This is
the ominous, albeit familiar, scenario used against the
Nicaraguan
revolution:
infiltration of mercenaries financed and trained by some United States agencies, and
economic and propaganda aggression, using a neighbouring country for this activity. Unless checked, this might
lead to a conflict with incalculable consequences,

104. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Greece. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
105. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): It gives me great pleasure to join the speakers who have preceded me and to
extend to you, Sir, the congratulations of my delegation
on your assumption of the office of President of the Security Council and express our appreciation of the manner
in which you have conducted the Council’s deliberations
this month. I fee1 confident that the Council will c0ntinu.e
to benefit from your experience, ability and diplomatic
skill in its consideration of the issue before it. I should
like also to take this opportunity to express our appreciation of the exemplary way in which your predecessor,
Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
representative of the United States,
conducted the Council’s proceedings last month.

99. We have more than once welcomed the readiness of
the Nicaraguan
Government to negotiate a solution to
the conflict. This readiness was reaffirmed by Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann in his statement of 9 May. We have also
noted with satisfaction that the four countries of the
Contadora Group have taken constructive action aimed
at preventing any further escalation. My Government is
encouraged by Nicaragua’s acceptance of the Group’s
latest proposals. This confirms the peaceful and constructive foreign policy pursued by that country both in general and in the Central American region in particular.

106. The reason I asked to participate in the current
debate is that it concerns respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of a Member State of this Organization. This is a matter on which, as is well known, Greece
is extremely sensitive, since respect for and application of

100. It is the strong view of my Government that the
Council should undertake decisive efforts to bring about
a negotiated,
peaceful solution of the problems which
have been created on Nicaragua’s borders. The first step
10

the principles enshrined in Article 2 of the Charter is a
cornerstone of the foreign policy of the Greek Government. Moreover, Greece is dedicated to the principle of
the peaceful solution of all international differences and
advocates the implementation of this principle in every
case.
107. My country has friendly relations with all the countries involved in the problems which are so sadly disturbing Central America and, in accordance with its
attachment to the principles 1 have mentioned, would like
to voice its support for the peaceful solution of these
problems.

113. I should like to touch on another question. The
United States representative said that the main concern of
the United States in Nicaragua was to support and defend
human rights, but it seems that the defence of human
rights is being carried out with the assistance of the Somozist National Guards. Apparently these are the best
defenders of human rights that can be found in that
region. I did not speak about the crimes of the United
States in this case; I spoke about the crimes of the Somoza
Guards.
114. The statement of the United States representative
contained some other allegations, too, but I do not think
it would be right to answer them because their purpose
was to divert the Council’s attention from the very serious
and important matter which we are discussing.

108. In this spirit, the Greek Government gives its full
encouragement and support to the initiative undertaken
by the Contadora Group and expresses its earnest hope
that this Group will be able to find peaceful solutions, to
the benefit of all the parties concerned. It is also our hope
that the appropriate organs of the United Nations will
continue to follow closely the whole matter at present
before the Security Council.

115. The PRESIDENT
(z’nterpretafion from Fuench):
The representative of Guatemala asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply and I invite him to take a place
at the Council table in order to do so.
116. Mr. QUfiONES-AM8ZQUITA

(Guatemala)

(in-

terpretation from Spanish): May I begin by thanking

the
Council for its kindness in allowing me to speak for the
second time. Rest assured that I shall not take up much of
the Council’s time and that my statement will be brief.

109. The PRESIDENT
(interprefation from French):
The representative of the Soviet Union wishes to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.

117. I listened closely to the statement made by the Minister for External Relations, Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann,
when, two days ago [2433rd meeting], after my statement,
he described as false the assertion in the Guatemalan
speech [ibid.] that in Panama there had been a meeting of
Central American Foreign Ministers at which there had
been discussion of some of the problems to bc included in
the agenda to be drawn up and of the appropriateness of a
comprehensive approach to the problems. Since, semantically, falsehood means lack of truth or authenticity, in
order to clear up any misunderstanding about our position, may I say that there was, indeed, a meeting of Central
American Foreign Ministers-a
meeting which was not
attended by Nicaragua-and
the Central American Foreign Ministers made a joint statement, with which perhaps
because of some error Minister D’Escoto Brockmann is
not familiar. That statement read as follows:

110. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I should like to
say a few words in connection with the recent statement
of the representative of the United States. Unfortunately,
as often happens, having made her statement, she has
abandoned us. This has been called “hit-and-run
tactics”.
111. The representative of the United States dredged up
what in the United States is called a red herring. She is a
great specialist in that. I wish to point out that her statement contained a number of allegations which have
nothing to do with the actual facts, in particular, allegations that the Soviet Union is interfering in the affairs of
Central America. She said, for example, that the reason
for the lack of economic progress in that region was interference by the Soviet Union.

“Having met in Panama City, the Foreign Ministers of
the Republics of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala
and Honduras, in response to the kind invitation
extended by the Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela, the countries which make up the
so-called Contadora Group, issue the following joint
communiqut”.

112. That was said by the representative of a country
which for decades dominated that region and bled its peoples white. I should like in that respect to quote from a
statement by General Smedley Butler of the United States
Marine Corps:
“I helped make Mexico safe for American oil interests in 1914. I helped make Haiti and Cuba decent
places for the National City Bank boys to collect
revenue in, I helped purify Nicaragua for the international banking house of Brown Brothers. I brought
light to the Dominican Republic for American sugar
interests in 1916. I helped make Honduras ripe for the
American fruit companies in 1903. Looking back on it,
I might have given Al Capone a few hints.“*

I would draw the Council’s attention to the fact that this
joint communiqui says at the beginning “meeting”, so there
was indeed a meeting, It goes on:
“1. On Tuesday, 19 April of this year, we came to
this city, prompted by the highest spirit of Central
Americanism and inspired by our sincere desire for
peace and concerned by the regional conflict, in search
of solutions capable of restoration of harmony and
security to the area.

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

11

eign Ministers-all
the more so since Guatemala did not’
say “all” the Foreign Ministers.

“2. The meeting was convened for the purpose of
continuing the consultations initiated by the Foreign
Ministers of the Contadora Group with each of the
Central American countries during the brief, successive
visits that they paid to the Governments of the five
Central American republics on the 12th and 13th of
this month.

120. The impestuousness and flippancy shown by the
Foreign Minister of Nicaragua in describing these statements as false I can attribute only to his nervous reaction
caused by Nicaragua’s difficult situation. I would advise
him to be calm and collected. Let him not see ghosts
where there are none; let him see no tricks where none is
intended. Imprudence is not a good counsellor.

“3. A relevant occurrence prior to the beginning of
the meeting was a discussion of the methodology to be
adopted in carrying out the consultations on the
regional problems.

121. My country wishes to take part in a multilateral
dialogue in all good faith, a frank dialogue to seek solutions so that there should be no use of force. Oppressed
peoples are different from free peoples in that the former
appeal to strength and not to law. Strength has to be
sought in the conscience of our peoples and the principles
of international law. Our desire is to help end a situation
of violence in Central America which destroys the flower
of our youth, ruins the life of our nations and calls for
superhuman efforts. Let us seek our own identity without
foreign interference.

“4. As a result of the consultations at that meeting,
the participating Governments will jointly discuss, at a
forthcoming meeting, the procedure and the agenda
that will serve as a basis for the talks aimed at seeking
constructive and peaceful solutions guaranteeing harmonious coexistence within the framework of respect
for the principle of non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other States and the self-determination of
peoples.

122. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
call on the representative of Nicaragua, who wishes to
speak in right of reply.

“5. We reaffirm our readiness to continue to make
efforts to achieve effective understanding among the
Central American countries, and in that spirit we are
prepared to meet next May.

123. Mr. CI-IAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): Bearing in mind your appeal for brevity, Mr. President, and the time we have spent in various
meetings discussing this item in the Council, I have no
intention of speaking at length, but I have a few brief
points to make to define or clear up a few aspects which
may lead to better understanding among our colleagues in
the Council.

“6. Lastly, we record our appreciation for the valuable conciliatory work done by the Foreign Ministers
of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, and we
express thanks for the hospitality extended to us by the
Government of Panama. 21 April 1983.”
118. It is also worth making clear that the points
covered in our statement, as well as those agreed to by the
Foreign Ministers, are the same as those referred to by the
representative of Panama in his statement yesterday
morning, from which I quote the following:

124. We are aware-and that is why we shall be briefthat both our colleagues in the Council and the members
of the international
community are perfectly aware of
who is the aggressor and who the victim in this complaint
brought by our Government, We are also aware that the
members of the Council and of the international community know very well who in Central America is usurping
the power of the people and who in Central America
governs with the people. We are further aware that the
members of the Council and the international community fully understand why our Government and our revolution have to have recourse to the Council in the cases
of invasion that we have denounced on two occasions at
the end of one month in this very forum,

“As a result of that trip, the Foreign Ministers said
that among the matters which require the most attention the following should be mentioned:
“ ‘the arms race, arms control and reduction the
transfer of armaments, the presence of military
advisers and other forms of outside military assistance, actions aimed at destabilizing the internal
order of other countries, threats and verbal aggression, warlike incidents and frontier tensions, the violation of human rights and individual and social
guarantees, and the grave economic and social problems which are at the heart of the region’s present
crisis”’ [sea 243&h meetirlg, para. 541.

125. Nicaragua, as a member of the Security Council,
believes that it is the inherent obligation of this body in
the first instance to ensure the maintenance of international peace and security. We believe that is an unavoidable responsibility of this body. In this regard, as members
of this organ we must make the proper and necessary
contributions not only in this particular case that affects
Nicaragua, but in any situation where that is necessary.
Our country has therefore come to the proper body, to
the organ which the very Charter of the United Nations
affords us, for recourse as a sovereign country, We have
therefore avoided going to the premises of the State

119. In other words, where is the falsehood? There was
indeed a meeting of Foreign Ministers and there was
indeed discussion of the points that we have mentioned. I
admit it should be made clear that, although Nicaragua’s
delegation was in Panama, it did not take part in the joint
declaration. But, just because Nicaragua did not participate, it cannot be said that there was no meeting of For12

Department to make alleged complaints concerning
alleged arms trafficking in Central America and from
Nicaragua to other countries in the region,
126. I believe that all our colleagues in the Council and
in the international community know very well what I
am talking about. They know very well that abut a year
ago, when General Alexander Haig was the Secretary of
State, a situation arose in the State Department in which
an attempt was made to provide evidence to justify to his
own public opinion at home and to international public
opinion abroad his warmongering attitude towards Nicaragua. They took a young Nicaraguan captured in El
Salvador and tried to use him to demonstrate that there
was clear reason to say that Nicaragua was involved in
arms trafficking and assisting the Salvadorian patriots.
We know what the outcome of all this was. We can all
perfectly well remember that the United States press
interviewed the young Nicaraguan after one year of
imprisonment, and he stated how he was taken to the
United States, how he was taken to the State Department
and how pressure was brought to bear on him to make
him state something that was not so.
127. In closing, I wish to make it quite clear, for the
record, that the statements of the representative of Guatemala once again confirm the correctness of the statements made by our Minister for External Relations
yesterday [2435th meeting]. He said, accurately, that
there had not been a meeting of Central American Foreign Ministers in Panama, unless Costa Rica, .Honduras,
El Salvador and Guatemala claim that only they are Central America. Nicaragua is and intends to remain part of
Central America, and we understand that Panama and,
indeed, Belize are part of Central America. We have to
define our premises and we have to be clear about our
concepts, particularly when dealing with the geography
of a region, To sum up, these statements made by the
representative of Guatemala bear out the truth of what I
once again bring before the Security Council for consideration, that there was no meeting of Ministers of Central
Africa. If it is decided to have a meeting of four Minis-

ters, from four countries which form part of Central
America, that is the sovereign right of each and every one
of them, but it does not mean that there was a meeting of
Central American countries.
128. Similarly, this is not merely an assertion on the part
of Nicaragua. I believe most, if not all, the speeches made
by representatives of the countries members of the Contadora Group have made it clear to the Council that what
took place in Panama was a second round of consultations, in which the Ministers of Central America were in
Panama at the disposal of the Contadora Ministers. In
other words, the Contadora Ministers met individually
and bilaterally with each of our Foreign Ministers-a
stage begun previously at a working session at which the
Contadora Ministers had gone to each of the countries of
the region in order to establish the same mechanism of
consultation.
129. I think I have made absolutely clear what the position of my Government is and also just how true and
correct our Minister’s statement yesterday was.
130. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation @m French): I
apologize to the representative of Nicaragua if I ever gave
the impression that I wanted delegations to be brief. I’do
not remember asking delegations to be brief. On the contrary, I think it is normal and useful that on such a serious
and important matter as this all delegations should speak
from their heart and their conscience and say what they
really believe. In the name of the Council I thank all
delegations who spoke and said everything they considered ought to be said.
The meeting rose at I.15 p.m.

NOTES
I A/38/68,
nnnex.
z See Official Records of the General Assembly,
sion, Supplement
No. I (A/37/1),
p. 1.

Thirty-seventh

Ses-
