S/PV.9422

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9422nd meeting

Thursday, 21 September 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hasani/Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Ms. Colonna
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Hamamoto
Mr. Borg
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Al Sayegh
Lord Ahmad
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2022/688)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-27450 (E)
*2327450*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/688)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other high-level representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Germany and
Türkiye to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central
Asia and the Americas, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: On 19 September, Azerbaijan announced
that it had launched “local counter-terrorism activities
in the Karabakh economic region” in response to the
tragic deaths of two civilians and four police officers
in incidents involving landmines, allegedly placed
by Armenian armed forces. According to official
statements, Azerbaijan had informed the Russian
peacekeeping force and the Joint Russian-Turkish
Monitoring Centre of its activities as being intended
to prevent large-scale provocations by the Armenian
armed forces, neutralize their military infrastructure
and ensure their withdrawal and the restoration of the
constitutional order of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
2/20

21/09/2023

Developments indicated a serious escalation in
military operations, with reports of Azerbaijani forces
breaking through the Line of Contact. There were
casualties reported, including among the civilian
population, as well as evacuations of thousands of
people within the region. The Russian peacekeeping
force, which itself suffered casualties, documented
numerous ceasefire violations. The United Nations,
which is neither present along the Line of Contact
nor in other areas under the mandate of the Russian
peacekeepers, is not in a position to verify or confirm
those various claims and allegations.
Allow me nonetheless to recall the SecretaryGeneral’s extreme concern over the recent resumption of
hostilities that resulted in the tragic loss of civilian lives,
including children. United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Volker Türk also expressed concerns
about the impact of the renewed use of armed force
on civilians. He noted that it is critical to return to the
peace process and work on an agreement grounded in
respect for human rights. The Secretary-General urges
all concerned to strictly observe the 2020 ceasefire in
accordance with the 9 November joint statement and
to continue implementing their obligations, notably
as they relate to international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The escalation occurred following the muchneeded delivery, on the previous day, 18 September, of
shipments of wheat flour and essential medical items
simultaneously through both the Lachin corridor and the
Aghdam road. Members of the Council will recall that,
over the past months, issues of freedom of movement
of civilians and humanitarian access have been major
sources of tension and sharp exchanges between Baku
and Yerevan. The Secretary-General remains deeply
concerned about the impact of the escalation on the
fragile humanitarian situation and calls on all parties to
urgently facilitate unimpeded access for humanitarian
relief to civilians in need.
We also note the concerns of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) about the
humanitarian impact of the latest events on the already
vulnerable population in the region. Recalling the
extremely limited access to basic commodities and
health care over the past few months, the ICRC assesses
that the situation was likely to deepen their suffering.
The developments of the past few days should be
seen in the context of the broader pattern of regular
ceasefire violations that have continued to persist.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

21/09/2023

We note yesterday’s announcement of a cessation of
hostilities, with the situation on the ground remaining
fluid. We also understand that, in a positive step,
representatives of the local population and the
Government of Azerbaijan met earlier today for an
initial exchange.

the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
And France is far from alone; many countries around
this table have also expressed their clear rejection of
violence and arbitrariness and called on Azerbaijan to
show restraint and comply with international law.

In conclusion, we call for a credible and durable
cessation of all hostilities. Any renewed escalation
would lead to further loss of life and human suffering
and further set back internationally supported peace
efforts. The protection and essential needs of the
civilian population, including their human rights, must
be the overriding priority. A genuine dialogue between
the Government of Azerbaijan and representatives
of the region, together with full engagement in the
normalization process by Armenia and Azerbaijan,
are the only sustainable way forward. The Secretariat
will remain in close contact with all relevant actors
and the parties concerned and stands ready to support
ongoing peace efforts as needed. The Secretariat is
also ready and prepared to conduct humanitarian needs
assessments, if given access, and provide assistance
as needed.

As was to be feared, the results of those actions
took a particularly heavy toll, causing several hundred
injuries and dozens of deaths, including among
civilians, including many children. A ceasefire was
announced yesterday, which was essential. It is also
essential that it be respected.

The President: I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
I call on Her Excellency Ms. Catherine Colonna,
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of the
French Republic.
Ms. Colonna (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for
his briefing.
France requested the holding of this emergency
meeting of the Security Council given the seriousness
of the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. After having
amassed a large quantity of troops and military
equipment for several weeks, on 19 September
Azerbaijan decided to launch a large-scale military
operation, which mobilized massive land and air
resources and affected the civilian population. It
was an operation that no one could believe was not
premeditated, even as efforts towards a negotiated
solution had intensified the day before and the delivery
of humanitarian aid had resumed for the first time in
three months.
With the greatest firmness, France immediately
condemned that unacceptable offensive that contravenes
3/20

It is not the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan that
is at stake here. Nobody disputes it, and nobody is
threatening it. What is at stake is the possibility for the
Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh to be able
to continue to live there with respect for their rights,
their history and their culture. Such a guarantee cannot
exist when the strongest exercise deliberate coercion
on the weakest, when the threat of permanent military
intervention looms and when Nagorno-Karabakh has
been the object of a blockade for several months now
that prevents people from accessing food, medicine
and energy.
France took note of President Aliyev’s remarks
yesterday affirming his desire to live in peace with the
Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh and preserve their
rights. Those words commit Azerbaijan, which today
bears responsibility for the fate of the population. If
Azerbaijan is truly interested in reaching a peaceful
negotiated solution it must now provide tangible
guarantees. It must engage in good faith in the
discussions, excluding any use of force or any threat of
the use of force and accepting that the dialogue concerns
rights and guarantees for the population, with the
support of the international community. It must ensure
amnesty for the forces that accepted the ceasefire. It
must restore, without delay and unconditionally, traffic
through the Lachin corridor, in accordance with the
order issued by the International Court of Justice on
22 February 2023, which has since been confirmed
by the Court. Finally, it must accept an international
humanitarian presence in Nagorno-Karabakh. Doing
so is essential as winter approaches. Without those
guarantees, there can be no solution.
This is unfortunately not the first time that France
has alerted the Council to the seriousness of the
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. This is not the first
time that France has called on the Council to mobilize
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

to avoid a human tragedy and a worsening of this crisis,
which threatens to profoundly destabilize the South
Caucasus region. The events of recent days confirm
it: we cannot remain passive and look away from what
is currently happening in Nagorno-Karabakh, lest we
become complicit in the mass exodus of a population
that is already very hard-hit. As the Council is aware,
several reports indicate that since yesterday, there
are many currently preparing to depart, while almost
10 per cent of the population of Nagorno-Karabakh
has been displaced owing to the offensive launched by
Azerbaijan on 19 September.
The Council must contribute actively to resolving
the crisis. It must defend the principles of the Charter and
international security by providing its active support for
defining the parameters of a solution negotiated between
Baku and the Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh. It
must clearly state its determination to ensure respect
for international law at all times and everywhere, and
it must remain vigilant against any attempt to drag
Armenia into these tragic events and to use them as
a pretext to call into question its territorial integrity.
In recent months, Prime Minister Pashinyan has shown
his sense of responsibility, his desire for de-escalation
and his commitment to reaching a negotiated solution
with Azerbaijan, based on recognition and respect for
the territorial sovereignty of both of the two countries,
within clearly delimited and demilitarized borders.
France is mobilized and will continue to be so, within
the Council as in all relevant forums, for a just and
lasting peace in the South Caucasus, to the benefit of all
the peoples of the region. France stands ready to work
with all those pursuing the same objective.
The President: I now call on His Excellency Mr. Ian
Borg, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs and
Trade of the Republic of Malta.
Mr. Borg (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for his briefing.
Malta is deeply concerned about the latest military
escalation by Azerbaijan against Karabakh Armenians.
It happened only a few weeks after the Security Council
called for efforts to de-escalate the situation and for
all sides to engage in constructive dialogue. Such acts
constitute an obstacle to peace. Malta condemns any
act that endangers civilian lives. We once again call for
the protection of women, children, the elderly, persons
with disabilities and other vulnerable groups. The
displacement of the local population and the destruction,
casualties and loss of life as a result of military action
4/20

21/09/2023

are deplorable. Further, we call for urgent humanitarian
support to be delivered without obstacles to those most
in need.
Aggressive and dangerous rhetoric and the
propagation of disinformation and misinformation
will only lead to mistrust between the parties. We
therefore urge both sides to refrain from engaging in
such campaigns. Following the ceasefire agreement,
Malta calls for the immediate and complete cessation of
hostilities and for it to be respected. We remain firm in
our belief that safeguarding the safety, rights and wellbeing of civilians must remain the absolute priority.
Malta also urges the respective parties to abstain from
violence and to return to dialogue and diplomacy so
as to ensure a peaceful settlement to the situation. We
call on all sides to engage in good faith and to focus
efforts on constructive and positive discussions, and we
fully support the European Union’s role in facilitating
dialogue at all levels.
We reiterate our support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of both Armenia and Azerbaijan.
We once again strongly encourage all sides to commit
to inclusive dialogue and negotiations towards lasting
peace. We reiterate that any peace agreement between
both parties must protect the rights and security of all
people in the region.
Mr. Al Sayegh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Miroslav Jenča for his comprehensive briefing on
recent developments. We welcome the participation
of ministers and other high-level officials in
today’s meeting.
Our meeting comes as world leaders gather here in
New York to emphasize the urgent need to prioritize
dialogue and peaceful solutions to the crises raging
around the world, in order to preserve the security and
safety of peoples and to focus on multilateral action so
as to address common challenges. In that context, the
United Arab Emirates welcomes the ceasefire reached
in the region yesterday through Russia’s mediation,
confirming that all parties concerned have chosen the
path of calm and de-escalation.
Despite the ceasefire, we cannot fail to stress the
need for all parties to commit to protecting civilians and
taking the necessary measures to ensure their security
and safety in the event of heightened tensions. We also
appreciate the role played by Russian peacekeeping
teams in providing safe haven for civilians in recent
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

days, and we deeply regret the loss of civilian life. We
offer our sincere condolences to the families of the
peacekeepers killed in the line of duty.
We also appreciate that the International
Committee for the Red Cross was able to deliver relief
assistance to those in need, with the consent of the
parties concerned. This constructive approach is an
effective example of the role of dialogue in achieving
positive results for all, especially in terms of alleviating
the suffering of civilians through the provision of
necessary relief aid. In that context, we welcome the
deliveries of humanitarian assistance earlier this week
and the deliveries of medical supplies to hospitals in the
area affected by the escalation.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates stresses the
need to maintain and stabilize the ceasefire. The
parties concerned must exercise restraint and avoid any
escalatory acts, in order to preserve the lives of civilians
and the security and stability of the region, which
cannot bear further repercussions resulting from any
new escalation. We are encouraged that talks were held
today in Yevlakh and hope that they can contribute to
building further understanding between the two parties.
We further emphasize the need to uphold the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
and peaceful settlement of disputes. Recent events have
demonstrated the fragility of the situation in the region
and the urgent need for further dialogue at all levels to
pave the way towards a peaceful and prosperous future
for the peoples of Azerbaijan and Armenia.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his
update to the Council. We welcome in particular the
participation of Armenian Foreign Minister Mirzoyan
and Azerbaijani Foreign Minister Bayramov in today’s
important discussion. It is good to see them both
again today — although we wish it was under slightly
different circumstances, of course.
Like others around this table, the United Kingdom
has been alarmed by the formidable pressures faced by
the population of Nagorno-Karabakh. The humanitarian
needs on the ground are immense, and they are
growing. Earlier this week — as we heard already from
the Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates — we
were all indeed encouraged by the news, albeit small,
that a small-scale movement of humanitarian goods
had taken place, via both the Lachin and Aghdam roads
into Nagorno-Karabakh. However, that opportunity for
5/20

21/09/2023

progress was cut short by Azerbaijan’s announcement
of the start of a military operation.
Together with many of our partners, the United
Kingdom has urged Azerbaijan to end its use of force,
refrain from further escalatory action and, importantly,
to return to dialogue. While we fully recognize the
issues of sovereignty and territorial integrity, military
might cannot be used to resolve tensions between
communities. Direct dialogue is the only way to find
genuine, sustainable peace and solutions. It is therefore
now vital for talks to resume with representatives of
the Karabakhi Armenians on the basis of a credible
plan to ensure the rights and security of everyone in
the region and to allow them to live in peace. At this
time in particular, the United Nations and international
organizations, such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, can also provide vital and crucial
assistance in addressing immediate and long-term
humanitarian needs.
The further use of violence will serve only to
undermine the tentative, fragile progress towards a
sustainable peace agreement between Azerbaijan and
Armenia, based on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of both countries, which is unquestionably in
the interests of the entire South Caucasus.
For its part, the United Kingdom welcomes
yesterday’s announcement of a ceasefire. We therefore
strongly urge all the parties to respect that ceasefire,
end the violence and engage in urgent, open dialogue
on a safe and secure future for the people of the region.
And I assure you, Mr. President, of our good offices,
and that the United Kingdom stands ready to support
that crucial process in any way we can.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča
for his informative briefing.
The United States is alarmed by the situation in
Nagorno-Karabakh due to Azerbaijan’s continued
military actions, and we call for those actions to
cease immediately. We note the announcements that
military operations have been suspended. And if that
is confirmed, that would be a positive development.
But right now, the situation on the ground remains
dire, and we are extremely troubled by the reports
of violence against civilians. Let me be clear:
Azerbaijan has a responsibility to ensure that its forces
comply rigorously with international law, including
international humanitarian law, and the rules governing
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

the conduct of hostilities, the protection of civilians
and the humane treatment of combatants. Azerbaijan
also has international obligations and commitments to
respect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
all individuals in its territory.
The United States calls on the sides to ensure
that humanitarian organizations can provide food,
medicine and other essentials, without any roadblocks,
and to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
workers. Earlier this week, we welcomed the delivery
of humanitarian goods along the Lachin corridor and
the Aghdam roadway into Nagorno-Karabakh. That
was a critical step forward. But it is disappointing
that military actions commenced a day after that
positive confidence-building action. Azerbaijan has
publicly stated that it is committed to alleviating the
humanitarian situation in Nagorno-Karabakh and to
providing access to food, shelter and medical care, as
well as restoring electricity, gas and water supplies.
The residents of Nagorno-Karabakh are looking
to us in their time of need. And for our part, the
United States has provided more than $24 million
in humanitarian and development assistance since
2020 in response to the crisis. Our aid addresses food
insecurity, water and sanitation requirements, medical
care, winterization, child protection, mental health,
psychological support and emergency response efforts.
But let us be clear: the only solution to the crisis is to
put an end to the violence and establish lasting peace.
And as the sides work to de-escalate the situation, we
reiterate the importance of an international mission
that could provide reassurance and confidence to the
residents of Nagorno-Karabakh that their rights and
security will be protected, consistent with Azerbaijan’s
public statements.
The United States continues to engage with both
Azerbaijani and Armenian leadership at the highest
levels in pursuit of a permanent solution to the situation
in Nagorno-Karabakh. Let us work together to advance
peace and justice for all.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča for his briefing. We appreciate the fact that this
meeting is being held, at this crucial time, in the presence
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and
Azerbaijan. I also wish to acknowledge the presence of
the other high-level representatives here today.
6/20

21/09/2023

Switzerland is deeply concerned about the military
operations that were launched by Azerbaijan earlier this
week. That development places an additional burden
on the civilian population of the Nagorno-Karabakh
region, which is already suffering a very difficult
humanitarian situation. Switzerland takes note of the
ceasefire announced yesterday and calls for a lasting
halt to the hostilities on the ground. The use of force to
resolve conflicts is unacceptable.
Although hostilities appear to have ceased, the
situation remains fragile. At this time of uncertainty, the
obligations under international law must be emphasized
all the more clearly. International humanitarian law
and human rights, in particular minority rights, must
be respected unconditionally. We are saddened by the
reports of civilian casualties. The protection of the
civilian population, the wounded and medical facilities
remains paramount.
We also reiterate that humanitarian actors,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross,
must be able to carry out their impartial missions and
that the rapid and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
aid to the population in need must be facilitated.
While we were relieved by the positive developments
with regard to humanitarian convoys using the Lachin
corridor and the Aghdam road earlier this week — as
mentioned by many others here today — that access
must be maintained. We call on the parties to respect
their obligations under the trilateral declaration of
November 2020 and the decisions of the International
Court of Justice, among other instruments.
In recent days, many of us at the United Nations
have reiterated our commitment to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. Just yesterday, the
President of Switzerland and many others did so in
this very Chamber (see S/PV.9421). We must therefore
ensure that we do not confine ourselves to fleeting
words but rather seek the unity that enables us to act in
favour of respect for international law and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. A lasting peace between Armenia
and Azerbaijan must be achieved through continued
dialogue at the negotiating table. Peace must be based
on respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and
the protection of minority rights. It is up to everyone,
including influential actors in the region, to commit to
respecting international humanitarian law and peaceful
solutions. Switzerland will commit to achieving that
objective and remains available to the parties, if they
wish.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

Echoing the words of the Secretary-General in his
appeal to the General Assembly (see A/78/PV.4), let
us not give up on diplomacy at this crucial moment.
It is absolutely essential that Azerbaijan and Armenia
resume the peace process.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
on the situation around Nagorno-Karabakh. We note
the participation in the meeting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Armenia and Azerbaijan.
On 19 September, there was a sharp escalation of
the military confrontation in Nagorno-Karabakh. The
humanitarian situation has worsened. There have been
risks of a steep increase in the number of refugees.
Fighting has led to civilian deaths. Unfortunately,
Russian peacekeepers once again bore the brunt of the
attack in carrying out their mission. As a result of the
shelling, they sustained several casualties. We took note
of the readiness of the Azerbaijani side to immediately
conduct a thorough investigation of the tragedy and to
bring those responsible to justice.
Despite the complex situation, the Russian
peacekeeping contingent continues to conscientiously
carry out its mission and to do everything possible
to protect the civilian population. From the moment
the fighting resumed, the command of the Russian
peacekeeping contingent has been in contact with
representatives of Karabakh Armenians and Azerbaijani
authorities and is actively taking steps to immediately
put an end to the bloodshed and the fighting as well as
to ensure adherence to humanitarian law for peaceful
civilians. Some 5,000 civilians, including more
than 1,000 children, were evacuated from the most
dangerous regions. People were given shelter in our
peacekeepers’ camp, where they were protected from
artillery and mortar fire. The wounded were given
medical assistance, and temporary housing and hot
food were provided.
With the active mediation of the Russian
peacekeeping contingent, on 20 September an
agreement was reached on a full cessation of the
fighting, to begin at 1 p.m. of the same day, and on
the start on 21 September of negotiations between
the representatives of the Armenian population of
Nagorno-Karabakh and the central authorities of
Azerbaijan. Today the negotiations are taking place
in the city of Yevlakh with the participation and
coordination of Russian peacekeepers. The absolute
7/20

21/09/2023

priority is to not allow a resumption of fighting and
to direct the situation back to the political track and
diplomacy.
The Russian Federation continues to play a leading
role in the process of contributing to the normalization
of relations between Azerbaijan and Armenia and more
than anyone else has been interested in resolving the
crisis as soon as possible. The President of the Russian
Federation held talks with the Prime Minister of
Armenia, Mr. Nikol Pashinyan, and the President of
Azerbaijan, Mr. Ilham Heydar oglu Aliyev. During those
talks, the hope was expressed that efforts would be made
to ensure the situation trends towards de-escalation
and stabilization. We believe that the ArmenianAzerbaijani truce should be accompanied by reliable
and clear guarantees of security and respect for the
human rights of the population of Nagorno-Karabakh,
based on universally accepted international principles.
The framework for the relevant parameters for
the solution to the conflict were established by the
authorities of Yerevan in October 2022 and May
2023 when, at summits held under the auspices of the
European Union, they recognized that Karabakh was
a part of Azerbaijan. At the same, in the concluding
declarations of these summits, to which Yerevan agreed,
the topic of the need to properly ensure the rights and
security of the Armenian population of Karabakh was
unfortunately simply omitted. We expect that contacts
between Baku and Stepanakert/Khankendi will yield
results and will make it possible to immediately launch
measures to ease the humanitarian crisis in the region
and ensure stability in the daily lives of the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh.
We will contribute to that in every way possible.
We need to develop a gradual road map to integrate the
population of Nagorno-Karabakh into the constitutional
order of Azerbaijan, with clear guarantees for their
rights and security. Those processes will be actively
supported by Russian peacekeepers. The security and
rights of Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians are of key
importance. Our position is that the set of trilateral
declarations at the highest level made between 2020
and 2022 laid the legal groundwork for the process of
Armenian-Azerbaijani normalization and that they are
still the only real sustainable solution to the conflict in
the South Caucasus. Nor is there any alternative to the
Russian peacekeeping contingent. We intend to assist in
resuming as soon as possible work on all the pillars for
normalization agreed to by the three leaders, including
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

elaborating a peace agreement, unblocking transport
communication, delimiting borders and building
humanitarian contacts between the two neighbouring
peoples.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing and France for
requesting this meeting. I welcome the participation
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and
Azerbaijan.
We deeply regret the rising tensions and the loss of
human life, both civilian and military, resulting from
violence last Tuesday in Nagorno-Karabakh. Brazil
extends its solidarity to the families of the victims and
wounded. We deeply regret the fatalities and wounded
among Russian peacekeepers. We condemn the resort
to unilateral actions. The attacks on populated areas,
which resulted in dozens of casualties, including, as
I said, civilians and Russian peacekeepers, put at risk
the fragile stability achieved after the 2020 ceasefire.
We welcome the ceasefire agreed yesterday and urge
the parties to strive to safeguard the rights and the
security of the civilian population and to avoid further
escalation.
Brazil reiterates its support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan. We understand that
the current crisis is part of a dispute that has involved
generations and cost the lives of thousands, deepening
resentment and mistrust between communities. It is
essential, however, to avoid the logic of retaliation that
has so often prevailed in the past, as well as to refrain
from attempts to alter the political status by force.
We reiterate the call for the full reopening of the
Lachin corridor. The civilian population must have
unimpeded access to food and medicine and must
no longer be subject to interruptions in the supply of
energy and basic services. We urge all parties to explore
mechanisms to prevent isolation and further tensions
and clashes. The delivery of humanitarian assistance by
the International Committee of the Red Cross, through
both the Lachin corridor and the Aghdam road earlier
this week, was a positive sign and should be unimpeded
moving forward. Only diplomacy and negotiations,
based on international law and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, will bring lasting peace.
Brazil recalls the trilateral declaration of 9 November
2020 and reaffirms its support for the mediation efforts
by the European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United States.
8/20

21/09/2023

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing. Ecuador takes
note of the letters from Armenia and Azerbaijan on the
situation that were recently circulated in the Security
Council and welcomes the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
present in the Chamber.
The events of 19 September, which claimed the lives
of a dozen people and forced thousands to flee their
homes, are deplorable. There is no excuse for the use
of military force in violation of international law and
international humanitarian law. Those acts are contrary
to the provisional measures issued by the International
Court of Justice on 7 December 2021.
The recently announced ceasefire must be fully
implemented on the ground and serve as a means to
de-escalate tensions with a view to achieving the
necessary guarantees for security and stability for the
inhabitants of the region.
On a previous occasion, my delegation drew the
Council’s attention to the problem related to the freedom
of movement in the Lachin corridor. We referred to
the serious humanitarian situation and the underlying
threat to security in that region. (see S/PV.9397) In
that regard, the facilitation of unrestricted access
to humanitarian aid remains essential in order to
prevent the deterioration of the situation for the
civilian population.
Ecuador calls on the parties to definitively resume
dialogue and negotiations in all frameworks and with
initiatives and tools that will enable a peaceful solution
to be reached in accordance with international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Any
agreement must have the necessary guarantees aimed
at protecting the populations living in that region in full
respect for human rights.
Ecuador encourages the Council to ensure that
the dialogue processes result in the establishment of a
definitive peace on the basis of diplomatic negotiations
between the parties.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča for his briefing. We welcome the presence of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and
Azerbaijan and other high-level representatives at our
meeting today.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

China has taken note of the letters sent by Armenia
and Azerbaijan to the President of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, respectively, and
has noted that Assistant Secretary-General Jenča has
just informed us that the parties concerned reached a
ceasefire agreement yesterday mediated by Russia. We
are following the current development of the situation
and hope the parties will follow through with the
ceasefire agreement, so that the situation will return to
calm and be stable.
We express our condolences about the loss of
Russian peacekeepers who were attacked. They
persisted in fulfilling their functions under difficult
circumstances. Their personal safety and security
should have been guaranteed.
Armenia and Azerbaijan are neighbours that
cannot move. Resolving disputes through dialogue
and consultation will not only serve the fundamental
interests of both countries but also help jointly safeguard
regional peace and stability.
In
numerous
previous
Security
Council
deliberations, China has consistently advocated the
maintenance of calm and restraint by the two countries to
avoid an escalation of the situation and human casualties
and a deterioration of the humanitarian situation.
We support the two countries in continuing to build
mutual trust through the mediation of relevant parties
to meet each other halfway and properly resolve the
disputes between them in accordance with recognized
international law and norms governing international
relations. China supports all diplomatic efforts that
will help to achieve that goal and will also play a
constructive role to that end.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, we
would like to thank you, Madam President, and France
for convening this meeting on the recent security
developments in the Nagorno-Karabakh region. We also
are grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenča for his briefing. We welcome in this meeting the
Foreign Ministers of Armenia and Azerbaijan and hope
that the Council’s deliberations will help to strengthen
the resolve of the two nations for a peaceful and lasting
resolution of the long-standing conflict.
The reported local anti-terrorist operation carried
out by Azerbaijan in Nagorno-Karabakh two days ago,
on 19 September, and its concerning casualties are
a reminder of the fragile peace in the region and the
9/20

21/09/2023

latent risk of tragic eruptions, as we have witnessed
twice in the past.
We take this opportunity to extend our deep
sympathies to the families and loved ones of those
civilians and Russian peacekeepers who sadly and
rather needlessly lost their lives.
We view positively the further news of a ceasefire
arrangement having been reached within a day of the
operation and join the calls made in the Council and
in the general debate of the General Assembly for the
immediate cessation of all military hostilities. An
escalation of the tensions in Nagorno-Karabakh is one
that the continent of Europe and the rest of our world
can ill afford at this time of immense global insecurity
and political upheavals.
The prevailing security conditions are unsettling
but highlight the continuing need for international and
regional support for trust- and confidence-building
measures to complement ongoing political peace
processes. All sides are strongly encouraged to exercise
restraint amid the of heightened tensions and to
cooperate with the Russian peacekeeping contingents
within the framework of earlier agreed arrangements.
If the future reintegration of Nagorno-Karabakh
with the rest of Azerbaijan is to be successful, we
believe that the approach must be reconciliatory and
non-confrontational. We therefore urge all concerned
to disengage from all actions that foster mistrust and to
seek the path of dialogue in good faith.
We wish also to emphasize that while the authorities
continue in the discussions on the way forward, the
recent developments should not be allowed to derail
earlier ceasefire arrangements and the progress towards
a comprehensive settlement and the normalization of
relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan, including
the delimitation and demarcation of borders.
The Council would recall that in December 2022,
when the Lachin corridor was first closed, and in
subsequent meetings on the subject, my delegation
expressed concerns about the possible humanitarian
fallouts. Nine months on and with the winter season
drawing close, we remain deeply concerned about the
fate of the thousands, especially women and children,
whose access to life-saving aid, medical supplies
and other critical necessities remain significantly
diminished. We therefore reiterate our appeal for
unimpeded humanitarian access, as well as the free
movement of persons, commercial cargo and transport
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

along the Lachin corridor and other identified routes.
We re-emphasize, in line with international law,
that the rights and freedoms of all the inhabitants of
Nagorno-Karabakh must be protected and preserved,
devoid of ethnic considerations or any other form
of discrimination.
In conclusion, we urge the unified support of the
Council for a truly comprehensive and lasting peace for
Nagorno-Karabakh and request the Council to remain
seized of this matter.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): We would like
to thank the Albanian presidency for convening this
meeting. We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča for his important briefing. We welcome
the participation in this meeting of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Mozambique is deeply concerned about the
escalation of military violence that occurred in the
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan on 19 September, which
resulted in numerous deaths and hundreds of injuries,
including among the civilian population.
We offer our heartfelt condolences for the lives
lost, including those of the Russians peacekeepers.
We regret that after repeated appeals from the
Council and the international community in general,
violence has taken precedence over dialogue,
compromising efforts towards peace between the
Republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan.
This occurrence exacerbates the suffering and
despair of the local population, which is facing a serious
humanitarian crisis, as reported by Director Wosornu,
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in her latest briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9397).
The Charter of the United Nations is unequivocal
regarding the pacific settlement of disputes. In that
regard, we reiterate our call on the parties to end
violence and to favour genuine dialogue to achieve
durable peace.
Mozambique welcomes the ceasefire agreement
reached on 20 September between the Government
of Azerbaijan and representatives of the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh, under the mediation of
the Peace mission of the Russian Federation in
Nagorno-Karabakh. We urge its strict compliance. We
also urge the parties to fully comply with the trilateral
agreement of 9 November 2020, which, among other
10/20

21/09/2023

things, declares a ceasefire and the end of all hostilities
in the conflict.
The combined efforts of regional and international
actors must be maintained and reinvigorated in order to
bring the parties back to the negotiating table. Political
and diplomatic efforts should prevail in finding
an adequate and mutually accepted solution, thus
guaranteeing the maintenance of peace and stability in
both countries and the region.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča for his briefing.
Last Tuesday, fighting broke out in the Karabakh
region, causing numerous deaths, injuries and
displacements of people. Those events took place even
as the resumption of humanitarian convoys in recent
weeks in the region had shown encouraging signs of
de-escalation.
The use of armed force only complicates the political
resolution of the crisis and worsens the humanitarian
situation in the region. It is clear that the presence of
military forces on the line of contact is a permanent
source of tension that fuels belligerence. Three years
after the deadly fighting in 2020, we must do all we can
to avoid taking a step backwards.
My country reiterates that a political solution,
based on the rule of law and, in particular, on the
implementation of the tripartite agreement of 2020, is
the only alternative for ending these cycles of deadly
violence, implementing the ceasefire and finding a
lasting situation to the situation. Diplomatic channels
must remain open, and partners with influence
in the region must redouble their commitment to
maintaining communication, with a view to reaching a
political solution.
My country hopes that the ceasefire agreement
signed yesterday and the negotiations under way
will bring peace to Karabakh and ensure that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of each of the
parties are respected. My country welcomes this sign
of appeasement and call on the parties to respect it.
In conclusion, I call on the parties to facilitate
access for humanitarian personnel to the populations
in need, without restrictions or politicization. We also
reiterate our appeal to the parties to not exacerbate
tensions by stirring up historical fears, hate speech and
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

21/09/2023

bellicose rhetoric, but to build, instead, on what unites
them for lasting peace and shared prosperity.

so, as here there was an indication of the need to further
increase the flow of humanitarian supplies.

Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing. This week,
the members of the United Nations have assembled
to discuss international peace and security. We
have talked about the ways and the need to enhance
international cooperation. We have expressed our trust
in multilateralism.

Only a couple of days after the situation
deteriorated, reports of military clashes, including
the loss of life, were disturbing, even though we have
been aware of the fragility of the situation. We have
followed with concern the recent developments on the
ground. As is usually the case, the arguments advanced
by the two sides differ sharply. While we reiterate that
confrontation and conflict are always a bad choice, we
renew our call on the parties to prioritize the protection
of civilians and the preservation of residential areas
and the civilian infrastructure. These are not only
important, but also obligations under international law.
We call for restraint, calm, peace and dialogue.

In the middle of these discussions, military
activities were carried out in Nagorno-Karabakh. Japan
then expressed serious concern about the worsening
situation and strongly called for an immediate cessation
of hostilities and for Azerbaijan to stop its military
activities. Any unilateral change to worsen the situation
is unacceptable.
As of 20 September, an agreement was reached
to suspend military activities. Although the military
confrontation stopped, the situation remains uncertain.
The Security Council should remain seized of the
situation on the ground in order to enable it to have a
positive influence. In particular, the Security Council
should particularly remain seized of the humanitarian
situation in Nagorno-Karabakh. Safeguarding local
livelihoods must be the top priority. The lives of the
most vulnerable, including the sick and chronically
ill, the elderly, women and children, must not be
under threat. Humanitarian access by international
organizations must be unimpeded so as to protect the
security and needs of the local population.
The settlement of the conflict between Azerbaijan
and the related parties is crucial for peace and stability
in the Caucasus region. Dialogue between them is
critical. Japan calls on all parties to resolve their issues
through peaceful means.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Albania.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for
his briefing.
A week ago, we welcomed the shipment of
humanitarian goods for the population of the Karabakh
region, along the Lachin corridor and the Aghdam
road. The delivery was conducted by the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We had highlighted before
that when it comes to humanitarian efforts, every
possibility must be fully explored. We are happy that is
11/20

We understand that yesterday a ceasefire agreement
was reached to stop the military actions. It is a triumph
of reason, and it must hold. We urge both sides to
remain committed to the agreement and to avoid any
further escalation. We fully support efforts between
Armenia and Azerbaijan to resolve long-standing
issues and achieve a dignified and durable peace. The
normalization process should be intensified and the
negotiations on a peace treaty that were held during the
past months in the United States, Brussels and other
European capitals should continue.
It is very encouraging that the leaders of Armenia
and Azerbaijan have reaffirmed publicly their
commitment to the 1991 Alma-Ata Declaration and the
territorial integrity of the two countries. Mutual respect
of sovereignty and territorial integrity, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, is
a solid basis for addressing and solving the dispute by
peaceful means. Both countries should make use of the
readiness and the sincere efforts of the international
community to find a just and peaceful solution to
pending issues. We welcome the meeting held in
Yevlakh today between the representatives of the
central Azerbaijani Government and the representatives
of the ethnic Armenians living there. The first results
are encouraging. It is very positive that both sides have
agreed to provide fuel supplies for the heating systems
of kindergartens and schools, as well as emergency
medical and firefighting services and humanitarian
support. We strongly encourage the parties to build on
that and move forward in finding suitable and mutually
acceptable solutions.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

21/09/2023

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ararat
Mirzoyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia.

war, it is clear that there are enormous humanitarian
needs on the ground.

Mr. Mirzoyan (Armenia): I thank the Security
Council for convening this emergency meeting to
discuss the security and humanitarian situation in
Nagorno-Karabakh stemming from the unprovoked
and well-planned military attack by Azerbaijan.

People are still starving, owing to the severe
shortage of food imposed by the ongoing 10-month
blockade. The health-care system has been paralysed.
Hospitals have no electricity, and there is a critical
shortage of medicine. People have even been deprived
of the chance of receiving first aid. Without fuel,
ambulances cannot operate to take the wounded to
hospitals. The images coming out of Nagorno-Karabakh
are truly shocking — women, children and elderly
people left without shelter or food, mothers desperately
trying to find their lost children and wives crying out
of fear that Azerbaijan may imprison their husbands.
It is hard to believe that all that is happening not 100
years ago but today, in full view of the international
community in the twenty-first century. Social media
forums are full of Armenians from Nagorno-Karabakh
searching for their children or relatives. Children have
found themselves without warning living in shelters
or even on the streets, crying inconsolably and asking
their parents to take them home, unable to realize that
they no longer have a home to return to.

While the seventy-eighth session of the General
Assembly is under way and all the members of the
international community are gathered here to look for
ways to maintain peace and security worldwide, while
we all speak about the imperative to condemn the use of
force and prevent the further loss of human life caused
by man-made disasters, and while each of us comes
here to contribute to peace in our respective regions,
Azerbaijan unleashed yet another large-scale offensive
in the South Caucasus on 19 September against the
people of Nagorno-Karabakh, in blatant violation
of international law and the trilateral statement of
9 November 2020. Literally the whole territory of
Nagorno-Karabakh, Stepanakert and other cities and
settlements came under intense and indiscriminate
shelling, with the use of missiles, heavy artillery and
combat unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and aircraft,
including prohibited cluster munitions. The intensity
and cruelty of the offensive makes it clear that the
intention is to finalize the ethnic cleansing of the
Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh.
The outcomes of the large-scale military operation
clearly reveal their atrocious nature. Yet they are very
preliminary, given the fact that through the targeted
attacks against critical infrastructure, such as electricity
stations, telephone cables and stations and Internet
infrastructure, the members of the population have
been completely cut off from one another and deprived
of the possibility to report the real-time situation on
the ground. Furthermore, Azerbaijani troops control
the main roads in Nagorno-Karabakh, which makes it
impossible to visit and get information on the ground.
To date, it has been confirmed that more than 200
people have been killed and 400 people have been
wounded, including women and children among the
civilian population, which was also confirmed today by
the Azerbaijani Ministry for Foreign Affairs. More than
10,000 persons have been forcibly displaced, including
women, children and the elderly, who are living without
shelter, food and other means of subsistence. Thousands
of families have been separated. Coming on top of the
approximately 20,000 displaced persons from the 2020
12/20

During the shelling, an 8-year-old boy went missing
in one of the settlements of Nagorno-Karabakh. His
10-year-old brother was killed, and it has not even
been possible to remove his body from the village.
The other brother was injured. Those are only a few
examples, and there are numerous other cases. In the
eyes of Azerbaijan, those children are terrorists, and
Azerbaijan’s actions, missiles, armoured vehicles,
artillery and UAVs were directed against those children
and their parents and grandparents. Azerbaijani social
media are full of calls to find the missing children
and women, to rape and dismember them and feed
them to the dogs. Azerbaijani users of social media
are sharing on platforms the profiles of Armenian
women from Nagorno-Karabakh, betting on who will
get to rape those women when they are placed under
Azerbaijani custody.
This was foreseeable; the clear signs were there.
We have been raising the alarm for a long time now.
The international community refused to take it
seriously enough. The current aggression has come as
the culmination of a 10-month-long blockade of the
Lachin corridor and the forced starvation imposed on
the people of Nagorno-Karabakh. The severe shortages
of food, medicine, fuel, natural gas, electricity
and other essential goods had already brought the
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

vulnerable people of Nagorno-Karabakh to the brink
of a humanitarian catastrophe. One would be naive to
think that had not been precisely thought through ever
since, or even before, the imposition of the inhumane
blockade, with the aim of breaking down the will and
ability of the people of Nagorno-Karabakh to resist and
maintain their lives and livelihoods in their ancestral
homeland. The Azerbaijani aggression that unfolded
with explicit barbarity and the deliberate targeting of
civilian populations and infrastructure was the final act
of the tragedy, aimed at the forced exodus of the people
of Nagorno-Karabakh.
When Azerbaijan blocked the Lachin corridor and
we requested an emergency Security Council meeting
in December 2022 (see S/PV.9228), the Council failed
to react adequately. When the International Court of
Justice, on 22 February and 6 July 2023, handed down
legally binding orders and they were disregarded by
Azerbaijan, the Council, the organ whose duty is to
ensure the implementation of the Court’s orders, failed
to react adequately. When in April Azerbaijan installed
an illegal checkpoint in the Lachin corridor and later
started to kidnap people, including those under the
protection of international humanitarian law, the
international community failed to undertake adequate
measures. When Armenia requested once again another
emergency Security Council meeting in August 2023
(see S/PV.9397), warning about the fragile security and
humanitarian situation and calling on the Council to
use its toolbox to address all the issues and not leave
the people of Nagorno-Karabakh behind, the Council
failed to react adequately. During the days prior to the
19 September Azerbaijani aggression, when Armenia
raised the alarm about the foreseeable use of force by
Azerbaijan and sought concrete measures and actions
to prevent such a scenario, the international community
reacted to our warning with scepticism.
Now, when Azerbaijan has already once again begun
to use force against the people of Nagorno-Karabakh,
when those people are forcefully removed from their
homes and are in danger of being forcefully deported
from their homeland, when many of them who have
been defending their families and their right to live in
freedom and dignity in their homeland for the past 30
years are in danger of mass arrests and prosecution, and
when we have a situation in which there is no longer
the intent, but clear and irrefutable evidence of a policy
of ethnic cleansing and mass atrocities — the Security
Council must act.
13/20

21/09/2023

Despite accepting all demands made by the
Azerbaijani side to stop the bloodshed and despite the
ongoing talks today, the people of Nagorno-Karabakh
have once again been subjected to attacks through the
use of different calibre weapons and mortars, thereby
forcing civilians once again to seek shelter in basements.
We believe that such attacks and further persecutions
will continue unless there is clear international action.
By the way, with regard to the demands I just
mentioned, I would like to state very clearly and
unequivocally that the Republic of Armenia was not
part of those discussions, and we resolutely reiterate
that the claims and references to the presence of any
military personnel of the armed forces of the Republic
of Armenia in Nagorno-Karabakh do not correspond
to reality. In that attempt, we clearly see the intention
of some actors to involve the Republic of Armenia in
military actions, thereby transferring the hostilities
to our sovereign territories. The position of Armenia
firmly remains the same — we should establish
peaceful relations, based on mutual recognition of
sovereignty and territorial integrity, which certainly
cannot be misinterpreted in any way or used as
licence for mass atrocities, including ethnic cleansing
in Nagorno-Karabakh. The rights and security of
the Armenian people of Nagorno-Karabakh must be
properly addressed and internationally guaranteed.
There is also another very important aspect
regarding the parties involved. As I noted, some members
in their statements still make general calls to the sides
of conflict. That approach and that terminology are no
longer relevant. There are no sides to the conflict, but
perpetrators and victims. There is no conflict, but a real
danger of atrocity crime. Is it still possible to prevent
that now? We are here because we believe so. We still
believe in humankind, in international law and in the
ability of the Security Council to act decisively when
the lives of thousands are at stake.
Against that backdrop, time and again, I appeal
to the Security Council to demonstrate its credibility
and reputation by undertaking the following
urgent measures: to condemn the resumption of
hostilities and the targeting of civilian settlements
and infrastructure; to demand full compliance with
obligations under international humanitarian law,
including those related to the protection of civilians,
in particular women and children, and critical civilian
infrastructure; to immediately deploy an inter-agency
mission by the United Nations to Nagorno-Karabakh
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

with the aim of monitoring and assessing the human
rights, humanitarian and security situation; to ensure
unimpeded access of United Nations agencies and other
international organizations to Nagorno-Karabakh, in
line with humanitarian principles; and to ensure full
cooperation of the parties, in good faith, with the
International Committee of the Red Cross to address
the consequences of the military action, including
the removal and identification of bodies, search and
rescue for personnel missing in action, the release of
prisoners of war and the safe and unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian assistance, in strict compliance with
international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, we ask the Council to ensure the
return of persons displaced in the course of the recent
aggression, as well as persons and refugees displaced as
a result of the 2020 war, to their homes in the territory
of Nagorno-Karabakh and adjacent regions, under the
monitoring and control of the relevant United Nations
agencies, as was foreseen in the trilateral statement of
9 November 2020; to ensure the immediate restoration
of vital supplies, including food, medicine, fuel, gas
and electricity; to demand the immediate restoration of
freedom and security of movement of persons, vehicles
and cargo, along the Lachin corridor, in line with the
orders of the International Court of Justice; to ensure
a sustainable international mechanism for dialogue
between representatives of Nagorno-Karabakh and
officials in Baku to address the issues related to the rights
and security of the Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh;
to demand the exit of any Azerbaijani military and lawenforcement bodies from all civilian settlements in
Nagorno-Karabakh to prevent panic, provocations and
escalation endangering the civilian population, until a
result has been obtained in the negotiations; to prevent
punitive action against Nagorno-Karabakh political
and military representatives and personnel; and to
create the possibility for a United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping force to maintain stability and security
in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Finally, let me mention that today, we celebrate
the day of independence of the Republic of Armenia.
And let me congratulate my compatriots on this very
important and symbolic occasion.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Bayramov (Azerbaijan): I thank the Albanian
presidency of the Security Council for an opportunity
to attend this meeting of the Council.
14/20

21/09/2023

Although Armenia’s attempt to exploit the
Security Council in its campaign to mislead the
international community is deplorable, we take this
opportunity once again to inform the Council and the
wider international community about the challenges
Armenia poses to regional peace and security. As a
matter of fact — and this needs to be underlined at the
very beginning — Armenia’s request to the Council
is related to the local counter-terrorism measures
taken by Azerbaijan within its sovereign territory,
in full compliance with international law, including
international humanitarian law.
Therefore, Armenia’s further appeal to the Security
Council is a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, which demands respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and non-interference
in their internal affairs. Such reckless abuse of the
Council yet again is utterly inadmissible, a serious
blow to the authority and reputation of this body and
must be resolutely rejected.
It is also counter-productive and irrelevant. Indeed,
when the Council was called to a debate today allegedly
owing to concerns regarding the rights and security
of ethnic Armenian residents of the Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan, the counter-terrorism measures had
already been ceased, and dialogue on the reintegration
of ethnic Armenian residents of the Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan had started in practical terms on the ground.
The long-overdue meeting of a special
representative of the Government of Azerbaijan with
representatives of Armenian residents took place today
in the city of Yevlakh, Azerbaijan. At the meeting, the
special representative assigned by the Government of
Azerbaijan for the dialogue with Armenian residents
outlined the Government’s plans for reintegration,
and issues related to the restoration and operation of
infrastructure were discussed.
In the context of discussions of social and
humanitarian matters and upon the request of the
Armenian residents, the delivery of fuel for use by
social facilities, such as kindergartens and schools,
hospitals and other emergency services, as well as other
humanitarian support measures, are expected to be
implemented soon by the relevant central government
institutions. Such a dialogue was not possible before
owing to obstruction by the Armenian side, relying on
heavy illegal military presence in the sovereign soil
of Azerbaijan.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

What Armenia tries to present to the international
community as an attack on “peaceful” residents of the
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan is, in fact, local counterterrorism measures by Azerbaijan, fully in line with
its rights under the United Nations Charter, to disarm
the Armenian armed formations illegally stationed
on the sovereign territory of Azerbaijan. Armenia
itself, with its brazen and uncorrected disregard to
its international obligations made those measures by
Azerbaijan unavoidable.
Armenia’s attempt to accuse Azerbaijan of violating
the trilateral statement of 10 November 2020 agreed
by the leaders of Azerbaijan, the Russian Federation
and Armenia is equally baseless. On the contrary, it
is Armenia that blatantly disregarded its commitment,
under the document mentioned, with respect to the
withdrawal of its forces from the territory of Azerbaijan.
Throughout the past three years, since the
signing of that statement, Armenia kept more than
10,000-strong armed formations, equipped with heavy
weaponry, such as tanks and other armoured vehicles,
artillery pieces, multiple rocket launchers, mortars,
electromagnetic warfare equipment and other types of
offensive arms in the territory of Azerbaijan. Those
illegal armed forces were sustained through direct
military technical, logistical and financial support by
Armenia, including by abusing the Lachin road, in an
attempt to fuel separatism in the sovereign territory of
Azerbaijan for the purposes of its revanchist policy.
The counter-terrorism measures demonstrated the
scale of illegal militarization by Armenia, despite the
commitment it undertook under the trilateral statement
to cease all military activities against Azerbaijan and
withdraw its forces from Azerbaijan’s internationally
recognized territory. In just 24 hours, more than 90
outposts of the illegal formations were taken, and 20
combat vehicles, 40 artillery pieces, 30 mortars, six
electromagnetic warfare systems and two anti-aircraft
missile systems were neutralized.
These are photos of heavy Armenian military
equipment. It is absolutely clear that such offensive
equipment was not present on Azerbaijan’s territory for
peaceful purposes. No sovereign State would tolerate
such a heavy illegal military presence on its soil,
including Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan acted fully within
the rights safeguarded by international law and its
Constitution to protect the safety and security of all
of its residents. Therefore, the systematic attempts by
Armenia to create a new status quo with the illegal use
15/20

21/09/2023

of force and to sustain a grey zone based on a line-ofcontact logic on Azerbaijan’s sovereign territory
were defeated.
Azerbaijan has been warning about Armenia’s
looming military adventure for several weeks in the
light of its intensified military engineering works
and forces build-up. We registered and brought to the
attention of the international community the intensive
reinforcement of battle positions with military
personnel, armoured vehicles, artillery pieces and other
firepower; the raising of the combat-readiness level of
forward units; the creation of additional mobilization
units; the expansion of intelligence activities against
Azerbaijan’s armed forces; and the incursions into the
positions of our armed forces to carry out sabotage
by planting new landmines in already demined
areas and roads used by civilians. The systematic
shelling of positions of the Azerbaijani armed forces
by the armed formations of Armenia using weapons
of various calibres, the continued mining of our
territories, the fortification of battle positions and the
increased number of trenches and military shelters in
the Karabakh region of Azerbaijan over the past few
months further escalated tensions.
Despite Armenia’s earlier statement on its
recognition of the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan,
which includes the Karabakh region, the Prime Minister
of Armenia took yet another extremely provocative step
by issuing a congratulatory message on the occasion
of the so-called anniversary of the establishment of an
illegal puppet structure in the territory of Azerbaijan.
That is further evidence that Armenia has not abandoned
its territorial claims against Azerbaijan and that it has
no intention of stopping its fuelling of separatism in
our territory by all available means, including through
political, military and financial support.
The illegal activity conducted under the false
pretext of holding so-called presidential elections
by the puppet regime that was created as a result of
Armenia’s occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan
was another extremely provocative step. It made it
crystal clear that, through those actions, Armenia
aimed to nullify its previous statements recognizing
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan.
It demonstrates that Armenia is not engaging in good
faith in the negotiations on a peace treaty.
Armenia’s deliberate attempts to undermine
peace efforts are not isolated from its worldwide
smear campaign against Azerbaijan, which is based
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

on fabricated accusations of a so-called blockade
and humanitarian crisis. That campaign essentially
collapsed on 18 September 2023 in view of the eventual
implementation of Azerbaijan’s offer to use multiple
routes for the delivery of goods to meet the needs of
ethnic Armenian residents in the Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan.
Therefore, following active diplomatic efforts
by several international actors, including Security
Council members, a simultaneous delivery of
humanitarian goods through Aghdam and Lachin was
finally conducted by the International Committee of
the Red Cross after weeks of artificial delays caused
by illegitimate obstructions by Armenia and its
subordinate puppet regime.
Having failed to impose its fake narrative on
the international community through a so-called
humanitarian agenda, Armenia resorted to military
provocation the next day, 19 September 2023, hoping
that renewed tensions would help its blame game
against Azerbaijan.
As a result of the explosion of mines planted by
an Armenian sabotage group on the AhmadbayliFuzuli-Shusha highway, two civilian road constructors
tragically lost their lives. Four police officers fell
victim to another mine explosion in the same vicinity
while attempting to inspect the mine incident site.
Those explosions led to the serious wounding of six
more Azerbaijani police officers. Here we can see
the horrible consequences of that reckless sabotage
act against Azerbaijan within its own territories. Six
persons with real names and surnames perished.
The area where the mine explosions took place
had previously been under regular use by Azerbaijan,
leaving no room for doubt that the mines had been
recently planted by an Armenian sabotage group that
infiltrated the area.
It should be noted that, since August 2022, a
total of 2,728 landmines manufactured in Armenia in
2021 — that is, after the 2020 trilateral statement — have
been detected and neutralized in Azerbaijan. That
includes 1,119 landmines neutralized in the Kalbajar
and Lachin districts, along the Azerbaijan-Armenia
border area, and 1,609 landmines detected in the
Karabakh Economic Region. Since the signing of the
trilateral statement in November 2020, 314 individuals
have fallen victim to landmines.
16/20

21/09/2023

In response to the subversive acts of Armenian
armed formations that inflicted civilian and military
casualties, the armed forces of Azerbaijan launched
local counter-terror measures to disarm those illegal
armed formations and neutralize the imminent threat
posed to the safety and security of Azerbaijani civilian
and military personnel. The counter-terror measures
were limited and proportionate to the threat posed to
Azerbaijan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
well as the safety and well-being of our citizens. The
counter-terror measures were aimed exclusively at
neutralizing legitimate military targets in the sovereign
territory of Azerbaijan. As such, they were fully aligned
with the sovereign right of Azerbaijan to self-defence
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Azerbaijan acted in full compliance with the norms
of humanitarian law. All measures were taken to avoid
collateral damage to civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Accusations of the intentional and deliberate targeting
of civilians by the armed forces of Azerbaijan are
baseless and false, in view of the photographic and
videographic evidence. From the very first minutes,
Azerbaijan’s Ministry of Defence made several public
statements calling on civilians to stay away from
military installations. Similar notifications were sent
to the Armenian residents of the Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan via mobile short messaging service. That
was done in view of the reckless attempt by Armeniasubordinated armed formations to deploy military
equipment and installations within residential areas.
Azerbaijan’s Ministry of Defence announced that
the protection and security of administrative, social,
educational, medical, religious and other facilities
would be ensured in line with Azerbaijani law and the
norms of international humanitarian law, while women,
children, elderly people, people with disabilities and
the sick would be provided with the necessary medical
aid, supplies and other assistance. The armed forces
of Azerbaijan behaved in an exemplary professional
manner by using high-precision ammunition to
neutralize illegal military installations only. As several
pieces of video footage clearly demonstrate, the armed
forces of Azerbaijan deliberately refrained from striking
legitimate military targets in order to avoid collateral
damage. As can be seen from these photographs, the
Azerbaijani armed forces would have acted differently
if the intention were to target civilians or conduct socalled ethnic cleansing.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

In the context of certain interventions delivered
before mine — including the one delivered by the
Armenian delegation, which replicated groundless
accusations against Azerbaijan — I can only draw the
Council’s attention to the fact that, just a few hours
ago, the Prime Minister of Armenia dismissed all
those accusations in a statement in which he publicly
acknowledged that there was no direct threat to civilians
in Karabakh and that allegations of mass atrocities
against them are untrue. I wish to underscore that that
was a statement made by the Armenia Prime Minister a
couple of hours ago.
From the very beginning, it has been consistently
communicated by Azerbaijan, including in contacts
with international interlocutors, that as soon as Armenia
and its subordinate puppet regime in the territory of
Azerbaijan agree to lay down arms and disband their
illegal structures, the counter-terror measures will stop
immediately. That happened on 20 September 2023,
when acceptance of those conditions was confirmed
through the command of the peacekeeping contingent
of the Russian Federation. Consequently, the local
counter-terror measures were halted, effective 1 p.m.
Baku time.
It was specifically agreed that the armed forces
of the Republic of Armenia must be fully withdrawn
from the territory of Azerbaijan and that the illegal
armed formations that Armenia had formed with
local Armenian residents and trained and supplied
must disarm. That agreement was reached through
the Russian peacekeeping contingent that is present
on the ground and confirmed and publicly declared by
the puppet structure subordinated to Armenia. That
is in addition to the fact, previously documented on
numerous occasions, that the Republic of Armenia
was indeed militarily present on the sovereign soil of
Azerbaijan and was in breach of its commitment under
the trilateral statement to withdraw from Azerbaijan.
Its attempts to deny such a presence were nothing but
shameful deception of the international community.
It was also agreed that the issues pertinent to
the reintegration of ethnic Armenian residents into
Azerbaijan, including their rights and security in
the framework of the Constitution of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, would be discussed directly between their
representatives and the central Azerbaijani authorities.
As I have already mentioned, the first such meeting took
place earlier today and yielded positive initial results.
The meetings in that format will continue. Therefore,
17/20

21/09/2023

the counter-terrorism measures taken by Azerbaijan
achieved the established objectives. That could have
been done peacefully long ago had Armenia honoured
its commitments under the trilateral statement. It is
Armenia and only Armenia that is to be blamed for the
fact that it did not happen.
Armenia’s failure to fulfil its obligations regarding
the full, immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
its forces from the territory of Azerbaijan had been
the reason for the failure of all international efforts to
settle the armed conflict unleashed by Armenia against
Azerbaijan more than 30 years ago. The continued
illegal military presence of Armenia in the sovereign
territory of Azerbaijan remained the most serious
obstacle to a post-conflict normalization process
between Armenia and Azerbaijan, and to efforts
to reintegrate the ethnic Armenian residents of the
Karabakh region of Azerbaijan after the signing of the
trilateral statement on 10 November 2020, under which
the conflict was ended and completely new realities
emerged in the region.
We have consistently and extensively drawn
the attention of all involved international actors
to the danger of such an illegal military presence.
Unfortunately, acknowledgment of our legitimate
concerns behind closed doors was not reflected
in practical steps or in the public messages of our
interlocutors. The lack of an adequate and targeted
reaction by the international community to Armenia’s
irresponsible warmongering statements and aggressive
actions only contributed to that country’s sense of
impunity and to the permissiveness that led to more
military and political provocations. However, that was
a grave miscalculation.
At a time when the practical implementation
of disarmament and demilitarization on the ground
has begun, accompanied by direct dialogue between
Armenian residents and central Azerbaijani officials,
the international community’s consideration of the
situation should correspond to existing realities in order
to remain relevant and helpful. Conversely, a one-sided
and biased approach driven by short-sighted political
considerations or lobby connections — largely, that
which is at the core of the convening of this debate in
the Security Council — is utterly counter-productive
and unhelpful.
Reliance on such a course of action has failed on
several previous occasions. It can only lead to diverting
the focus from a genuine normalization process, which
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

is not in the interest of either of Azerbaijan or Armenia,
but which caters to the whims of certain outside forces
that continue to manipulate existing differences for
their own political purposes. Therefore, at this critical
time, when there is a historic opportunity to eventually
establish good-neighbourly relations between Armenia
and Azerbaijan after a bloody conflict that lasted 30
years, it is more important than ever for the entire
international community, including the Security
Council, to adequately comprehend the risks and threats
associated with Armenia’s destructive actions and to
resolutely resist Armenia’s brazen attempts to exploit
the Security Council to whitewash its internationally
wrongful acts.
Despite all the serious challenges stemming from
Armenia’s destructive position, Azerbaijan once again
reaffirms its readiness to engage in a genuine dialogue
and negotiations on the basis of equal and reciprocal
respect for each other’s legitimate interests. We once
again extend our offer of a just, fair and lasting peace
to Armenia, notwithstanding the unhealed wounds of
its armed aggression against my country, the massive
devastation of our cities and villages and the deliberate
desecration of our holy places. We hope this offer by
Azerbaijan will finally be reciprocated by that country.
On a different track, the Republic of Azerbaijan
reaffirms its determination to guarantee to the
ethnic Armenian residents of the Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan all rights and freedoms, in line with its
Constitution and relevant international human rights
mechanisms, including those safeguarding the rights
of persons belonging to national minorities. Azerbaijan
has a proud history of uniting different ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities within one nation. Ethnic
Armenian residents are welcome to be part of our
model of peaceful coexistence.
At the same time, Azerbaijan recalls the obligation
of all States under international law to refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of other States,
undermining the integration of persons belonging
to national minorities or fuelling separatism in the
territory of neighbouring States. Azerbaijan remains
open to constructive engagement with all international
partners with a genuine interest in peace, stability and
well-being in our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the Federal
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic
of Germany.
18/20

21/09/2023

Ms. Baerbock (Germany): Far too many people
have been killed in the course of just two days.
Thousands have been forced to flee their homes.
Azerbaijan has chosen to create facts on the ground
by military force. We firmly condemn Baku’s military
assault and call on it to permanently and completely
cease its military actions.
We have taken note of reports of a ceasefire, but
what we need is a complete cessation of violence.
Azerbaijan carries the responsibility to reliably and
fully protect the civilian population, especially children,
living in Nagorno-Karabakh. A displacement and
forced exodus of ethnic Armenians from Karabakh are
not acceptable. Having said that, I also want to reiterate
what resolutions of this body have underlined time and
again — the territorial integrity and the sovereignty of
both Armenia and Azerbaijan must not be questioned.
It is hard to imagine the hardship that the children,
women and men of Nagorno-Karabakh have been
enduring for months, after the Baku authorities
effectively closed the Lachin corridor. Store shelves
remained empty, medical supplies ran out, and electricity
and gasoline were scarce. Over the past weeks, together
with many partners here in this Chamber, we worked
hard to ensure humanitarian access to those in need,
especially pregnant women, children and the elderly.
Just at the moment when a glimpse of hope was
emerging and humanitarian supplies were allowed into
Nagorno-Karabakh, Baku broke its repeated assurances
to refrain from the use of force, causing tremendous
suffering to a population already in dire straits.
The people of Nagorno-Karabakh deserve to live
in security and to have their rights protected. Keeping
the Lachin corridor open is crucial in that regard — for
humanitarian reasons, but also because the corridor
provides a cultural and social bridge for ethnic
Armenians living in Karabakh. Baku and Karabakh
Armenians need to return to a dialogue. Since it began
over 30 years ago, this conflict has produced too
many victims. What we need — what the people in
the region need — is a lasting peace between Armenia
and Azerbaijan, and that can only be achieved at the
negotiation table.
I will continue to make this very clear to both
sides: I urge them to return to the talks mediated by the
European Union, because now is the time to de-escalate.
And I would like to underline that no country should
use this situation to destabilize Armenia’s democracy.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

The men, women and children of Nagorno-Karabakh
and the entire region deserve a life without
fear — without fear of violence erupting again, fear of
being forced from their homes or fear of being deprived
of their rights, language and religion. They, like all of
us, deserve a life in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Akçapar (Türkiye): I thank the members of
the Security Council for providing me the opportunity
to address them and I also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General.
We are meeting at a time when a counter-operation
has already ended and talks have begun as we speak.
Since the end of the second Nagorno-Karabakh war
some three years ago, Türkiye has repeatedly underlined
on every platform the fact that a historic opportunity
to achieve a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
South Caucasus has finally emerged. We have urged
all sides, third parties and international actors to make
use of that opportunity and bring a lasting settlement to
the ongoing conflict in the region. With that in mind,
from the very beginning we have fully supported and
continue to support the peace process launched between
Azerbaijan and Armenia and have ourselves initiated a
normalization process with our neighbour Armenia. We
have welcomed, promoted and contributed to each and
every effort deployed that has brought help to further
that process between our two neighbours. In particular,
the signing of a comprehensive peace treaty between
Azerbaijan and Armenia based on the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity has been and
remains crucial for the eventual success of that process.
However, over the past three years we have
witnessed that the Armenian side has been reluctant
to fully implement the trilateral declaration, which
put an end to hostilities at the end of the second
Nagorno-Karabakh war. In addition, the illegitimate
structure in Khankendi has maintained its existence
and separatist activities. The illegal military formations
in Karabakh have continued their armed attacks. Heavy
and other weaponry in the region remain deployed,
and a bloody mine warfare was carried out against
Azerbaijani citizens. The facts, data and evidence
provided by Azerbaijan today speak for themselves.
Nevertheless, Azerbaijan’s consistent initiatives to
address those issues through dialogue with Armenia and
the representatives of Karabakh Armenians were met
with an uncooperative attitude. Azerbaijan’s initiatives
19/20

21/09/2023

on the humanitarian front and on the reintegration of
the Armenian population in the region, such as the
opening of the Aghdam-Khankendi road, were also
repeatedly refused.
Furthermore, over the past three years, the
Armenian side has continued to spread false information
about the situation in the region, directing baseless and
unsubstantiated accusations, commissioning so-called
expert reports based on distorted data and abusing
international platforms to advance a fake agenda. That
is not the way to seek peace and reconciliation. The way
to do that is by approaching the negotiation table with
sincere intent and political will to reach a settlement
and to continue that process with good faith.
After suffering for three years from all those acts,
we believe that Azerbaijan was left with no choice but
to take the measures it deemed necessary for its own
security and stability, and it therefore launched its
counter-terrorism operation on 19 September against
the illegal military formations in Karabakh. Surely
that was not only Azerbaijan’s sovereign right but also
its obligation to ensure the security of its citizens. I
would specifically like to remind the Council that just
hours before beginning its counter-terror operation
in Karabakh, Azerbaijan lost seven citizens in two
separate mine explosions that had been planted by the
separatist illegal formations as a strong provocation.
The counter-terror operation was swiftly concluded on
20 September, and Azerbaijan’s legitimate demands to
disarm and disband the illegal military formations on
its own land and for the dissolution of the illegitimate
structure were finally accepted.
Türkiye
welcomes
the
meeting
between
representatives of Azerbaijan and Karabakh Armenians
held today, 21 September. We hope that such contacts
will continue and be productive in order to resolve the
decades-long issues.
I would like to echo the remarks made by my
President during his address to the General Assembly
(see A/78/PV.4), in which he said that we expect Armenia
to fulfil its promises, especially the opening of the
Zangezur corridor. As everyone now accepts, Karabakh
is Azerbaijani territory. The imposition of a status
other than that will never be accepted. Our primary
goal should be for everyone, including the Armenians,
to live peacefully, side by side, on Azerbaijan lands.
We support the steps taken by Azerbaijan to protect its
territorial integrity.
23-27450

S/PV.9422

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia

It is time to look ahead and support diplomacy. A
new door of hope for a lasting settlement has opened.
There is a historic obligation to seize that opportunity
and bring it to its culmination. We therefore once again
urge the Armenian side and the other interested parties
not to waste this opportunity, not to repeat previous
and recent mistakes, and to act with the prospect of
leaving a peaceful and prosperous South Caucasus to
succeeding generations.
The President: I
Mr. Borrell Fontelles.

now

give

the

floor

to

Mr. Borrell Fontelles: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting at
this crucial moment.
The European Union has been closely following
the developments. Let me start by expressing my full
solidarity with the Karabakh Armenians, who have been
enduring a period of intense hardship. For months, they
have been in isolation due to the blockage of the Lachin
corridor leading to shortages of food and medicine,
their freedom of movement has been obstructed, and
they have been faced with multiple disruptions to the
delivery of gas and electricity. Azerbaijan bears the
responsibility to ensure full respect for the rights and
security of Karabakh Armenians. As we have repeatedly
made clear, the use of force to resolve disputes is
unacceptable. In that regard, the European Union has
condemned the military operation by Azerbaijan, and
we deplore the casualties and loss of life caused by
that escalation. We have taken note of the respective
announcements of a ceasefire and expect the cessation
of hostilities and of any kind of violence to hold.
The local population urgently needs humanitarian
assistance, as well as guarantees that their rights and

20/20

21/09/2023

security will be respected. We therefore ask Azerbaijan
to take the following concrete measures in that regard.
First, it should ensure unimpeded humanitarian
access to the civilian population in need, including
through a full reopening of the Lachin corridor. It is
important for humanitarian actors to be able to continue
to operate and scale up their activities, as needed in the
current situation. The European Union and its member
States stand ready to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance. Today the European Commission announced
an initial package of humanitarian aid to support those
in need.
Secondly, it should engage in a comprehensive and
transparent dialogue with the Karabakh Armenians to
ensure their rights and security, including their right to
live in their homes in dignity. We note that a meeting
was held today on that issue.
Let me be clear. The European Union fully
supports the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
both Azerbaijan and Armenia and expects all actors
to do the same. We call on Azerbaijan to reaffirm its
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity of
Armenia and to agree to the delimitation of the bilateral
border between the two countries, in line with the
letter and spirit of the 1991 Almata-Ata Declaration.
The European Union also calls for the resumption
of negotiations between Armenia and Azerbaijan
on all pending issues with the aim of concluding a
peace treaty. We remain committed to continuing to
facilitate dialogue between all sides in order to ensure
a comprehensive, sustainable peace for the benefit of
all the people of the region.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

23-27450
