UNITED
NATIONS

PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3181
March 1993

8

ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Monday, 8 March 1993, at 4 . 0 5 p . m .
President:
Members:
.

Mr. McKINNON

( New Zealand)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venea ue1a

Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr

.. JESUS
SARDENBERG

. CHEN Jian
. OLHAYE

. LADSOUS
. HATANO
Mr . SNOUSSI
Mr . MARKER
Mr . VORONTSOV
BARNUEVO
Mr .
. ERDOS
YaEZ

Sir David HANNAY
Ms. ALBRIGHT
Mr

. ARRIA

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English
and interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will
be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches o n l y , They should
be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within
One w e e k , to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a Copy Of
t h e record.
93-85397 3%75V (E)

SIPV.3181
2

The meetins was called to order at 4 . 0 5 P.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN CAMBODIA
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SECURITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION 792 (1992) (S/25289)
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Security Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution
792 (1992), which is contained in document S125289.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/25376, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council ' s prior consultations
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the
following additional documents:

S/25133, letter dated 20 January 1993 from

the Permanent Representative of Singapore to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council: and ,5125366, letter dated 4 March 1993
from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

If I hear no objection, I shall

take it that that is the case,
There being no objectim, it is so decided.

SlPV.3181
3

(The President)
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. LADSOUS (France) (interpretation from French):

My delegation

welcomes the prospective adoption of the draft resolution before the Council.
The draft resolution focuses primarily on the elections in Cambodia, which
constitute the cornerstone of the peace process and one of the central
purposes of the Paris Agreements, which created the most ambitious United
Nations operation in history.

It is therefore essential at this stage that

the Security Council act unanimously.
First of all, we welcome the compliance with the timetable established

for the elections; my delegation reaffirms,its full confidence in the ability
I

Of

the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC), which has

already done remarkable work, to organize truly free and fair elections.
In our view, the draft resolution will send a clear political signal to
all the Cambodian parties:

they have no choice but to respect the rules Of

democracy. No use of violence will be tolerated.

The Security Council will

endorse the outcome of the elections - if, of course, they are declared by the
United Nations to have been free and fair - and the Council will continue to
lend its support to the constituent assembly that will emerge from the
elections, and to the process of drafting a constitution and of putting in
Place a Government for all of Cambodia.
The international community will then help the authorities who will have
been constitutionally put in office. That means a long-term commitment from
the international community and the Security Council.

We cannot, therefore,

be indifferent to what happens in Cambodia following the elections.

S/PV.3181
4-5

(Mr. Ladsous, France)
We also want firmly to remind all the Cambodian parties that they have
undertaken to respect the outcome of the elections; we urge them to do s o .
The election campaign will begin in a few weeks.

We remain gravely

concerned by the acts of violence and intimidation in the country. We
therefore appeal for tolerance, moderation and political maturity on the part
of the people and the leaders of the Cambodian parties, so the elections can
take place in the neutral political climate specified and required by the
Paris Agreements.
My delegation fully endorses the Secretary-General's reminder that the
Cambodians themselves bear the primary responsibility to restore peace and
stability in Cambodia.

That i s no less true today than it will be tomorrow.

The United Nations intervened at the request of the Cambodians themselves, and
it can in no case replace them if their political will should flag.

S/PV,3181
6

Sir David EIANNAY (United Kingdom):

I should like to take this

opportunity, Sir, slightly belatedly, to congratulate YOU on having assumed
the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Snoussi, for the remarkable way in which he chaired the Council in
an extremely busy month - even if it was the shortest month of the year.
My delegation very warmly welcomes the draft resolution before us.

In

particular, it welcomes the Council's endorsement of the dates set for the
This is

constituent assembly election by the Supreme National Council (SNC).

an absolutely key element in the implementation of the Paris Agreements, and
we were particularly pleased that it was possible to reach this agreement in
the SNC and that it will now be endorsed by the Security Council.

This will

be the first election ever entirely organized by the United Nations, and it is
Very good that it is being held on time as planned under the Paris Agreements,
despite all the difficulties there have been in implementing those Agreements.
My delegation would also like to congratulate the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) on the work it has done up to
now.

There has been a major success in electoral registration, a s the

Secretary-General's report reminds us, and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has also done a remarkable job in repatriating a
Very large number of the refugees who have spent so many years on the
Thai-Cambodian border.
But, of course, much remains to be done if the Paris Agreements are to be
implemented as fully as possible.

It is essential that every step bB taken to

Prevent intimidation of political parties in the electoral process.

We r e l y

very much 3n UNTAC's recoubling its efforts in that sense.
It is important that a l l the parties should work for a successful Outcome
Of

the elections, and should not disrupt UNTAC's work in the next few months.

S/PV. 3181

I
(Sir David Nannav. United Kinadom)
In that respect, the detention of a number of UNTAC military and civilian
personnel by the Khmer Rouge has been particularly reprehensible.

We hope it

will. not be repeated in the next few weeks before the elections.
In the same context, we were extremely disturbed by the evidence of
Vietnamese personnel

- small in numbers, admittedly - remaining in the State

of Cambodia's armed forces.
All parties are obliged under the Paris Agreements to respect the holding
of free and fair elections and to respect their outcome.

We are delighted

that the Council is thus stating that it will itself do its best not only to
make those elections a success, but. the process that comes out of them
S U C C ~ S S ~ Utoo.
~,

Ultimately it is for the Cambodians themselves to bring about
reconciliation and prepare the ground for the future of their country.

It is

crucially important that the constituent assembly, once elected, completes its
task of drafting a new constitution and creating a new Government in the time
allocated for it - three months.
Of course, w e recognize that the situation between the election of the
constituent assembly and the formation of a new Government will be
particularly uncertain and fragile, and that this is of course accentuated by
the fact that the Khmer Rouge have chosen to exclude themselves from this p a r t
Of

the Paris process.

We therefore look forward to the Secretary-General's

recommendations on how best to get through this period while preserving i n t a c t
the whole process agreed at Paris,
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the United Kingdom f o r

his kind words addressed to me.

s/ PV . 3 101
0

Mr, CHEN Jian (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

First of all,

Sir, I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of March.

I am confident that with your

rich diplomatic experience and talent, you will successfully guide the work of
the Security Council this month.

I also wish to take this opportunity to

thank your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Snoussi, Ambassador of Morocco, who
steered the work of the Security Council last month with remarkable skill.
China has consistently advocated the comprehensive implementation of the
Paris Agreements on the question of Cambodia and the realization of Cambodia's
national reconciliation.

The Paris Agreements are the results of the

concerted efforts of the various Cambodian parties as well as the
international community, and constitute, therefore, the foundation for the
comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodian question.

Only when the

Paris Agreements are comprehensively implemented, and when all the Cambodian
parties participate fully in the peace process, can the success of the peace
process in Cambodia be guaranteed.
With regard to the difficulties and differences arising from the
implementation of the Paris Agreements, we always hold that they should be
resolved by the joint efforts of the parties concerned through consultation
and dialogue, We are not in favour of any act that runs counter to the Paris
Agreements.

We hope that the peaceful settlement of the Cambodian question

and genuine national reconciliation will be achieved through the joint
endeavour of all the Cambodian parties under the guidance of the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) and the leadership of
Prince Sihanouk.

(Mr. Chen Jian. China)
It is an important step in the Cambodian peace process to hold the
constituent assembly election in accordance with the Paris Agreements.

In our

view# the establishment of a neutral political environment is a key factor in
ensuring a free and fair election in Cambodia.

We have noted that certain

progress has been made in the preparation for the election in Cambodia.
However, it is regrettable that, as rightly pointed out by the
Sectetary-General in his report, politically motivated violence has been
occurring continuously and that a neutral political environment is yet to be
established. We urge UNTAC to take all practical and effective measures to
create the necessary neutral political environment so as to ensure the conduct
of a free and fair election.

We call on the various Cambodian parties to make

posLtive efforts towards this end.
The question of h o w to maintain peace in Cambodia after the election in
May and how to build an independent, sovereign, unified, peaceful and neutral
Cambodia is of universal concern. China neither wishes to see the recurrence
of civil war in Cambodia nor supports any party in resorting to force. What

we stand for is the realization o f genuine national reconciliation, We
believe that at this important juncture in Cambodian history Prince Sihanouk,
as the leader of the Cambodian people, will play an important role in
achieving peace and national reconciliation. We also hope that the endeavours
of the international community will be conducive to the realization of this

objective.
Based on the position f have stated, the Chinese delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

S/PV.3181
11

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of China f o r the kind

words he addressed to me.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/25376.

A vote was take0 bv show of hands.

In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary, Japan,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Venezuela

The: There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft resolution

has therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution 810 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make

statements following the voting.
MS. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

Let me join those who have

congratulated you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council; I look forward very much to working with you.

Let me a l s o give very

warm congratulations to Ambassador Snoussi for his remarkable leadership of
the Council last month.
The United States is pleased to vote in favour of this resolution, which
marks another milestone towards achieving the major goal of the Paris
Agreements.

That milestone is allowing the Cambodian people to determine

their own destiny through the conduct of free and fair elections.

Despite the

many problems, great progress has been made towards this goal.
We urge all parties to desist from further cease-fire violations and to
halt immediately any attacks upon or detentions of United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) personnel.

We call on all parties to cooperate

(MS. Albriaht, United States)
fully with UNTAC to ensure that political intimidation and Violence are ended
and to establish a neutral political environment necessary for the conduct of
free'and fair elections.
The United States notes that the holding of elections in May will be only
one step towards the ultimate goal of creating a peaceful, democratic
Cambodia. For elections to be successful and national reconciliation to
occur, all of the Cambodian parties must be prepared to respect the results,
We call upon all the parties to put aside the animosity that has divided them
and caused the Cambodian people such suffering and hardship.
In voting for the resolution, we are committing ourselves to supporting
only the Government that will emerge from the elections as the sole legitimate
authority for all of Cambodia.
Finally, the United States would like to pay tribute to the President of
the Supreme National Council, Prince Sihanouk, and Special Representative o f
the United Nations Secretary-General Yasushi Akashi for their invaluable
contributions towards the csuse of peace and democracy in Cambodia. We also
would like to express our respect and admiration for the men and women of
UNTAC, and for the Cambodian people, who have shown through their
participation and actions their desire for a peaceful. independent and
democratic Cambodia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the United States f o r

the kind words she addressed to me.
Mr, HATANO (Japan):

Since this is the first time I am addressing

the Council this month, let me express to you, Sir, my warmest congratulations

on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of March, I

smv. 3181
13

(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
should also like to express the gratitude of my delegation to
Ambassador Ahmed Snoussi for the exemplary manner in which h e guided the
business of the Council during the month of February.
Japan would like to express its satisfaction at the unanimous adoption of
the resolution, which will facilitate the Cambodian peace process as it enters
a very critical phase.

Significant progress has been made i n the

implementation of the Paris Agreements in spite of the difficult situation
still prevailing in Cambodia.

I refer in particular to the national voter

registration campaign, which has been very successful, and the repatriation of
refugees, which has proceeded much more smoothly than had been originally
anticipated.
It is clear that such achievements are due in no small measure to the
commitment and energy that the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative have brought to their awesome tasks.

Japan pays high tribute

to the Secretary-General and his personal. representative and reiterates its

strong support as they continue to work for peace in Cambodia.
This resolution contains a number of important elements which address, in

a constructive manner, those issues that have arisen in the course of the
peace process.

One to whic5 Japan attaches particular importance is the

decision of the Supreme National Council to endorse the conduct of an election
from 23 to 27 May 1993.

Japan hopes that the United Nations Transitional

Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) will continue to take every necessary measure to
create and maintain a neutral political environment.
AS

stated in the resolution, the Security Council will endorse the result

of the election, provided it has been certified a s free and fair by the United
Nations, and will support the constituent assembly to be established
accordingly.

S/PV. 3181
14

(Mr

. Hatano, Japan)

Japan takes this opportunity to appeal to all Cambodian parties t o
likewise respect the outcome of the election, which is fundamental to the
restoration of peace and stability in Cambodia.
The safety and security of UNTAC personnel is a source of continuing
concern to Japan.

We therefore reiterate the Council's demand that all

parties make every effort to safeguard the lives of UNTAC personnel throughout
Cambodia and to ensure that no hostile action will be taken against them.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Japan for the kind

words he addressed to me.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian):
The Russian delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption by t h e Security Council
of a resolution intended to ensure the successful completion of the United
Nations operation in Cambodia.

We consider it especially important t o achieve

consensus on such issues as support. for the holding of elections in Cambodia
within the timetable set up by the Supreme National Council

- 23 t o 27 May -

and the preparedness of the Council to support fully the constituent assembly,
the constitution it is to draft and the formation of a new government for all
of Cambodia.

We value highly the efforts of the United Nations Transitional Authority
in Cambodia (UNTAC) in fulfilling its mandate pursuant to the Paris
Agreements, in spite of certain substantial difficulties relating in
particular to Democratic Kampuchea's non-compliance with its obligations under
the Paris Agreements, inter alia, with regard to participation i n elections

for a constituent assembly.
Today, with so little.tirne remaining before the May elections, it is
important to support and enhance the positive dynamic in the pre-election

(Mr.

Vorontsov, Russian F e d e r a t i o n )

process and t o e n s u r e a n e u t r a l p o l i t i c a l environment and c o o p e r a t i o n by a l l
Cambodian f a c t i o n s w i t h UNTAC i n achieving t h e b a s i c o b j e c t i v e s of t h e P a r i s
Agreements.
With regard t o U N T A C ' s f i n d i n g of t h r e e persons who are covered by t h e
r e c e n t l y adopted new UNTAC d e f i n i t i o n of f o r e i g n m i l i t a r y p e r s o n n e l , w e
believe t h a t t h i s q u e s t i o n , which has been r a i s e d h e r e , w i l l n o t be of g r e a t
importance and t h a t t h i s s o - c a l l e d three-person problem will be s u c c e s s f u l l y
resolved by t h e Cambodian p a r t i e s themselves.

S/PV. 3181
16

(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
We believe that at the current stage the question of the safety o f UNTAC
and all international personnel. in Cambodia takes on special significance, In
this connection, we emphasize the responsibility of all the Cambodian factions
to ensure normal conditions for UNTAC activities.
It is also important to give priority attention to the problems involved
in the maintenance of security in the country during the post-election period,
before the formation of the country's new Government and the completion of
UNTAC's mandate.

We welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to submit

recommendations to the Council in that regard.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize our readiness to cooperate with all
the parties to the Paris Agreements in the successful completion of its full
implementation.
The PRESIDENT:

I should now like to make a brief statement in my

capacity as representative of New Zealand.
New Zealand welcomes the adoption of this resolution by the Council.
Cambodia is of special importance to the countries of the Asia-Pacific region,
and it is thus an issue to which New Zealand attaches great weight.
The discharge of the United Nations role in Cambodia involves the
participation of a very large number of countries, including many which are
not at present Council members.

The Council's management of the peace process

on behalf of the United Nations must accordingly, in our view, take account of
the perspectives of the wider membership, especially those countries with
personnel in Cambodia.

This will be even more important as, with the support

of all Cambodian parties, the peace process and the United Nations involvement
in it come to an end.

S/PV. 3101
17
(The President)
The task assigned to the United Nations in Cambodia is novel, innovative
and onerous.

It is not altogether surprising, therefore, that events have not

proceeded as smoothly as had been originally hoped,

None the less, the

progress that has been made in the fulfilment of the Paris Agreements and the
Council's earlier resolutions on Cambodia is, New Zealand believes,
significant and, as is reflected in the resolution we have just adopted,
should be endorsed by the Security Council.
New Zealand welcomes the fact that all Council members have voted in
favour of the resolution and that there is therefore general agreement on the
situation now prevailing in Cambodia and on the steps to be taken to move the
peace process ahead.
are:

The key elements in the resolution, as we see them,

the momentum towards the elections, which has already been demonstrated

in the gains that have been made in the implementation of the peace process,
must be maintained; the obligation upon UNTAC and all the Cambodian parties to
ensure that the election campaign is conducted in a neutral political
environment, with fair access to the media by all parties; the complete
cessation by all Cambodian parties of acts of violence, threats and
intimidation, as well as offensive military activity: the necessity that t h e
elections be free and fair and certified as such by the United Nations; the
recognition that it is the Cambodians themselves who bear the real
responsibility for the peace process and their future, including the
Preparation of a constitution and the subsequent establishment of a Government

for all Cambodia; and it is axiomatic that the safety and security of UNTAC
personnel must be respected

- UNTAC personnel must be permitted to perform

their mandate without interference,

S/PV.3181
18

(The President)
For New Zealand, the unanimity of the Council in the adoption of this
resolution is a reaffirmation that the peace process for Cambodia has the full
support of the international community which this Council represents. That is

a timely contribution that the United Nations Security Council can offer
towards the success of the elections that are to be held in May and the
formation of the Cambodian Government which is to follow.
I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its

--

consideration of the item an its agenda.

4. 5

.m.
