Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

tion on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the
Territories under review.
1816th plenary meeting,
21 November 1969.

2508 (XXIV).

Question of Southern Rhodesia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southem Rhodesia,
Hav;.ng heard the statement of the petitioner,4
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further all previous resolutions conceming
the question of Southem Rhodesia adopted by the
General Assembly and by the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, and particularly its resolutions 232
(1966) of 16 December 1966 and 253 (1968) of 29
May 1968, in which the Council determined that the
situation constituted a threat to intemational peace
and security,
Deeply concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Southem Rhodesia resulting from the introduction
by the illegal racist minority régime of new measures
aimed at entrenching itself as well as repressing the
African people in violation of resolution 1514 (XV),
and about the continued presence of South African
forces in the Territory,
Deeply concerned also about the persistent threat
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring African States resulting from the existing situation
in Southem Rhodesia and the presence of South African
forces in the Territory,
Bearing in mind that the Govemment of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem lreland, as
the administering Power, has the primary responsibility
far putting an end to the illegal racist minority régime
in Southern Rhodesia and transferring effective power
to the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of majority
rule,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to attain that right in conformity
with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Declares illegal all measures taken by the racist
minority régime to deprive the people of Zimbabwe
of their legitimate rights and to entrench its policies
of apartheid in Southem Rhodesia;
3. Condemns the failure and refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to take
effective measures to bring down the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia and to transfer
power to the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of
majority rule in accordance with all the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
4 /~id., Twenty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 1822nd
meetmg.

67

4. Condemns the intervention of South African
armed forces in Southem Rhodesia, which constitutes
an act of aggression against the people and territorial
integrity of Zimbabwe, and calls upan the United
Kingdom, as the administering Power, to ensure the
immediate expulsion of all South African forces from
Southem Rhodesia;
5. Condemns the policies of the Governments
of South Africa and Portugal and other Govemments
which continue to have political, economic, military
and other relations with the illegal racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia in contravention of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, thereby violating
their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations;
6. Condemns the policies of those Statcs which
make it possible far their nationals to emigrate to
Southern Rhodesia in violation of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968);
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, in fulfilment of its responsibility as the administering Power, to take effective measures. including
the use of force, to put an immediate end to the
illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia and
to transfer all powers to the people of Zimbabwe on
the basis of majority rule;
8. Calls upon the administering Power to ensure
the immediate release of the African nationalists who
are in detention and to prevent further assassination
and imprisonment of African nationalists in Southem
Rhodesia;
9. Calls upon all States which continue to maintain
political, economic, military and othcr relations with
the illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia
to bring them to an immediate end;
10. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies and
other international organizations concerned to extend
ali moral and material assistance to the national liberation movements of Zimbabwe, in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity;
11. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, in view of the armed conflict in the Territory
and the inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the
application to that situation of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War11 and
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, 6 both dated 12
August 1949;
12. Draws the attention of the Security Council
to the gravity of the situation arising from the intensification of suppressive activities against the people
of Zimbabwe and from armed attacks perpetrated
against neighbouring States in violation of intemational peace and security;
13. Reaf]irms its conviction that the sanctions will
~ot put an end to _the illegal racist minority régime
m Southern Rhodes1a unless they are comprehensive,
mandatory, effectively supervised, enforced and complied with, particularly by South Africa and Portugal;
14.. Further draws the at~ention of the Security
Co~ncil to the urge!}t necess1ty of applying the followmg measures env1saged under Chapter VII of the
Charter:
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75

(1950), No. 972.
(1950), No. 973.

General Aaembly-Twenty-fourth SeHion

68

(a) The scope of the sanctions against the illegal
racist minority régime should be widened to include
a1l the measures laid down in Article 41 of the Charter;
( b) Sanctions should be imposed on South Africa
and Portugal, the Governments of which have blatantly refused to carry out the mandatory decisions
of the Security Council;
15. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the
Territory under review;
16. Calls upon the administering Power to report
to the Special Committee on its action in the implementation of the present resolution.
1816th plenary meeting,
21 November 1969.
2517 (XXIV).

Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,_
Recalllng its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, 2248
(S-V) of 19 May 1967, 2498 (XXIV) of 31 October
1969 and its other relevant resolutions on the question
of Namibia, as well as Security Council resolution 264
(1969) of 20 March 1969,
Recalling further Security Council resolution 269
(1969) of 12 August 1969, in particular paragraph 5
in which the Council called upon the Government of
South Africa to withdraw its administration from Namibia immediately and in any case before 4 October
1969,
. Deeply concerned about the situation in Namibia,
which constitutes a threat to intemational peace and
security and which has been further aggravated by
South Africa's occupation of the Territory and that
country's defiant refusal to comply with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security

Council,
· Considering that the basic condition required, on the
oiie hand, to enable the Namibian :people to exercise
*ir right to self-determination and mdependence and,
on tlle other hand, to enable the United Nations to
fulfil its responsibilities towards Namibia is the applitjltion, of effective measures to bring to an end imDlC(liately the illegal presence of South Africa in the
']ferritory,
Gtavely concerned that the refusal of South Africa
to comply with the decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly seriously undermines and
epcroaches on the authority of the United Nations,
Mindful ot the obligations of Member States under
4rticle 25 of the Charter of the United N ations,
: Noting with appreciation the report of the United
llfations Council for Namibia,7
• 1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination and independence, in
cpnformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(?{V), and the legitimacy of their struggle against the
'-:>reign occupation of their territory;
2. Expresses solidarity with the people of Namibia
i4 their legitimate struggle against foreign occupation
abd requests all States to provide increased moral and
material assistance to them;
· T Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
S11sion, Supplement No. 24 (A/7624/Rev.l).

3. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its persistent refusal to withdraw its administration
from the Territory and for its policies and actions
designed to destroy the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia, thus persistently violating the
principies and obligations of the Charter of the United
Nations;
4. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the need for taking appropriate nfoasures in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter to solve
the grave situation that has arisen as a result of
South Africa's refusal to withdraw its administration
from Namibia;
5. Commends the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to all States and to the subsidiary organs of the General Assembly and other
competent organs of the United Nations, as well as
to the specialized agencies and other intemational
organizations concerned, for appropriate action, acting
in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to continue to discharge, by every available
means, the functions entrusted to it in the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and facilities to the
United Nations Council for Namibia to discharge its
duties and functions;
8. Calls upon all States to co-operate with the
United Nations Council for Namibia in carrying out
the tasks entrusted to it.
1819th plenary meeting,
1 December 1969.
2518 (XXIV).

Petition8 concerning Namibia

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the special responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to Namibia, including in
particular those set out in General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967, 2325 (XXII) of 16 December
1967 and 2403 (XXIII) and 2404 (XXIII) of 16
December 1968,
N oting that the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples has received and examined during
1969 ten petitions conceming Namibia, in accordance
with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 1805
(XVII) of 14 December 1962 and within the context
of the implementation of the Declaration,
Noting further that these petitions relate, inter alía,
to the general situation and recent developments concerning Namibia, to the refusal by South Africa to
implement General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI)
and 2248 (S-V) and, in particular, to the continued
implementation by South Africa of the recomm.endations of the Odendaal Commission, 8 including the partitioning of the Territory into "self-goveming homelands" and the removal of Africans from their ancestral lands,
~

s Commission of Enquiry into South West Africa Affairs,
established in 1962 by the Government of South Africa under
the chairmanship of Mr. F. H. Odendaal.
