UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2599”

MEETING: 21 JUNE 1985

NEW YORK
CONTENTS
Page
1

Revisional agenda(UAgendd2599) .,....,,..,.........,,................
Adoptionoftheagenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 17June 1985from the Pcrmanat Reprrscmativeof Botswanato the
unitcdNations~totheRrstdcntoftheskcuritycoundl(s/lm9)
...

1

s/w.2599

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents arc composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OflciaJ Recor& ofthe Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohdotta and Decisions of the
Security CotmU. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2999tb MEETING
Held la New York on Friday, 21 June 1985, at 3.30 p.m.
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

l+esidenc Mr. D. H. N. ALLEYNE
(Trinidad and Tobago).
&eseoc The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madapscar. Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

1. Adoption

At the Invitation of the A*s&ient. Mr. Ogoutna (Jim&t),
Mr. Ma&a (Smwiflsnd) and Mr. Foum (United Republic of
TontPnkr)trookdwpiiwsresewedfortkemattheskbofthe
ckmncilcirambrr.
3. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the following change in the
draft msolutio.* kfore the council in document s/17291.
The eighth prcambular paragraph should read as follows:

of the agenda

2. Letter dated I7 June 1985 from the Permanent Rep
resentative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the Presldettt of the scfurity Council

Y&me&&l
Botswana for its unflagging adherence
to the conventions relating to the status of refugees* and
of stateleas pmont? and for the sacriflcea it has made
and continua, to make in givitt8 asylum to victims of
w-.

(s/17279)

4. llle fti
lb

is Mr. Uddhav DC0 Bhatt, Vii
Chairman of r Special Committee against &7&&i,
I
invi~himloteLaap~at~~~tablO~tOmaLI
hits-t4

agenob mss &pled

5. Mr. BHATr (viimmn
of the special committccagaht8tAparlwld):Mt.&sidau,Iwiahtoextendto
yOUiMtdtOtlW-dth8Ceruril,~khalfOf~
8peclal~oopinrtI(gprrftaMaadanmyom
heludf,ottr~anddtantt$lota8mvingmetc,ppnidpueinthkrneet@.IehouldalaoUketoeatatdtoyoucny
-oaprrt=-w~Bd~
CoundlforIhismondt.IamconWntthatthe&uncil
wiH,ttm&yo4tr*ka&rship,kabletoadopteBective
menatmatoinducetheni&trCgimtofSouthAfricato
aPlcf&hwithita~
and dwtabiuzation whanm
agairmtln@&ntAfricanStatesanditsterrotistcam*s
people of South Africa and their libera-

1. The PRES!DBNTt In acco&nu
wl&Pdeckbn
takenatthe25!Wthmrttiq&IinvitetheIW&terforFord~AffaimofBot8wmtotakeaplaeattbcCoundl
ta~,IinvitrthemptwamadvosofdKBahamm,tkotrmaIt lxmocmdc Rcpubuc, Laaotho. Liberia, i?ky&k,
SouthAfticaandtheBudantotaketbeplacearrrtrvcdfoi
thmatthesideofthccouncilehambef.
A: the Invttatkm of&e &wi&btt, Mfs.9 Chiepe (lbtnwna)
took a place at the cbvncu tab&: Mr. He#tm (&ham@,
Mr. S&gel (Gemm lkmoeratlc RepMe), Mk. Mdkaka
FsorA6), Mr. Kolb (iUberW, Ma. Gonthkr @gchdka),
Mr. wn Se-g
(South AjUca) ard Mr. L&i& (S&u)
rwktlre~esre~fort~mar~Jdr~~c#rrdl

6. Isbould&oIiketotakeadvattta#ofthllopportunitytoconveyourdeepoppcds1ionIoIbe~tative
ofTWland.whodurir#histnGimcylastmonthdC
charged hi rcspdbititia
wiih great distinction.

Clrambcr.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
chat I have received hen
from tbe nprclentntiws
of
7. ThcGnJncilisIoday-ngIhclaIataogrrvion
Benin, Swaziland and the United RepuMi d Tanzania, in
of the racist dgimc of South Africa aopinst Botswana in
whiitbeyrequcsttobeinvitedtoparticipateinthcdistbc aftermath of its covert military mission of&out*
in
cussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance
n&them Angola. This latest act of atjgression took place
withthe~lprocticc,Ipropocc,withthe~dthc
justwhentheCo4mcilwascons&ringthequestionof
Council, to invite thy representatives to panicipte in the a Namibia and the decision the Pmoria authorities to install
I

a puppet regime in Namibia to perpetuate its domination
over and exploitation of Namibia. The pattern of criminal
behaviour on the part of the racist regime of South Africa
necessitates some. action from the Council to inhibit it
from persisting in its aggression and in its destabilisation
schemes.

13. 1 wish to rcpeat, on behalf of the Special Committee
and on my own behalf, that the primary cause of tension
and conflict in southern Africa has been and remains the
inhuman policy of rrparrireld pursued by the racist regime
of South Africa. Any illusion that peace and security can
be brought to southern Africa through an amelioration of
the upnrfheid laws and directives will prove not only false,
but also costly. As recent events have shown, the regime
considers the appeasement of certain Western Powers and,
in particular, the Government of the United States, as a
justification for its obstruction of the implementation of
the independence plan for Namibia, its escalation of
a-ion
against Angola, the initiation of new terrorist
campaigns against Botswana and the furtherance of its
oppression and killing of innocent black South Africans.

8. On the morning of 14 June, members of the so-called
South African Defence Force raided Botswana, killing 12
persons. including three women and a six-year-old child.
and injuring six. Among the injured were a i&year-old girl
and a Dutch lady. Ihe racist forces of South Africa also
fired indiscriminately at passing motorists and set a
number of vehicles on fire, and two Botswana citizens were
injured. The dastardly act by the racist regime also resulted
in the destruction of 10 targets in Gahorone, the capital of
ROtSWM&

14. These aggressive acts perpetrated by the Pretoria
r&ime against Botswana, as well as similar acts committed
in the past against the territories of Angola and Mozambique, prove that the regime is involved in State terrorism
against innocent civilians and economic targets. The Special Committee has deckred on many occasions that the
regime is an international outlaw and that it has felt emboldened to commit such heinous crimes because of the
protection and the backing of certain Western Governments, in particular the Government of the United States.
Accordingly, while the racist regime of South Africa is the
main culprit, it is high time that the international community take action against it and prohibit its collaborators
from continuing to provide it with political backing and
with the military and economic means to perpetuate its
crimes.

9. On I5 June, Ihe GaeruYux of London described the
events, stating:
“It &ems like an unpardonable act of contempt for
international law, by a bully who knew he could get
away with it, against one of the feast offensive countries
in the world.”
The newspap concluded that mere protest would have
no e&t at all.
10. This naked aggression by the Pretoria r@me against
civilian targets must be condemned, and punitive measures
mustbcadopmltomsetthebreaehofpeaceandtbe
threat to intematioaal peace and security emanating from
that wanton act.

IS. The Special Committee believes that the @rrfheti
dgime’s killing of innocent civilii
of the African
Nathmal Con#ess of Soulh Af&a (ANC) io related to the
fact that that r6glme aumot tokrate any opposition to
qmrhdd. lhe intensifkation of the struffgle by the peopfe
ofSouthAfricainsidetheircountrytodismantkthediaboliisystemofupPnkzMposmathreattother&fmeand
its dorm& nlousandI3 of
itsfalse~ooacemiqe
workcre,stt&tsendpsOpkfiomallatherseg=n@d
thepoputetionareenga@inarensdbattJetohberute
their awntry
and to exe&e
their right to self. .
daenn#rawninaunited,democmtkandnon-racial
South Africa. Their stru& d
the support and sohdadty of the intentatkmml community. Any attempt by the
rt$rr~~brutefometocrushthestrugglemut~
.

Il. The Chairman of the Spcial Commhtee, Mr. J. N.
Garb8,inhisstamnentlnthec!ouncUonIIJuneonthe
question of Namibia [B&M nrcctlng, miterated the poeitionoftheSpecialc!ommitweonthioqualionandurged
thec?auacutomkePgdtiye&etkmto~thedeffmnced
theli&tr6gi~atSfJ&AfricutotkUahcdNatiMs
andto~publ&opiukm.
I2 Funhermore. the !@ecial Committee, through its
&7nlhms,
Belninars and otberactivinumcrwrrrportr,
tk&tISSWlUWdtbCifWIB~communityOfthc~Of
resolvetomeetthethreattopeaceandsecurityinAfrica
andtheworkiatku~resultingfromtheoppm&fand
a~ofthe~r6gime.
Wearewcllawareof
the situ8tion, and 0) early as 1975, the Special Committee
drewtheattentionoftheinternationafcommunityt.othe
nggmsionofthemcistr@hneofSoutJ3Africaagainrt
Angola’fhereforu,whikurgingtheCounciltotakefum

16. Inconclurion.Iwish,onbchaffoflheSpecialCommhtee,Iour#ethefotlowirtgmeasurestocolmtertbiscrfminal set by the Pmtoris r@hne:

fhCth~SOUthAf~8htat~.IWiShtO

address,onbebalfoftheSpccielCommittee,aspeciaf
0ppealtotheWestemmembersofthcCounciltojoinlbe
internacionnl community in its demands for effective, punitiveactionagainstSouthAfrica.ThefailumoftheCouncil

--Wrst, the condemnation, in unequivocai terms, of iiK
mcistr6gimeofSoufhAfricaforitsgmesomeactof
terrorism;

tOdOptCUIllprrhetrsiVCmanditoy~UndtrChaptc~

-Secondly, the adoption ofcomprehensivtand
mandatory amaiona against South Africa under Chapter Vff of
the Charter and, in prtkulat,
the enforcing of the amM
embargo impord
by Security Council nxdulion
41%

VIIofthcChonerhorkdtoanunprrccdentedMtanceby
the Premria authoritise of the United Nations and of world
public opinion.
2

(1977) and its strengthening by the inclusion of embargms
on nuclear collaboration with South Africa and on the
oupply of petroleum and petroleum product3 to South
Africa;
-Thirdly,
the extension of moral and material support
to the victims of this aggression and, in particular, the
commendation of the Government and people of Eotswana for their sacrifices in support of the struggle of the
people of South Africa;
-Fourthly,
the reafirrmation of the solidarity with and
support for the people of South Africa and their liberation
movements, the ANC and the Pan Africa&t Congte3s of
Axania.
17. The United Nations has a special responsibility to the
people of South Africa and should take action to protect
them from the outlawed act3 of the racist r&imc and to
provide them with moral and material support. This issue
is of the utmost urgency because it involves a threat to the
lives of innocent pople. Action cannot be delayed any
longer.
18. ‘Ike PRESIDENT: lltc next speaker is the tuprescntative of Lesotho. I invite him to take a pIace at the Council table and to make his statement.
19. Mr. MAKEKA
(Lesotho): Mr. Pmsldent, a few days
ago you URIP kind enough to allow my delegation to
appear kfote the Council on the urgent question of Namibia. Let me therefotu agtln add my &Iegmion’a felicitationstothosce~toyouearlier,aswellaetothc
Pre?3i&nt for the month of May.
20. onthatearlierocc&m,
IaIIudcdcotheactsof
8ggESSiOtt~~COmIttittCditlbOthAttgOI8d~
tSW6It8bySOUthAf~.I8UtgCXC8fUl,sJr,tIt8tyOUh8VC
ottceagainpmnictedtmtotakeparcitttlte-tion
bytIteCouncllofthedtttationpromptedbythe&tvmion
oftkR8pubucofRomwmtabysmtthAhice
21. 1thasItowkotttcanf&uknowltodl
membmofthechnciItItattmitsofcItesoutbAfriatn
armycmesuItIteBotswatmbordaronl4Jttneatabout
oatO’CbCkiIttItCtUOdttg8DdtttbXkdiCS~oabo

ronc,ttttddg#wlpapk,iacIudittgwwteIt,chiklml
andrhgeea.cond~inthedarkafaisbt,theraidaIso
HtCCdVCdtMt8gCtOpropecty.AdetailcdiiiZECtOf8~*~~bythr-

urforFmignAfhhofBomumf~~~]atthe
tegiImingofthisdebateonthissad~inthehbtory
dsoutbemAfrica.Inagmttmanymspects,tM~
inG&cuorwandtbeinvnionofBacrmYammmmsant
ofrevnolotherdmilarcriminalactsbythemclstr@ne
against ita neighbours, includitt8 my own anmtry in 198;2.
22. Iltisbnottheflf3ttimetlmtthecotnk5lhasbeen
mquestedtocon&krSouthAfrica’sgrouvioIatiatoftIK
Charter by invading one of its sovereign nelghboun. a
§tatettlemkrdthe~tion.Rccordrofsuchbrtrbarous attack3 abound and include repeated tition3
of

Angola, Mozambique and Lesotho. not to mention the
unending occupation and rule of terror in Namibia. The
Council on this day is focusing on the invasion in Botswana, and the world community should ask why Gaborone was attacked.
23. The reasons given by Pretoria actually do not differ
much from those 8iven in nearly all the previous similar
criminal acts of terrorism against neighbouring States.
Once again, General Viljoen of the South African Armed
Forces announced that there had been a successful preemptive strike against bases of the ANC. Threatening a
repetition of the treacherous nocturnal assault unless BotSwana removed the alleged remaining terrorists, the General of the racist r&me’s forces ascribed numerous act3 of
violence in South Africa to refu8m living in Botswana. AS
usual, the General displayed a rocket launcher and a gun
drawn from his array of arscnalo in an attempt to justify
his country’s invasion of Botswana, which he stated had
been postponed for clclse to thr .myears for political considerations. The General’s arrog. . utterance3 to newSmen
were soon followed by another attempt by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Information of South Africa, Mr.
Rotha, at explaining why his country invaded Botswana.
His efforts at explanation are contained in document
S!!?2g2. It is claimed in that document. among other
things, that some 36 acts of terror and violence in South
Africa had been planned and executed from Botswana
within the preceding I I months. For these and other reasons, the South Aftican army had to invade Botswana and
murder the tiled
ANC tetrorist3.
24. But who were these terrorists who were killed? What
was their identity7 They included a six-year-Id boy-1
repeat, a six-year-old citizen of Lesotho-Peter
Kamohelo
Mofoka, who was in Gatuuone visiting his aunt, Mrs.
Machobane, the wife of a South African refu8ee. Ilte aunt
report3thattheboyscreamedbecarwhcwasterrlfiiby
the raided madbgmnmg
of her husband. llte soldiers
rricdinvaintoquictthcboy,whokeptcyingootloudly.
‘Dteyt?mtcovemdhlmwithhisbIankettomufIIehisvolce,
butatmoydthathisvokegmvlouder*theyriddkdhls
bodywithbttIletsandthtwsucc&edhssikncinghimfor
ever.WertItlsboyaterro&7Leaothobltterlytnoumsthe
desthoFhersonandheemadtarran~menetohavehb
bOdyfWtYtdtOhii
mo&rNnd
for burial at a resting
pIacenrmtdforaIlEa3othovictimsofSouthAfrica’s
mclsm, mw
and State terrorism.
25. Wehavebeeninformedthatthaeso-calledterroti3ts
incIudalgouthAfrlcanref~,aDutchcitimnanda
IbmaIi. Wemoumforalltbmewholosttheirlivesintbis
mid. We mourn also for Kamohe& andltmnyother
LugbtersandsonsofLuotbowhofellpreytoSouth
Africa’s tmneighbourly acts. We are duty-bound to seize
this opportunity to report futlher that South Africa has
nottriedtocomplywlthSecmityCouncilreaolution527
(1982). nor made any attempt to pay the stipulated compemation for damage to life and propetty msulting from
that aggmuive act of 1982 a8ainst my country.
26. Kamohelo Mdoka, our latest young martyr, pmrsonifmwhathasbmndescribedbyPtetoriaastheincreasin8

number of terrorists from Botswana who have been
blamed for the ongoing instability and unrest inside South
Africa owing to the internal opposition to racial discrimination and qrr~heid.
27. There is hardly a week that goes by without South
African courts prosecuting people for the ongoing riots
and disturbances. In all these court proceedings. not one
has involved across-the-horder incursions from Botswana.
It is true that South Africa is facing considerable internal
problems emanating from its racial policies, but none of
the riots and violence can be explained by imagined it&
trations from Botswana, Lesotho or any other neighbouring country. If anything, Minister Rotha’s account of
contacts with his counterpart in Gaborone shows that
there was no justification for South Africa to use force
against Botswana. The Governments of the two countries
have been in continuous dialogue on a variety of issues
affecting their relations. As General Viljcen said, the invasion of Botswana had long heen decided upon and had
been postponed for years.
28. Botswana has over the years hosted thousands of
refugees. The majority haw been South Africans and Namibians. As documents of the Council show, these refugees have comprised students, youths, single adults and
families. Some are in schools. others are self~mployed or
accommodated in refugee settlements. Missions of the
Secretary-General have visited Botswana each. year and
repotted both to the Security Council and to the General
Assembly on the refugee population in Botswana. In all
the reports on those visits, the Republic of Botswana was
never found to have any foreign bases. Starting with document s/12421 of 26 &toher 1977, down through the years
to the latest report pmczt&g the libetation of Zimt&nve,
Rotswana never had and still does not have any such
base.
25% It will k medal that Botswana made a solemn
undataking on its attainment of indepemknce that it
wouldnotandcouldnotallowLtmitorytok~asa
sanctuaryforgtter&a&itksagahtstitspoweffulneighbour,southAfIiea.Thkundatakingwasnpcetedthis
momingbytkhKnkerforFore@A%imofRots~.
Theteishardlyayearthatgoesbywithoutvariatstupterntatives of the Rotswana owcmmcnt
npcatined
reafiirming thii cardinal principle and commitment. R+
tswanahasnoANCguerritlaaanywherewithinitabotvkm.
The ANC neva claimed to hm any in that county either.
The fact bthatRotswm&likeLesotho,zambia*2ztnbabwe and other count&a, does grant political asylum and
will continue to extend mfuge to thousands of South Africans, regardku of race, who tlee their country for freedom
from tyranny and permcution by qmw&id.
3c. qm*u4**rp
.. W.,.ww.” Y. “ab w” %i!dicltddr~~iteiiiii~
nixing that South Africa last week sent troops to Gabo
rone not to kill ANC guerrillas engaged in plots, but to
murder innocent mfqRes, Rotswatta nationatsandcitii
of countries like my own, whik asteep. The intetuion was
toterrorixetheRotswaMpopheccandlilrcothsb
tswana peopk to close their doors to fugitives from injuc

tice. It is about time that the policies of terror of our
neighbour are contained. South Africa cannot go on in its
high-handed manner for ever.
31. We have repeatedly warned the world community
that South Africa pursues a policy of destabilizing its
neighbours and hence desires no peace in southern Africa.
The South African army occupies parts of Angola and has
lately conducted acts of sabotage in that country. A few
days ago. the Council focused on decades of South Africa’s defiance of the United Nations in its refusal to end its
illegal occupation of Namibia. The Council has just concluded its consideration of the Angolan complaint against
South Africa.
32. At the risk of sounding monotonous, my delegation
once more pleads with those members of the Council that
have influence over the rulers in Pretoria and Cape Town to
exert pressure on the racist regime to desist from their
resumed policies of destruction. Some permanent members
of the Council have maintained close bonds of friendship
and alliance with South Africa against peoples of African
descent. They can do more than utter empty statements of
abhorrence and condemnation of their racist friends. We
appeal most earnestly for positive action to end this genocidal adventurism on the African continent.
33. In conclusion, we join the many delegations that
have spoken &fore us in the appeal to the Council to
restrain South Africa from Routing international law and
from its putsuit of terrorism in southern Africa.
34. Mr. RARRTAFIKA
(Madagascar) (Irrretprfuflon
/raAl ited~): We are nearly at the end of our debates on
southern Africa, Sii, and my delegation is privileged to
have worked under the Minister for Fomign Atfairs of
Trinidad and Tobago, to whom we wish to pay a more
than deserved tribute for the essentially positive results we
have ken ahk to obtain, notwithecanding some pdictftMe ditRctdties. You, Sir, have taken up the presidential
responsibilities
with the traditional
open-mindafness
whkh marks the diplomacy of Trinidad and Tobago and
whichisaconatantf~unofyourgcraonalandprofe!+
sionalamduct.
35. It gives mc pleasure to welcome to tk Council the
lidlnkm for Foreign AfTairs of Rotswana. My dekgation
would ask her to convey to ha Gov~;m~~
fraternal sympathy of the Government
RepublicofM&@scarforthekmaofhumanlifecaused
by tk recent South African aggreaaion.
36, At this morning’s meeting, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Botswana made a moving appeal on behalf of
the refugees from aparfheki and of the policy to which
Rotswane is committed, along with a harsh, enlightening
hJ.4*.4.bt =f a+&u ,” -..A
s ..h
.L 01*--LA-‘” J yaPH#
-----‘I
wly V.
. .C.“,Ia rc&a,arc
ces towards its neighbours. We are particularly grateful to
her for this, and our present contribution to the debate will
be confmed to a few additional observations.
37. We hew muched tk point wkn
Swth Africa
wanted us to be: after repeated acts of aggression, it had

reason to hope that an exhausted Security Council would
conline itself to a repetition of condemnations, to which it
would pay no more than fleeting attention. Last Friday’s
attack on the capital of Botswana is evidence of this, for
South Africa-the self-proclaimed champion in the struggle against international terrorism-has
had a momentary
triumph.
38. South Africa’s natvety is matched by its cynicism,
and this time the apartheid regime chose as its victim a
peaceful, defenceless State which must, unfortunately,
make the best of an unfavourable, even hostile, political
and economic environment, but which, owing to its geographic position, its traditions and its international and
regional commitments, must also be a land of refuge for
those who have chosen no longer to suffer under apartheid.
39. Moreover, it is easy for the Pretoria regime-with the
encouragement of those who in these last years of the
twentieth century persist in an outmoded ideological
crusade-to
accuse the ANC, the liberation movement
which is followed by the oppressed African masses, of
having perpetrated 36 acts of so-called terrorism planned
and carried out from Botswana. Our fiit reaction is that
the racist regime has no right to speak of terrorism, especially in connection with legitimate opposition to its wayward policies, and that the r&&e is guilty of fraudulent
misrepresentation. Our second reaction is that as long as
the apmtheid system persists. with its train of brutality.
ture, and elimination of embarrassing wit&.ses, the ANC
has the right to rebel and, if necessary, torenorttotheuse
of weapons to reply to violence and repression.
40. The premeditated, unprovoked armed attacks carried out by the Retoria r&ime against neighbouring African States are without question deliberate, flagrant and
ntpeated violations of the Chaner of the United Nations
and run counter to the eatablialted norms of intematiottal
law and the Declaration on the Inadmissibiliiy of Intetvention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States. As I
said yesterday with regard to the complaint of Angola, we
must draw the necetwatyconclusionsifweareloyaltothe
credibility and effectiveness of tk United Nations in get+
eral and of the Security Cciuncil in p&ctdar.
41. FOI the present. we have the duty to respond to the
request of the Republic of Ebtswatta that jut&e be done.
It is in that spirit that, along with the delegations of Rurkina Faso, Egypt, India, RN and Trinidad and Tobago,
we have introduced draft resolution S/17291.

legitimately defend itself against South African terrorism
and strengthen its ability to harbour refugees from the
land of crprrrtlreld. Those refugees, be they of the ANC or
not, ate also entitled to security, protection and well-being,
44. Our reply to South Africa must be llrm and unequivocal; this would pay a tribute to Botswana for its devotion
to its international political and humanitarian obligations,
for its courageous commitment to the common struggle
against qmrtheki and for ita desire to live in peace in that
troubled tegion.
45. Mr. KASEMSRI
(lltailattd):
Only yesterday the
Council heard the complaint made by Angola against
South Africa, and the Council adopted its resolution 567
(1985), in which it strongly condemned South Africa for its
tamwed, intettsiftt, ptemeditatal and unprovoked acts of
aggression, which constitute a flagrant violation of the soveteignty and territorial integrity of Angola and seriously
endanger intematlonal peace and security.
46. Today I am compelled to speak in order to express
Thailand’s position on the latest aggression by South
Africa, thii time against the Republic of Botswana. My
delegation, together with the rest of the international community, learned with grave concern of the military attack
by South Africa against the capital of the neighbouring
country of Botswana which resulted in the loss of lives of
innocent civilians, including childten, in Gaborone, as well
as damage to property there.
47. ‘lItis morning wt heard the detaikd account of the
incident given us by the Minister for ForeiSn Affairs of the
Republic of Bmmvana. 1 cltould like to take this opportunity to convey to her the warm raspect of my delegation.
48. TlterewaeapasmtgeintheatatenutttoftheMinii
for Foreig A&in of btswamt which struck my de@+
tion at3 be& qednlly rcIcw3ttt to our dcKberations, and I
shalltherefotequoteit.shesal~
“Weha~hmgwam6dtltatthepcatibmofraciam
willcoasmneusaKlntbs~lfltioellowedtogoott
ttnchaMttotakb Qpinst the front-line
StatawiKbr&tg&uthAfrlctt,ortltetegiottasawhole,
nauertoe&ation.!lalvationliesa&lyinputtlngan
ettdonctforalltoUtebrm&iesofupanRridin&nuh
AfGcasotlmttherctikttomoreSowetoe,Uitcn:mgrr, sharpvilla,
latqp and the test, no more tefugca8catteiedttllo+ertheu&otttinentandtheworld
at large rating to tetum to their country at all costs.”
ws&A memfl prino. 40.1

42. We unreservedly condemn all acts of aggression,
provocation, harassment, terrorism and destabilixation
committed by the Pretoria regime against Botswana. We
demand that South Airw not hide -behind the iacr tiii no
non-aggression pacts exist between itself and certain of its
neighbours in order to continue to commit such acts.

49. My delegation con&den that the unprovoked attack
against Rotswarm constitutes yet another serious violation
. - arrs,*,y,r,
-^.4-..
^..A .uri....&.l
of dii
O.&u
U,..*“‘laJ ;r.rrriru
.s...y..J nr
Y. as. u-kp.
..._...I_.
State.

43. We hope that the mission that the Secretary-General
win detail :o Rotswana ti enable the intematiotml cornmunity to provide assistance to that country so that it may

50. Allow me to take this opportunity, therefore, to
express my delegation’s full support for Botswana and our
syttt@ytothebetvavadfamiliosofthela#tvictimsof
Ptetoria’s aggrmakm and callous disregard for the princi-

ple of the inviolability of international
Charter and the norms of international

boundaries,
law.

the

57. The Pretoria Government claims that it attacked
ANC bases in Gaborone. However, we may well ask: Was
the killing of innocent children and foreigtiers in Gabocone part of that attack against an ANC base? Was the
attack waged against the petroleum installation m
Cablnda on 21 May 1985 an attack against an ANC base?

51. My delegation strongly condemns South Africa’s
lawless action against Botswana and demands that the Pretoria regime desist forthwith from further aggressive acts
against the front-line and other sovereign States. Consequently, my delegation will support the draft resolution
contained in document s/17291. as orally revised.

58. It is clear that the military operations undertaken by
national liberation movements are being planned and executed from inside South Africa itself. llte marches and
demonstrations are all being planned and executed from
within South Africa itself. Therefore, when South Africa
failed to stifle the flames of revolution, when it failed to
silence the freedom fighters, it resorted to the perpetration
of its latest acts of aggression against Botswana and the
other front-line States.

52. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan, who wishes to make a statement in his
capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab States for the
month of June. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
53. Mr. BIRIDO (Sudan) (inferpretufion from Arubic):
We are pleased to participate in the Council’s deliberations
once again under your wise presidency, Sir, and we wish to
renew our expression of thanks to you and the other
members of the Council for affording my delegation an
opportunity to speak in the Council on behalf of the
Group of Arab States during its consideration of the latest
act of aggression perpetrated by the Government of South
Africa against civilian targets in Gaborone, the capital of
Botswana, on 14 June 1985.

59. Those recurring developments, as well as the
repeated acts of aggression berng perpetrated against the
front-line States and the peoples of Namibia and South
Africa, all clearly demonstrate that the Pretoria Govemment is indeed the source of aggression and terrorism in
southern Africa. They show that its policies and practices
threaten international peace and security. because of that
Government’s insistence on the heinous policy of apartheid
and its insistence on occupying Namibia.
60. llterefore the Council must condemn South Africa
for its act of aggression against Botswana. It must demand
that South Africa cease its violation of Botswana’s independence and territorial integrity. It must impose sanctions a&tst South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII
of the Charter. The international community must intensify its effotts to boycott South Africa and expose the
crimesit ppctrates and the racist policies it follows. It
mustdbs0inordettoisolatethatrCgimeandforccitto
abandon its policies that have led to instability in the
r&on, prevent reaching a peaceful solution of the question of Namibia and l litttirtation of the policy ofqplmheid,
and have further hampered the efforts of the front-line
States to devote their energies to development and enjoy
their rawrccs.

54. This morning we listened to the comprehensive statement delivered by the Minister for Foreign ABairs of Botswana, in which she detailed the damage resulting from
the treacherous attack against Gaborone-an
act of
aggression that msulted in the death of 12 persons, including women and children; 6 wounded, the burning of some
buses and the destruction of some homes and other
properties.
55. South Africa’s latest act of aggression against Betswana is but n link in a long chain of plots and planned
acts of aggression directed against Botswana and the other
front-line
stares. South Africa previously attacked
Maputo. the capital of Mozambique, in January 1981;
then again in May and in October 19.83. It attacked
Maseru. the capital of L.esotho. in December 1982 and
yesterday we listened to the Minister for FOR@ Affairs of
Angola, who detailed acts of aggression by South Africa
against his country since its independence. To that we
must also add the occupation of Namibia and the exploitation of its wealth, the practice of the policy of-&u,
the killing of innocent Africans and the imprisonment of
thousands of militants. all that in flagrant defiance of Security Council and General Assembly resolutions and in
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the
principies of international law and the Universal LWaration of Human Rights.

61. For that mason, we must also sum
the front-line
States milii,
materially and politically, so that they
may confront South Africa’s aggression and protect their
land and int@y. That was emphasii
by the ~xtmordinary Ministerial Meethrg of the Co-ordirmting Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21
April thii year, when it said in the Final Document:
-lltc Bureau undemcom the special position and
role of the Frontline &a&s of Southern Africa in the
stru& against South Africa. The continuing solidarity
andsuppoRoftht#da(esremainaJInequo~for
success in international efforts to liberate Namibia as
also the majority of !+outh Africans themselves. The
Bureau rPlutes the Frontline States for their steadfast
support to the Namibian cause. It renews the Movement’s pledge of support to the Frontline states. It
notes the prediiment
in which some of these states
which are particuhvly vulnerable find them&es, and

56. After perpetrating all those crimes, the represemative
of the Pretoria tCgime had the effrontery to speak in the
Council, as he did yesterday and last week, of the inalienable principles of international law and of the fact that
Touth Africa is convinced that the problems of our region
cannot . , . be solved by violence”.
6

lays emphasis on the need for concrete assistance to
them in order to help alleviate their economic prob
lems.” [S/17184 and Cow.1,atvtex,para. 42.1
62. In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm the Arab States’
full support for Botswana in its elforts to defend its territory and indrpendence. We particularly commend Botswana’s support for. and granting of asylum to, the victims of
apartheid.We strongly condemn the act of aggression perpetrated by the racist Pretoria regime against Gaborone.
Mr. QIAN Yongnian (China) (inrerpretution
from
Chhese):The Chinese delegation listened carefully to the

63.

forceful complaint made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Botswana about South Africa’s attack on Gaborone. We entirely support the solemnly stated position of
the Government of Botswana and its just demands. The
Chinese delegation expresses its indignation over the barbarous acts of South Africa in attacking a peace-loving,
neighbouring State, murdering and wounding innocent
people, including women and children, and destroying
houses and cars.
64. On I5 June, a spokesman of the Chinese Ministry of
Foreign Affairs issued a statement saying tltat tlte Chinese
Government and People strongly condemned the South
Aftiean authorities for carrying out actr of aggtession
against Botswana and tltat China profoundly sympathized
with, and supported, the struggle of the Government and
people of Botswana to safeguard their independence, sovereignty and terrltotial integrity. On 17 June, the Chinese
delegation reiterated that position in the Council, and I
shall not repeat it now.
65. The Chinese dele!#ion believe, that South Africa’s
latest invasion of Botswana, at a time when the Cotmcll
was considering tlte question of Namibia, not only violated
Botswana’s national sovereignty and territorial integrity
but also constituted an open provocation of the intematlonal community and the Council. Therefore, the Cotmcil
should adopt elkctive measures to put an end to South
Afrka’s trampling underfoot the Charter of tlte U&al
Nations and tk norms of intcmational law. The Chinac
delegation entirety sttp~orts the draft mo!ution sub&ted
by the non-&~
members of the Council.

68. My delegation listened with alarm to the detailed
statement of the facts made this morning by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Botswana, whom I ask to convey to
the bereaved families of the victims of that despicable act
of aggression the sincere condolences of my Government.
69. The unjustilied and wanton act of aggression committed on 14 June against the capital of Botswana by a
State that continues to defy this organization natumlly
deserves international condemnation. But it should also
cause the Council to be legitimately concerned about
genuine tespect for the principles contained in the Charter,
the validity of the resolutions that the Council adopts, the
limits of the action and the credibility of the United
Nations in general.
70. My country deplores South Africa’s new act of
armed aggression, which flagrantly prejudices Botswana’s
sovereignty, independence and temtorial integrity and the
inviolability of its frontiers. We also vigorously uphold
and support Botswana’s right to receive appropriate and
adequate compensation for the damage caused.
71. Finally. my country expresses its genuine concern
over the constant repetition of actions that every tlme they
are committed make even more diEcult the exercise of the
legitimate right of the countries of soilthem Africa to live
in peace and in conditions of independence and genuine,
legal equality that allow them to achieve their well-being in
the best possible conditions.
72. It is our hope that the Government of South Africa
will rdlcct on the matter and UndmDand that it is not
ethical or useful to continue obatlnately alienating both its
own people and the intemationa! community.
73. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT: llte next speaker is the repmsentetivrofSouthAftica.IinvitchimtotsLeaplaoeatthe
Council table and to make ltis statement.

66. I should like to take thla oppottunity to reiterate that
the position of the Chinese Government on the question of
southern Africa has ken clear and consistent. Botswana
and the other Al&m countries can rest assured that the
Chinese Government and a billion Chinese People stand at
their side, as in tbe past, and support their just &rug& to
safeguard their national &gnty
and territorial integrity and their opposition to -heid
and South Africa’s
a-on.

74. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(Sotttb Africa): As I have
litmtdtothc~ofthkdebatc,ithaubctomc
increaah@y apparent to me that this meeting ofthe atutcllhasbeenca!!edtocmatedtelmPmalonint!veintemational community that the South African Defence Force’s
operation against ANC targets-1 rrpat, ANC targetsat Gaborotte on 14 June was somehow intended, as the
onke of the Prcsidcnt of Botswana would hate us belicvc,
M&
ztir.fn brutality and violence perpetmta! by the
Gc3vmmlt.
and that this was particularly
dep!ombk considering the repeated assurances of the Botswana Govemnmt that it does not permit its territory to
be used for launching attacks against neighbouring
countries.

67. Mr. LUNA (RN)
(btf~etutionj+om
Sponti): For
the third time in only a few days tlte Council is meeting to
examine a serious situation created in southern Africa and
to listen to the representative of a Member State that has
suffered the violation of tk elementary rights enshrined in
the Charter of tk United Nations and in age-old civilized
practice.

75. Well, the facts are somewhat difierent. ihe true state
of affairs leading up to the events in Gaborone is contained in tk statement issued on I4 June by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of my country, which was circulated in
document S/17282. In addition, Minister Botha dispatched a message to the Botswana Minister for Foreign
Affairs on 20 June, in which he expressed regret at the loss

of innocent life, an aspect the Minister of Botswana failed
to mention this morning.

power station near Rustenburg and the properties of individual South African citizens.

76. Mr. Botha went on to observe that he trusted that the
Minister would reciprocate the sentiment in respect to the
lives of the innocent people killed and murdered in South
Africa as a result of ANC terrorism emanating from Botswana. Mr. Rotha further informed Miss Chiepe that,
after the signing of the Accord of Nkomati [S/16&V of30
March 1984. annex Ij. the ANC decided to concentrate on
Botswana in seeking new bases for launching its terrorist
attacks against South Africa. In the course of 1984. the
ANC availed itself of its otlicial political presence in Bc+
tswana and, by way of a secret communique to all ANC
members in Botswana, placed them on full-scale armed
alert and established large caches of arms and ammunition
in Botswana. The Botswana Government must surely be
fully conversant with these facts.

82. Minister Botha further drew the attention of the Botswana Minister for Foreign Atfairs to the fact that the
actions of the ANC in Botswana cannot be reconciled with
the public statements of the Government of Botswana to
the effect that it would not allow its territory to be used for
the purpose of committing violence against its neighbours.
Although the Botswana Government stated that it had
limited the ANC to a political oftice in Botswana, the
action of 14 June 1985 confirmed the existence in Gaborone of operational ANC centres dealing with logistics and
the gathering of information for the purpose of planning
and committing violence and sabotage in South Africa.
Thus, for example, among the persons who lost their lives
in that operation were persons involved in bomb attacks
and other forms of violence in South Africa. Further evidence of the violent intentions of the ANC operating from
Botswana is provided by the discovery of a huge arms
cache in Gaborone, subsequently confirmed by the Rotswana Government on 26 April 1985. Certainly these
facts refute the claims to refugee status made on behalf of
the ANC. They speak, 1 submit, for themselves.

77. The Botswana Government-the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country, added in his communicationhad repeatedly been urged by the South African Govemment and the South African security authorities to curtail
the activities of the ANC inside Botswana and in particular
the planning and execution of terrorist activities in South
Africa from Botswana. ‘Jlte Botswana Government had,
moreover, on a number of occasions had its attention
drawn to the infiltration of ANC terrorists into South
Africa from third countries through Botswana. and the
Botswana Government was requested to take appropriate
measures to prevent this infiltration.

83. Finally. allow me to quote from an address which my
State President made to the South African Parliament on
19 June 1985. President Botha said:
“Ignoring the incontrovertible evidence as to the
actions and plans of ANC terrorists in Botswana. they
are portrayed as ‘freedom fighters’ or ‘refugees’ in emotional attacks against the alleged tyrannical rule of the
South Aftim
Government. Measure which we are
taking within the framework of established principles of
international law to protect our population and our
property are decried as violations of the sovereignty of
other States. In other words, Botswana has the sovereign right to harbour terrorists and South Africa is
expected to sit back and dlow those terrorists to cross
our bordetx and kill our citizens with impunity. My
Government does not accept this warped concept of
sovereignty. And if the Western countries were true to
the norms and standards which they insist on and which
they aJ@y in similar circumstances, then they would
agree with my Government. It is and remains the
res~nsibility of each Government to ensure the security of its peopk. My Government will not abdicate this
resfKmsibility.

78. However, the Botswana Govmunen t was not able to
reach an acceptable undemmnding with tJtr South African
Government on the combattug of acts of terror agahtst
South Africa from Botswana. South Africa, themfore,
made it clear that it reserved the right to take steps to
prevent acts of terror and sabotage from being pJanned
and executed from neighbouring States.
79. As Minister Botha pointed out, pmee and stability in
southern Africa cannot be rl&tai&
if terror&s intent
on the overthrow by force of a sovereign Govrmment are
harboured in the territory of a neighbouring State, be it
with or without that State’s knowkdge or consent. g&t a
situation is obviously untenable.
80. It has always been the South African Government’s
belief that the problems of the southern African mgion
should be solved by the leaden of the region. And it was
for that reason that earnest appeals were made to the Eotswana Government to give attention to this probJem with
a view to reaching an u&mtanding
on effective and practical arrangements between the security forces of South
Africa and Botswana to ensure that the territory of neither
-*as used for the pianning or execution of acts of sabotage
or terrorism against the other.

“It is simply unacceptabk to us that our neighbours
pay lip-service to the principle that States should not
make their territories available for the launching of terrorist attacks against their neighbours while at the same
time harbouring terrorists in their countries.”
President Rotha concluded a follows:

81. since August 1984. the ANC has&n responsible for
36 acts of terror and violence which were planned and
executed from Botswana. During that ~teriod, six persons
were murdered and extensive damage was caused to a

‘On behalf of the South African Government, I once
again other to all our neighbours a hand of friendship
and a readiness to come to an understanding on the
basii of certain ground rules which in my opinion ought
8

to form the guidelines for regulating and normalizing
our relations. These ground rules include an unqualified
prohibition on support for cross-border violence or the
planning of such violence, the removal of foreign forces
from the region, the peaceful resolution of disputes,
regional cooperation in meeting common challenges
and toleration of the different so&economic
and political systems within our region.”

its neighbours or the black people internally. has always
been and remains the defence of apartheid. The regime
tries to camouflage its atrocious acts by making spurious
claims that it is the subject of attack emanating from the
neighbouring countries. The reality is that its borders have
never been trangressed or threatened by the neighbouring
African States. Like those who burned the Reichstag, the
regime in Pretoria is raising an anti-communist and prowhite hysteria with a view to winning support for its internal repression and external aggression.

84. Although South Africa is committed to resolving its
differences with its neighbours by peaceful means, we will
not hesitate to take whatever action is necessary for the
defence of our peoples and for the elimination of terrorist
elements. it is for the Government of Botswana to decide
whether it is in its own interest. and in the interests of the
region as a whole, that it should continue to harbour ANC
terrorists on its soil or whether President Botha’s ground
rules for peaceful coexistence, which we enumerated in the
Council as recently as yesterday, do not provide the best
assurances for peace and stability in our region.

90. The upurtheid regime has no retionable cause to fear
Botswana. Indeed, if it threatens South Africa in any
manner or form, it is because Botswana represents the
values of democracy, human dignity and decency, the
upholding of which runs counter to the philosophy of Boer
racism. The r&me fears the black people of South Africa,
those angry victims of upartheid. It is they who justly
threaten and will finally destroy the institutions and the
ideology of apartheid. For the savagery and unacceptability of the apartheid system itself makes opposition to it
inevitable. The South African racists and their benefactors
in the West know that the rest is propaganda. They equally
know that no frequency or magnitude of attacks against
the neighbouring countrieswill create safety for apartheti.

85. As for the ANC, the message is crystal clear: if they
attempt to strike at us, we will strike back-wherever they
may lurk.
86. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. 1 invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to rake his
statement.

91. The attack against Gaborone provides further proof,
if any were needed, that, contrary to the propaganda campaigns about its socalled goodwill, the r6gime in Pretoria
remains obstinate. Indeed, how cynical of a terrorist
regime to keep suggesting that the problems of our region
cannot be solved by violence, when in fact violence is its
only means of exisunce. It represses and aggn%ses against
millions, imprisons r:;~usands and even kills hundreds. It
is the upa&etd rtlgime which perpetuates violence. The
very nature of apwtheid is violent. The talk of the so-called
cross&order violence is but an attempt to rationalize its
continued acts of aggression against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its neighbours.

87. Mr, FOUM (United Republic of Tanzania): On the
morning of the 14th of this month, at a time when the
Council was considering the ongoing aggression by the
upurtheidr&itne against the people of Namibia, that
r&me sent its murderous forces into Botswana. Under the
cover of darkness, it visited death and destruction upon
innocent South African refugees and other innocent civlliana. The casualty count stands at 12 dead and sevetal
wounded. The material damage has yet to be assessed
fully. This unprovoked dastardly attack against a peaceful
neighbour is a clear mattifestatlon of the r@ime’s intention
to step up its campaign of military aggre&n
agahtst its
neighbours. That was reallimted only a few minutes ago in
arrogant fashion.

92. We, the front-line States, continue to believe that the
system of uFr&f/
is as brutal and immoral as it is irredentist. It follows, therefore, that any means of its sustenance is equally immoral and perpetuates brutality. Tlte
overwhelming majority of the world community share
with us this conviction. as well as the resolve to work for
the weakening and fmally the destruction of that scourge
of racism. In this endeavour we realize that. due to our
proximity to the enemy, we will endure the brunt of the
wrath of the upurtheid regime. As internal resistance consolidates and external opposition mounts, the regime will
become more and more desperate and increasingly aggressive. It is imperative, therefore, that those more powerful,
with leverage over South Africa, should desist from
appeasing the racists and should take a firm stand against
..,. I, m
___..n,,lcil
. ..* Sll”“,”
L. ,, ___
___-_
upurrnetu.
inmu,
IW, LUT________
yrq.Krs”. 1 *AW
dC0
of aggression. not to mention its evils, should not be
rationalized. and neither should its obstruction
of the inde-

88. That the attack was planned and executed to coincide
with the Council’s co&detation
of the r@nte’s ongoing
aggmslon in Namibia and against Angola also speaks of
the regard South Africa has for the Council. Indeed, if
those habitual apologists for the regime in the Council
need any proof of the duplicity and bad faith of aprmhefd,
hey should look no further. South Africa has demonstrated once more that there are no bounds to its viciousness in defence of racism. We condemn this latest
escalation of aggression in Botswana.
89, That the u+r&eiif regime should talk about peace
and commit aggression at the same time is not to be unexpected, for, while the tactics of that regime may change
from time to time relative to the requirements of dealing
with its neighbours, neither its objectives in the region nor
the political reality inside South Africa have changed.
South Africa’s basic objective, whether in its dealings with

pendence

of Namibia.

93,

Council

The

has on numerous

vented from adopting
9

occasiorrr

ken

pre-

effective measures against that

r&me. Even talk of sanctions to stay the hand of up~lrfheid invites inexplicable anger and vicious opposition from
certain members of the Council. Let me reiterate what we
have already stated-that those countries that have so far
been reluctant to see reason, those countries that have so
far continued to give aid and comfort to the racist rt?gime.
directly ,md by devious means, should draw a lesson from
the pages of history. They must desist from appeasing
aggression. In so far as they continue to refuse to see reason and chose instead to go into partnership with upurtheld, they must share the responsibility for the escalation
of aggression by the upurtheid r&gime. Be it within $le
framework of an engagement-whether
constructive or
othenvise-or of traditional political r4ationships. those
countries that continue to go against international opinion
have only managed to sustain racism in South Africa and
strengthen its aggressive capability, and they have thus
farilitated the attacks against the neighbours of South
Africa. The international
community has repeatedly
warned that collaboration with the rbgime strengthens it.
Waging propaganda campaigns on its behalf emboldens it.
Those countries’ indefensible relationship with apartheid
South Africa has proved inimical to the struggle for freedom and justice in that country, and it undermines the
prospects for peace and stability in the region as well as
international efforts to eliminate upartiteid.

95. Botswana has been forced to come before the Council partly because of omission on the part of the Council.
For had the Council taken action against the racist r&gir.*e,
had the more powerful members of the Council not
allowed that r6gime such leeway, it would not have committed so much aggression at will. Indeed, had those more
powerful members, consistent with their often talkedabout abhorrence of apartheid, given material support to
Botswana and the other neighbouring countries to withstand aggression, South Africa would not have been so
prone to attack. We therefore call upon the Council to
appeal to the international community to come to the aid
of Botswana. At the same time, the Council, while strongly
condemning that r&me. must reaffirm the right of Botswana to claim compensation for the loss of human life
and damage to property consequent upon the racist attack.
98. In conclusion, I wish to read out a message from the
President of my country, Mwalimu Julius Kambarage
Nyerere. addressed to President Masire of Botswana, following that attack. The message reads:
‘On behalf of all the people and of the Government
of Tanzania, as well as on my own behalf. I wish to
convey to you and to your Government and people our
horror at the dastardly attack on Botswana by the
South African racists yesterday.

94. Engagement with South Africa-corrptructive
or
otherwise-is an engagement with racism. It is wrong. It
assumes that upurtheid is rational and can thus listen ta
reason. But, as the murderous record of that r&me demonstrates, it is irrational and vicious. It cannot be engaged
into change with kindness. Certainly it cannot be destroyed by a policy of appeasement.

?he completely unprovoked aggression against a
small and peaceful neighbour whose only offence is that
it stands for decency and humanity is yet another exampk of the evil and aggre&e nature of the upurtheid
rceimc.

95. We renew our appeal to the proponents of that policy to abandon it. They should hear the cry of agony of the
widows and widowers, the OQhans and the maimed, ad
victims of apmheid, They should hear the cry of anger of
the masses of the people of South Africa. Time bought for
South African qrtheti
is time for more suppression,
more misery and more death. Tltey should hear the voice
of the victims of aggression in Botswana, in Angola, in
Zimbabwe, in Mozambique and in the Seychelles.

“Ever since independence the Botswana Government
has made two things quite clear both to the enemies and
the friends of apurthe&i.
The lirst is that it is l’undamentally opposed to racism, will continue to say so and will
observe the international conventions respecting the
reception and care of dugecs from the -State
as well as any other area. The second is that Botswana
istmabletoaUowitste&orytobeusedasabasefor
theoppmitionforccsofthepeopkofSouthAfrica.

96. The front-line States will contimr to fulfil their noble
duty of giving full support to the people of South Africa
and Namibia in their struggle
for freedom and justice.
Equally, we shall continue IO fulfil our international obligations to give asylum to refugees fleeing the brutality of
apartheid. To do so is consistent with international law and
a specific requirement under the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees’ and the Convention relating
to the Status of Stateless Persons? We will do so in full
recognition of the fact that no peace and security can prevail in southern Africa until Namibia achieves indew
dence, untii the uporriwid r&me stops its campaigns of
aggression and, above all, until the evil system ofupurtheid
is eliminated. We believe that this can be achieved. not
through accommodation with apurtheid~
but through its
isolation and ostracization. We will continue to demand
that the Council take effective action, specifically under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

‘l’he liberation movements know your position and
have respected your decision. The South Africans know
it and have never accepted your decision. For the existence of a peaceful and proipraeive non-racial State on
its borders is a demomtration to the Smith African
e
of the meaning of real freedom and indepen‘Wte -the&t r&rime, therefore, continues its efTort.5
of pressuring Botswana into becoming its puppet and
into acting 8s its poliaman
along your common
L.-d.
uwuw. To iheir eirrnai credit.’ ihe Eoiswana peopie
and their Government have reacted with great courage
and refused to succumb to these attacks on their own
human and national integrity,
“Yesterday’s raid was a terrible escalation ofthe pressure, reinforced by the qmrthed r&in&s
threat to
IO

repeat the operation whenever it felt that this would
serve its evil purposes.

102. The Ukrainian delegation categorically condemns
the act of aggression committed by the South African
racist regime against Botswana, as well as the continuing
acts of aggression against other independent African countries, and calls for their immediate and unconditional cessation. We should like to express our profound
condolences to the families which suffered as the result of
the aggression.

“I ask you to accept and to convey to the bereaved
and the injured in particular, but also to all the people
of Botswana, our sincerest condolences and sympathy.
We continue to stand in solidarity with your struggle to
uphold the freedom and dignity of your country and of
all human beings.
“We also call upon the whole international community, and particularly all the friends of South Africa, to
exert the maximum pressure on the upurfheid State and
to demand that it desist immediately from such attacks
upon its neighbours, from the wanton murder of their
citizens and those victims of apmheid to whom they
have given refuge and from its attempts to destabilize
independent African States.”

103. The Council, as we have proposed earlier, should
take effective comprehensive measures against the racist
r&me, including measures provided for in Chapter VII of
‘the Charter of the United Nations.
104. We should like to stmss once again that responsibility for the acts of aggression committed by Pretoria is
shared by the powerful Western protectors and defenders
of the racists. The racist r&time of a~r&dcould
not even
exist without their support.

99. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to draw to the attention of the Council to the following two further revisions
of the draft resolution contained in document s/17291.
Operative paragraph 4 should read:

105. The Ukrainian SSR wishes to eontirm its solidarity
with the peace- and freedom-loving peoples of Africa, timt
and foremost the front-line States, and also with the
national liberation movements of Africa struggling for
their indepndena,
freedom and an opportunity to build
their own independent future.

“Denounces aad rdects racist South Africa’s practice
of ‘hot pursuit’ to terror& and destabilize Rotswana
and other countries in southern Africaa;“.
Operative parzgraph

106. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR supports the
draft molution contained in document S/l7291 as orally
revised.

8 (b) should read:

“Proposing
measure to strengthen Botswana’s
capacity to receive and provide assistance to South African refugees;“.

107. ‘lb PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the repmsentat& of JAwria, who wisha to make a statement in hi
capacity aa Chairman of the Group of African States for
the month of June. I invite him to take a plaa at the
Counsil table and to make his statement.

100. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (tnt~ta&
/ran, Russ/an): For the third time
in the relatively short period of two weeks, the Council is
eousidet;ng the question of the aggressive actions of the
racist r&me of South Afrlea a&st neighbouring States.
ThelatestvictimoftheseactioushasbeenthesmallState
of Botswana. Today the Mittlster for Fomlgn Affaira of
Rotsvwtna has deserikd the set of aggremlon committed
agahtsthereountryandfumisheddetallsonthevlUims
and the material damage.

108. Mr. KOFA (Liberia): Mr. Pm&lent, please acocpt
our warmeat apFre&tlort of the able manner in which you
aredir&ngthea!Talrsofthe&tncilaudforyouralhnvingmctomakeauamment
on the matter before the CouncilinmyeapaeityasChairmartoftheGroupofAfrieaa
states.
109. Once again. the vicious and racist South African
r4@ebascarriedoutoueofitsevilmilitaryattackson
another pcaoc-lovine African country. This criminal and
mtu&ousaedoutookplaceonthemomingof14Jtme,
when Oaboror~, the capital of Botswana, was awakened
bythesoumlofmaehimguttsfhedbySouthAfrieansoldiemandcommar&unitssearchingformemknofthe
ANC, whom they regard as posing a threat to their established order. The unprovoked military raid on the capiml
ofthel&u&ni!!@teof~wsrtamsultedintlulose
-r.- -- ..
of 12 innocent live, ineluding that of a six-yearold child,
and left many other!3 wounded End maimed.

101. This unprovoked act of armed aggression committed by the South African racists against the capital of that
country left dead and wounded,
including women and
children. This act of terrorism against Botswana demonstrates that, in spite of the categorical condemnation by the
Council and by the international community, Rctoria is
stepping up its acts of aggression against the whole of the
southern African subregion, This was also demonstrated
by the cynical assertions of South Africa’s leaders. For
--^-es~.A~III~Is,
th4 MiiiiSteX
fiii
Fiji+i
&T&S
rii iiie Sri&j
African racist regime. in a statement made on 14 June this
year. issued a high-handed warning to the effect that South
Africa reserves its right to commit acts of aggression
against neighbouring States as and when it deems fit. The
statement of the South African representative in the Council today once again has confirmed the racists’ intent to
continue their bandit-like attacks and acts of aggression
against neighbouring African States.

1 IO. The African Croup learned with utter disgust of the
sedsss
raid hto Botswana by sokliers of the racist
dgime of South Africa, This act of banditry, coming at a
time when the Council was cons&ring punitive measures
a&M
the iprduii
rkgimc in connection with its illegal
11

occupation of Namibia and the installation of a puppet
interim administration there, proves beyond doubt Pretoria’s arrogance and total disregard for the feelings and
views of the Council and of the international community
towards its repugnant policy.

11% The savagery and lawlessness with which South
Africa conducts its campaign of violence and destruction,
as tactics of its hegemonic policy, pose a serious challenge
to the authority of the Council and a further test of its
responsibility to safeguard international peace and security. The Council must now exercise the powers entrusted
to it by the Charter of the United Nations to compel South
Africa to comply with internationally accepted norms of
civilixed behaviour. The Council has the obligation to contribute to the promotion of a peaceful resolution of the
highly charged situation in southern Africa, so that the
peoples of Botswana and all the other front-line Statescan
live in peace.

I Il. We view the invasion, conducted on the pretext of
identifying ANC targets, as an act of infamy that must be
strongly condemned by the Council. ‘Ibe outrageous
behaviour and manoeuvres of Pretoria were aimed at destroying the so&economic
UlfmStNCtUt’e of the front-line
States in order to pressure them into accepting the racist
regime’s wild dream of a “constellation” of States.

116. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): In beginning my statement, I must comment on the remarkable
address we heard this morning by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Botswana. The Minister’s statement provided us
with a cogent, measured and eloquent statement of Botswana’s policy of peaceful coexistence with its neighbours,
of its attempts to pursue that policy in its relations with
South Africa, and of the events of the morning of 14 June.
I should like to express directly to the Minister of Botswana my delegation’s appreciation for her contribution
to the quality of our pmceedings.

112. The attack on Botswana was one of a se&? of acts
of intimidation against the front-line States with the object
of forcing them to abandon their sacred duty to give sanetuary to those who are Seeing from the brutal suppression
of human rights in oporrhefd South Africa, as well as of
establishing hegemony over the whole of southern Africa
and discouraging support for the total liberation of the
entire region.
113. In view of those designs, it is now imperative for
the Council to take effective and concrete measures against
the racist regime, whose repeated acts of brutality and
violence, including murder, blackmail, kidnapping and the
destruction of vital sectors of economic activity, are pa&
ularly deplorable considering the numerous assurances
given by the Government of Botswana that it does not
permit its territory to be used for launching attacks against
neighbouring
countries, including South Africa itself,
South Africa must make full and adequate compensation
to Botswana for the toss of human lives and the damage
resulting from its acts of aggression. Member Statea should
be urged to extend all nemssary assistance to Botswana in
order that it may be able to continue to m&e and give
sanctuary to the victims of qurth&,
in accordance with
its humanitarian principles and the demamb of intemational law and morality.

117. This is the second time in as many days that the
Council has met to consider and vote on the question of
South Africa’s military operations against its neighbours.
‘he attack in Gaborone, with the resulting loss of life, was
a particularly deplorable violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Botswana. The United States condemns that attack, and we extend our deepest sympathies
tothepeopkofBotswanawhosuffera!asaresuhofit.
118. We have pointed out in a number of ataumcnts in
thischafnberoverthcpastscvcraldtl~thatnsprclforthe
soved&nty of all stat03 and the invi&bility
of intematied borders are key phcipks in international rclatiom,
ancithatnoStatccanarmgatetoit&therighttoviolate
thcaeprinciplcs. wecannotmtdwiunotcondonevio&tiott8ofthcmbywhwerstate,fwwbatevw-,such
cross-border viohce only complicates e!Tom to bring
peacetothesouthemAfricanregion.

114. We fCCO@ZCththC@Gtii~dllEIlhUOfttE
Council have on a number of oazasions sh0wn their determination to act against the monstrous r&time in South
Africa. But the Council has been powerless to take such
action owing to the high degree of tokmnce shown
tmvardstheracistr&imebysomeoftheCotmcil*spermanent members, which have frustrated the clear desire of the
international community for the imposidon ofcomprehensive mandatory sanctions. We therefore believe that the
eventofl4JuMhlH)plOvjdedcheCouncilwitb~o~tunity to take the kind of measures which will end South
Africa’s pmctice of hot pursuit, by means ofwhii
it termfz +--- &&&i&
awaw
au’ ai& -&
b &
southem African region. The time has fmally arrived for
the Western friends and allies of South Africa to assess
their relationship with that country, taking into full
account the gravity of the present situation in southern
Africa.Theyshouldbringtheirmoralandpoliticalwihto
bear on South Africa to end its continued attacks on neighbouring States and to prevent a racial bloobbath in the
southern African region.

119. Attbelemctim,myGovemmentdacsnotcon.
donetkraxntbombin~andutheractsofviokncewithin
South Africa and cannot accept a right to launch such
actions from beyond South Africa’s borders. We cannot
accept the right of any State to harbour terrorists. In thii
connection, my Oovemmrm was particukrly gratifii to
hear the Botswana Minister for Foreign Affairs’ fmn,
unequivocal statement of her Govemmentk
policy
tOiiZi& iiliy tin& cram-border operations,
120. That statement, particularly in the emotioncharge
aftemutth of the South African raid. is esne&ahv welcome.
We believe that South Africa can and io&
rrefif&dhn
kind. That woukf be a substantial contribution
to
incmased regional stability and peace. Both the Botswana
Minister for Foreign Affairs and senior South African offii
ciab have aBinned their willingness to take step to control
12

cross-border violence. We hops that the mechanisms that
have been put in place will be utilized and that the dialogue
which was under way before the Gaborone raid will be
resumed.

128. We listened with great interest and sympathy to
what the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Botswana so eloquently pointed out this morning The killing of unarmed
civilians in Gaborone-among
them a child and three
women-can
only give rise to condemnation and disgust
and, at the same time, to the firm determination to do
everything to put that abhorrent racist system in the place
it deserves. The message to be conveyed to Pretoria by the
Council must be unambiguous; it must be directed at decisive measures aimed at putting an end to the aggressive
policy of that totally immoral and dangerous system.

121. My Government will join with others in the Council
in supporting the draft resolution presented by the nonaligned members. We wish to take note of the flexibility
the delegation of Botswana has shown in its presentation
of the dealt resolution to Council members. However, my
delegation wishes to express the view that the last preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 2 contain language or formulations we do not regard as appropriate to
Security Council resolutions. We also reiterate the view
that nothing in this draft resolution carries the implication,
in thii instance, that action under Chapter VII of the Charter is contemplated.

129. As has been stated by the OBice of the President of
Botswana, the attack against Gaborone is to be seen “as
South Africa’s fulfilment of its threat in February this year
to invade Botswana** [see s/17274, u#&Y]]. In view of this,
we regard it as a shame when there are still members in the
Council who condone the aggressive character of the
racists and who, against all common sense, want to make
the world believe that there are changes carried out in
South Africa and that. therefore, one should wait, as it is
not urgent now to impose sanctions. But it is imperative to
act now. Every additional day of apurrhel& existence is
one more day of suffering for the majority of the people
inside the country, of threats to neighbouring States and of
danger to international peace and security. Vms, each day
of upa&&
is one day tw many. The Council must react
now, and it must react resolutely.

122 Despite those reservations. my delegation wishes to
send a strong message by its positive vote: a message that
the United States strongly deplores the South African military action. We hope thii message will be heard and
heeded.
12.3. The PRESIDENT: Ihe next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite hi to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

130. Once again. we demand the immediate imposition
of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South
Africa.onlytkuScsnweforcepretotiato~bythe
resolutions of the Ccamcil, which means to abandon um
hefd forthwith, to comply with resolution 435 (1978) and to
refrain from all acts of aggression and destabilisation
against peace-loving neighbouring States.

124. Mr. SCHLEGEL (German Democratic Republic):
Once again, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and
theotbermeinhemoftheC4nmcilfargivingmeanopportunity to participate, in my capacity as Chahman of the
GtOUpOfEiUtUlBEWOpMMtddiStSt&tUS,hchc~
don on the question now under consi&ation.
125. Itbwwthcthildtimeinlessttmntwowccksttmt
my delegatioh as Cl&man of that Group, appmrs before
thisMulytojointhevoiceaofpr6taR,iml@t&nard
graveamu!ln.Anditisthethirdcimeitlthisperiodthat
lhea+wnw~isinthapillory.nuewthnRd~
occqKdwoftheTerritoydNamibiaaudthenonoomptipncrtimohttion435(197g),aca&dngaasof
pggnreion,vloknceMddcstabuizationagaimtthe~
p&b Repubue of Angola, and, now, the swap raid
againstBotswana4Uthisprovrsthatthemcistsin~
riadelihemtely~tMworkicommunitybyintensifying their campaign of military agBmssion against
neighbouring sovereign states.

131. What prevents us from maching that goal? Nothing
elsethantheglobalstraugkandewnwlicintcrestsof
certain&perialistcirekswbichcwtinwtocouahomte
WhhtUUJSttppOttthClZiStdgilMhlOlktOltSh3ht

SouthAfricaastheirlastbastiononthecontinent4bast&mwhk%cmatesins@iMy,imecu&yandwarinthe
Iegiw. It is not only ollcc that the u/nw+i$Tyy
beenco&mneclinUnitedNationsrm&mons
tointernat&nalpeaceandsecurity,andnotonlyoncethat
Pmtoriahasfurnishedproofoftherightful~ofthat
comlemnation. In view of that, the wide gap existing
betweenwotdsanddeedsoftheimperiaMtalliesofSoutb
Africaisonefrlkdwithsufferingandshot,murderedor
injumd innocent men, women and children.

126. We think it was not by accident that Ret&a
launched the brutal attack against Gaborone at a time
when the Council was con&bring steps for settling the
question of Namibia4Dpopriate
steps to improve the
&tatiw
in the entire region of southern Africa. This latest
unprovoked and unwarranted raid against defencelem,
innocent citizens is an expression of the racists’ disregard
for this organ.

132. Thmisnodoubtthatasactiactiwoppositioninside
the ixxtnuy itself grows, uniting mom and more people
under the kadership of its liberation movement, at the
.3oUdafity movmcnt for this struggling people spreads
across the earth, so will Pretoria react in its abhorrent and
nomiotu mantwr. -flu South African racists know only
tw well that their time is over and that they have long
since been supemxkd by history. But we know that a
wounded beast of prey is extremely dangerous. Yesterday
it was the commando raid into Cabinda Province of the

127, WhatwillnowhetheresponseoftheGXmcil?
Tlterecanbeonlyoneanswertothh:~,theboilin
thefkshofAfrica,muMkbumtoutbeforcitbtoo~u.
I3

People’s Republic of Angola; today it is the barbaric
attack against Gaborone, capital of a country which seeks
to live in peace with all its neighbours. Who will fall victims to Ptetoria’s policy tomorrow?
133. We, the Eastern European socialist States, will continue to do our utmost to stop the crimes of the uparrk&f
regime. We stand in firm solidarity at the side of all those
who Eght against the Pretoria regime, be they inside South
Africa itself, in Namibia, or .in. the neighbouring States.
ll~l~sttle
of those peoples is mevitable as long as uparr134. We associate ourselves with the following statement
issued by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe on
14 June 1985, on the occasion of the raid on Botswana by
forces of the racist South Aft&n r&gime:
“the spirit and flame of freedom will continue to bum
more and more fiercely within each and every one of us
until that evil spectre of a~rlheid is totally and Enally
destroyed” [see S/17278, MneT).
135. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT: llte next speaker is the reptesentative of Swaziland. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
136. Mr. MALINGA
(Swaziland): Allow me, Sir, to
express to you and the members of the Council the sincere
gratitude of my delegatiar for giving us this opportunity to
participate in the Council’s dhatsslon on a grave matter. It
concerns criminal acts of aggression, violation of the territoriali~ofanindependentState,mur&rincold
blood and the destruction of propetty. comm&I
yat
again by the Retotia Government, this time against the
Republii of Botswana, a fraternal entry in our region of
tmuthem Africa, a country that over the years has been a
&conofpeaceandasymbolofthatrarecommodity
calkd demoeraey.

139. According to the account given by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Botswana, on the morning of 14 June
this year, members of the South African Defence Force
illegally entered the territory of Botswana and murdered
12 civilians, most of them in their sleep. The victims
included three women and tive children. The representative of Lesotho told the Council about the murder of a
small Lesotho child. His account creates in my mind a
replay of those tragic events, which can never be blotted
out of our minds, that occurred in Cassinga, in Soweto
and in Uitenhage, where small children who were proceeding to a funeral procession were shot in the back.
140. From the account of the representative of Lesotho,
it seems to my delegation that what occurred in Botswana
was not a question of the victims being caught up in the
crossfire between two armed forces. The killers came in the
still of the night to massacre innocent women and children
in their sleep and then went on a brutal hunting expedition
for Botswana nationals who, in the words of the Botswana
Minister this morning, were going about their business in
their own land. We learned that that cross-border act of
what we consider to be State-engineered terrorism was not
provoked by the Government and people of Botswana.
141. ‘Ihe Charter of the United Nations is very explicit
on such matters: it requires all Member States, irrespective
of their position in the inter-State power hierarchy. to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity of an independent, sovereign State. We of the Swaziland delegation
therefore submit that the action taken by the Government
of South Africa against the Republic of Botswana is not at
all consistent with the purposm and principles of the charter, and constitutes a naked act of aggression.

twe,eameesagrralahock.ItrSnrclr~intothc~of
ewy Swazi in every village, in evwy valley, on every
mountaintop.Itwasth8tintdtydam&dfecling
-by~twQpsopla~mwdmy-co
8sktokallowdtoparticiIuteinthcCouncilOddiberations.Ourbeingabktodoso*myckk@onan
oJbp-rt~~ro*imc
to the Gowmnmtandpropkof
condofencoontbetragklossoflife
and the destruction of property.

142 In seeking to justify its action, the Government of
South Africa -ted
that its bloody expedition acrom
thebordem6fourmgionwasanactofself-prcservatiion,
ba&onArtick5IofthcChart~.Ofcourw,thatArtkk
recognizes the right self&fence, which ir, in the words of
Dean A&son,
inherent in the very existence of nationhmd. Howwver, the exerckofthatrightkoond;tionel;it
can be cxerekd only in circumstances in which an annul
attack is imminent or has occurred. In the matter before
the Council there was no armed attack organized or contemplated by the Botswana Government against South
Africa. Therefore, that provision of the Charter cannot be
invoked to legitimirr sending an armed force into the territory of a neighbouring State.

138. BeforeIbrieByexplainmydekg&n%positioncm
the matter, I should like to extend to you, Sir, my ddegation% congratulations on your assumption of the pmidcncy of tbc Councii for the month of June, a month that
willgodowninAfricanhistoryasoneinwhiehsouthem
Africa bled and, suffocated by frustration, the intemational community expressed its utmost indignation and
revulsion at the brutal acts of oppression, Your Minister
eandtMedthecauncirtaffain
andyouyounclf,*,hm
with the distinction to which we have become sccunomd;
emgratulations.

14.1. A-ding
to the statement of the Minister for ForeignAtfainofBotswanathismoming+noevi&nceofa
mihtary nature has been estabhshed to link violent incidentsthat~insideSouthAfrica~course,sca
result of intcmal policia of t?lturfwth
the bombing
of hour
in Gaborone. ‘Ihe penom killed, according to
the Minister in her eloquent presentation this morning+
were civilians. Some of them were refugees, whose visibility and action were publll knowledgr, and who could not
beconsidctddtokathrratloaState&powcrful~South
Africa.

137. TheattackonBotswana,acountrywithwhiehthe
!hVidSSh8fCUW~gtOf~,hietayandCtd-

144. Listening to the Minister’s statement this morning
about South Africa’s intelligence-gathering sophistication
and its ability to detect infiltration caused me to recall
what I told the Council on 16 December 1982. when it was
considering South Africa’s aggression against Lesotho. I
said then:
“South Africa’s attempt to justify its act of aggression
against Lesotho strikes a false note, because King
Moshoeshoe, in his address the day before yesterday,
stated that the attacks alleged to have been launched
from Lesotho occurred a long distance from the
borders. It is therefore surprising that South Africrr.
which maintains the most sophisticated security network in the region, should have been unable to detect
the socalled saboteurs during their sojourn in its territory.” [2408th meeting, para. II?.]

that we, the Swazis, have even taken further bold steps in
the hope of inducing the evolution of a climate conducive
to a healthy exchange of views that perhaps one day would
lead to a peaceful solution of the problems confronting the
region. We were and still are signalling to South Africa the
need to adopt flexibility; the need for South Africa also to
take bold steps-l repeat, bold steps-to break down the
strong attitudinal and prejudice barriers, especially those
of apartheid, that have stood for so long in the way of
genuine peace in our region. Violence such as has occurred
in Botswana poisons the atmosphere that is conducive
even to the eradication of apartheid itself.
14% It is also much regretted that the people of Namibia
and the black people of South Africa have been so long
denied their rights to self-determination. These are the two
barriers that must come down in our region if we are to
attain peace. The flexing of military power against poor
neighbouring States is certainly not an investment in the
treasury of peace we all so much cherish. We therefore call
on our neighbour, South Africa, to take action that will
build peace bridges across the frontiers of our region.

But it could easily detect them in Botswana, in a neighbouring State. 1 continued:
“South Africa appears, then, to be trying to make its
neighbours responsible for its internal security . . .“.
WW
or lack of it.

149. The PRESiDENT
The next speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

145. We have just heard the representative of South
Africa confirming kfom the Council that it is the msponslbility of a poor, struggling neighbouring country to ensute
the security of South Africa. My delegation would have
bsenpkasedtohearhimaddressUtc&tswanaMlnismr
for Poaign Affairs’ remarks when she extended a hand of
friendship in t&en&g
before the Gmncil her country*s
willhIgltess to mahltahl gooddghbourly
Ielfalons with
South Afflca. We, the Swaxis, b&eve in negotiations.

lS0. Mr. OGOUMA (&in) (itttepretadottfiom
Rewh):
Allow me to extend to you, Sir. the warmest congtatulations of the delegation of Renin on your assumption of the
pmsidency of the Council for the month of June. Your
qt&ies of a seasoned diplomat, your extensive expetiettce
in intematiorUl l&es and your wisdom lead us to hope
that the current debate wig kad to de&ions which will
forcethenlgimedRetotiatoheedthedetnandsofthe
international community.
HI. I should like, through you, tothank all the members
of the Council for having Bccodtp to ?ttr tuquest to speak
OIltiWtltgMttpIdO~tUI&-

cz4wddttringtbepastmontb.
7nspiteofthseeffortstocreatai3natmosphem
antd~vetopeacefulamtaets,afalceplcturcdttelghhourlng States as launching bases for sulwemive au8dts
iSbhlgdCWlOgldSO8StOjUStif~...murdcrMdslruc
temxism.

W. TbisisnowtltathMtimeinlasthatt
thccouncil&rtte&tgtodbarsrvariocrr&tfUcolnmitrad

t
.
-bmY-by-W
&velopmenu,
bemuse King sobhtIza attempted to
create~-and the present cicwmmdisat&mptingto
crco1c-” anatmosphereconduclvetodia&mepnd
peaedul IleptMm
within tbe region . . #“. [Ibid,
pIma* 19 ta 121.1
147. We certainly do not merely pay t+se&e
settknmofUlapmesbypeaesftdmefms.We,Wthe
prrvdtbnmdthepincigkof
popkd-,~ghbourli~;ofcourse,itiscommonknowle+

IOdaysthat

d South Africa for setting up this fraudulent locallcd
if@p

to the

L

-9

butalfodechrai8uchactjonnutland

155. l?ten it was the turn of the Pnofrl@s Rqubiic
AngolatobtingacomplaimbeforetheCouncilagahtstthe
IS

of

agarth& rCghne of Pretoria, whose unceasing acts of
aggression and violence perpetrated by its armed racist
forces are jeopardizing the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Angola, and represent a grave threat to peace and
security in the region and on the international level. In its
resolution 567 (1985) adopted last night, the Council
strongly condemned the mcist regime of Pretoria and
demanded that South Africa should unconditionally tithdraw forthwith all its occupation forces from the territory
of An&l.

162. In the light of all these facts, is there any need
further to stress why these unceasing armed acts of aggression, these violent acts of aggression perpetrated by the
apart&id regime of Pretoria against the front-line States,
represent for the Organization of African Unity and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries a subject of grave
concern?
163. For several years now, on numerous occasions, the
Council has had before it complaints of neighbouring or
bordering States against the fascist and racist regime of
htoria
regarding premeditated, continuing, persistent
and prolonged armed invasions carried out by South
Africa in flagrant violation of the airspace, national sovereignty and territorial integrity of those countries. On all
those occasions the Council has adopted resolutions and
relevant decisions, to which South Africa has responded
only with defiance, bad faith, duplicity and treachery, as is
shown by the latest acts of aggression committed against
Angola in May and Botswana in June. as well as refusal to
carry out a full withdrawal of South African racist troops
from Angola.

156. Today it is Botswana’s turn to bring to the Council
its complaint against the same aparthefd regime of South
Africa. Indeed, on 14 June at the crack of dawn, a commando unit of the Defence Force of the racist Pretoria
regime launched a savage attack against the capital of Botswana, the city of Gaborone, which resulted in 12 dead
and six wotmded and considerable material damage,
157. Nor can anyone forget that, in its creeping acts of
aggression, the racist @me of Pretoria has sent armed
bands against front-line States, in particular Mozambique,
the Seychelles and Lesotho.

164. This detiance and this continuing arrogance on the
part of South Africa are not only an insult to the intemational community; above ah, they ret&t the inability of
th~‘Council and, more specifically, the tack of political wilt
on the part of some Powers to intervene promptly and
firmly at a time when intemationat peaee and security are
seriously threatened. Ihose Powers are clearly visible in
south Africa in all sectortr of economic activity, as well as
in the strategic and military seetom.

158. The pursuit and intensification of the barbaric acts
of aggression committed without any provocation by the
racist r&time of Pretoria against sovereign and independent front-line States aft also crimes that are creating a
particularly dangerous situation in southern Africa. repreaenting a serious threat to international peace and security.
lS9, ?he mcist r&gime of Pretoria is through these
&atnaful crimes radically and dangerously violating and
opp08ing the principlea enshrined in the Chat-tar of the
UnitedNatiot&iupMic&rthoresetforthinAtticle2,
paralpapb 4.

163. Iltis means that the duplicity and defutncc South
Africa is demonstrating only reflect the compfaisamx,
indeed the complicity. of some great Powers regarding
South Africa. We therefore understand the continued
refus8lofcertaincountricatbat8remetnhmoftheCounciltoexertmalanddecisivepnsawnon&uthAfricaand
why binding poiitical and economic measures have ao far
not been taken against ffouth Af&a.

160. Is not scrupulous mspect for those principles an
essential amdiion for the swvivat of States, for the survival of6m8ll. defhcah
states such as ours? But the racist
r&lmeofRetoefadosanotsenthingsirtthatIightataU.
T8kirtgllsi&Bb8eehB~oyrulaof~~dmml
importantfactoritsilfq@cofoniafoecapstiondNalnibi8,~pooplrafetxploitcdlmdwhoseinmmme
mource8arepillaged,themcistr&gitneofPretoriahas
8nhked
on a policy ofcontinuing milii
aggression in
aouth8mAfrica

ltui F~~~theworldfsre
cmmora8w8teofthcsu8uon.nt8tiswhythey8re
mobuizhlgtodemandthe~of&uthAf*the
takiugdeumo&maasuresagainstthePmtoriar&gime,
theanrdcmwtson88d~of~theHbmrtiOttOfNMlibhMd4ZQthld~OfthCpdicyOfCOilli,
uhlgInilit8ryaggmwkm
8g8inatst8tesofsoutbanAfric8.

161. Rqle8t8d 8ct6 of apomrion against the front-line
stota*inpartindar~,~
*llotmm8,the
seyehcllesand~~8rein~-dthipdicy
ofregimhdim~.n#rrcpc8ted8asd~
infaetformtheconcmtameansfortheimpkmentatkmof
thisI diabohi
. . @icy aimed at mashing the natural and
rr!!ur nl&Rty
‘&a! eLErst2!%tien the Giiifig
jiqj&
ofNahbiaandSouthAfrkaandthepeopkrofother
neighbouringindgndm,countriesofsouthemAfrtca,at
imposing a lWOCOIOnfPl sot&m in Namibia, at maintaining through wtion
ud terror the racist f&gime in
southAfric8#d8t~8nd~~
intimidation and terror a climate of instabihty, neofmlonid depedem
and destablidon
in southern Africa.

167. BenidspoaitkmontheiwueoftheimensBi~ionof
miutiuy8rmed8ctaoFaograsion
bythemciatdgheof
Pretai8 8g8inst the from-tine States, and in par&t&r
againatBocmwl,isverydear.Fortu,tbisp&yofcorr
Ii?%** 2ggrcdG stciiz from thi i,K&&&
tiimicgy ai tjw
redrtrcgimcofRclorisaimedatensl8vingthcpcopk$d
1heregionforthebeneStofintemationalimprinlirmto
murethereignofttprMdd8nd-loni8liun,8ndthe
frenzied pinaging of flourca.
168. my ddeg8tiolt fwrly condemm the continuad
aggrah
pIicy of South Afric8 ag8inst the front-line
16

States and lirmly condemns the armed military invasion
directed by the Pretoria regime against Botswana.

“On behalf of the Government and people of the
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, I wish to take this
opportunity to condemn in the most vigorous terms
South Africa’s invasion of your country and to express
my sympathy and that of the Government and people
of Trinidad and Tobago over the loss of life and
destruction of property.

169. It is high time for the Council, without further
delay, to take the measures necessary to ensure that its
resolutions condemning the continuing acts of aggression
of the racist Pretoria regime against the front-line States
are respected. My delegation believes that, to that end, it is
time also to impose binding, comprehensive sanctions
against South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter. My delegation therefore hopes that at this
meeting the Council will lirmly condemn the racist South
African regime’s repeated violations of the sovereignty,
integrity and independence of Member States and of international peace and security.

“Let me also take the opportunity to express my sincere hope that within the not too distant future, world
opinion will force the termination of the reprehensible
system of apnrtheidand usher in an era when all the
peoples of South Africa, and indeed of southern Africa.
could live in peace and harmony.”
177. The minority regime cannot offer any consideration
of whatever nature-political,
economic, military or
otherwise-to
justify its cowardly act of aggression. That
brutal and unwarranted act is all the more reprehensible
when one considem the repeated assurances of the Botswana Government that it does not-l
repeat, notpermit its territory to be used for launching attacks against
neighbouring countries. The Pretoria regime must make
full and adequate reparation to Botswana for this attack,
which resulted in the tragic loss of life.

170. We should like tovoice here the unswerving support
and active solidarity of the people of Benin for all brotherly peoples of southern Africa. in particular the peoples of
Angola and Botswana, in their struggle against the armed
aggression of the Retoria r&me and for consolidation of
their dearly-won independence
171. Ready for the revolution; the struggle continues!
172. The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of TBlNIDAD
AND
TOBAGO.

178. Even as we condemn South Africa for this attack
and for its other acts of violence against its neighbours. we
urge South Africa to heed the calls of the Council and to
respect the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law.

173. The Council must indeed be grateful to the Minister
for Fore&n Ansirs of Batewane for a moving and lucid
presentationof the detailsof the South African attack
against Gaborone, which conllrmed our own conchtalon
that that brutal attack and the killing of innocent,
ud
civilians, atnottg whom wen thee women and a
six-year-old child, were unprovoked and pmneditated.

179. We wish at this moment to reaflirm our solidarity
and sympathy with the people and Government of Botswana in their commitment to maitttahting that country’s
political and territorisl integrity. We feel that Botswana is
tobecommendcdforthasacrBilkhasmadeandcontinttes to make in giving asylum to victims of -he&i.
The amassiMtiMs, the kidnappings and the dcstruetiM of
property perpetrated in Botswana by the prsctitioners of
aparwdhavcnotsc#edtoswavethattNlyheroicstate
from sttccourhtg mfugees, its fellow men, tleeing the horror
that is 4jp7rtbeld.
180. I now mutne my function as PIGSDENT.
181. 1tismy~thattbeCouncilisreadyto
proeeul to vote on the draft molution kfcm it [s/I729I].
IfIhearhOObjCCtiOSI,Irhellputitloavotc~orally
twited.

175. TrinidadattdTobago~ttteuseofarmed
forceinG&oronebythearmyofthemhmrityradst
&gimeofSoutbAfricaon14June1985tokanactof
agpdon
and a +taty vldation of,tIotama’s
sow*mykyzT
pllp. provMwdthecharterof&
ullitedNationr,whichstipulatethcoblioptiondallsta~
to refrain in their intemstional relations from the threat or
ufeofforcea@~thesovereigmyandt&torialhnegrity
of any Sate.T;~~ti~T~go
strongly condemns and
dcnowes
.
-*

lk &q/Y:resotntiott(u orally revkd wasaduptedunanhoush [resofutlm568 (1985)l.
182. Mr. MAXEY (United Kingdom): My delegation is
delighted that the Council has adopted this resolution
unanimously. This gives the Government of Botswana the
support it was seeking. I would like to express sincere
appreciation to the Minister for Pore@ Affairs of Botswana and to the representative of Botswana for the wise

176, In a message sent to Presiint Masire of Botswana
follovlittg the attack on Gaborone, the prime Minister of
Trhridad and Tobago, Mr. George Chambers, stated:
I7

and helpful way in which they have brought their country’s
case to the Council, which is in keeping with the traditions
and the high reputation of their country.
183. As with resolution 567 (1985). adopted yesterday,
the United Kingdom does not interpret the term “‘act of
aggression” in the text of this resolution as falling within
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations or as constituting a finding or decision which has
specific consequences under the Charter. Rut although we
may not endorse every formulation in it, our support for
the purpose of this resolution whole-hearted.
184. Finally, I would like to repeat with added emphasis
my earlier appeal to the Government of South Africa to
pay the most careful attention to our proceedings today
and to abide by the resolution which the Council has just
adopted.
185. ‘Ihe PRESIDENT: The Minister for Foreign AtTairs
ofBotswanahasask#lu,maleaetatempnt,andInow
call upon her.
186. Miss CHIEPE (Botswana): At the risk of overtaxing
the patience of the Council, 1 beg to be allowed to express
to you, Mr. President, and to the Council as a whole, the
profound gratitude of my delegation for your kind indulgence. I thank you all for your kind words of sympathy,
support, understanding and encouragement. The Council
has spoken with the voice, a very strong voice, in its
uneqttlvocal reja%ion of tbe use of force as a substitute for
the pwcefbl ttsolution of contllcts or differences WWeen
or among Statea. lbii is as it sbottld be, for it is the principle responsibility of this very important organ of the
United Nations to maintain international
pace and
security.

187. As 1 said in my statement this morning, South Africa’s threat that it will he back in my country soon for a
repeat performance is very real indeed, and you have just
heard it repeated. You have all heard what the representative of South Africa said. As usual, we were treated to a
litany of baseless allegations so typical of South Africa. I
have categorically refuted in advance all those allegations
and will not waste the time of the Council in reciting once
again what even South Africa knows to be the true facts. It
is interesting to hear that, seven days after the attack on
our capital, suddenly an arsenal of AK-47s and the rest is
on display, when on Saturday, a day after rhe attack, only
two lonely pieces of weapons were shown to the press as
the loot hauled from the destroyed houses in Gaborone.
Are we being taken for a ride, as the Americans would say?
188. I thank the Council for all its kind messages of
condolences. ‘ibey will be delivered to my Government
and to the people of Botswana, as well as to those nations
*hose nationals were either murdered or injured on 14
June.
189. The PRESIDENT: The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
IRe meehg

rose at 7p.m

NOTSS
’ Si8ned at Oeneva on 28 July 1951 (United Nations, 2kra/p &r&s,
vol. 169, No. 2545).
a Simd al Nsw York oo 28 &pembn
1954 (ibid, vol. 360. No.
Jl5a
