S/PV.8377

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8377th meeting

Monday, 22 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Cordova Soria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2018/912)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-33306 (E)
*1833306*

S/PV.8377

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

The mission, together with the United Nations country
team in the Sudan, is in the process of finalizing the
concept of state liaison functions, which will facilitate
collaboration for the duration of the mission’s transition
and eventual exit.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2018/912)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with article 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mamabolo is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Johannesburg.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/912, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mamabolo.
Mr. Mamabolo: It is an honour for me to update the
Security Council once again on the situation in Darfur
and the work of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in particular
the mission’s reconfiguration and drawdown process.
Detailed information on those issues is contained in the
Secretary-General’s report on UNAMID (S/2018/912)
published on 12 October, which covers the period
11 June to 8 October.
With the adoption of resolution 2429 (2018),
on 13 July, we embarked in earnest on the mission’s
reconfiguration and drawdown. In accordance with the
joint special report of the Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) Commission and the Secretary-General
(S/2018/530), we are in the process of relocating the
mission’s headquarters from El Fasher to Zalingei,
and the Joint Special Representative to Khartoum.
2/13

22/10/2018

The mission is on course to reduce the military
component by 3,265 personnel by December and another
1,420 personnel by 30 June 2019. The police component
will remain at an overall strength of 2,500 personnel.
The military component will continue to maintain its
presence in the redefined areas of responsibility in the
greater Jebel Marra area, while focusing on traditional
peacekeeping functions and maintaining the flexibility
to respond in the rest of Darfur when the situation
demands it. Concomitant with the reduction in the
military component, the abolishment of 1,184 civilian
personnel positions by 30 June 2019 is being finalized.
That total comprises 189 international, 935 national and
60 United Nations Volunteer positions. If approved by
the budgetary board bodies, the proposed abolishment
will be undertaken in three phases, with 385 positions
to be abolished by 31 December, 89 by 31 March 2019
and 710 by the end of June 2019. Commensurate with
troop and staff reductions, five teams are proposed
for closure in October — three in November and two
in December — and three sector headquarters — in
Nyala, El Daein and El Geneina — by 30 June 2019.
We continue to monitor the impact on the security and
protection of civilians in areas from which UNAMID
has withdrawn. So far, we have not witnessed any
adverse impact.
As required by the mission’s two-pronged approach
to its operations, UNAMID and United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes have engaged the
Government of the Sudan in the finalization of the
transition concept for areas outside the greater Jebel
Marra area. It is based on holistic United Nations
system collaboration through joint analysis, planning
and delivery, with the aim of achieving stabilization
in order to avoid a relapse into conflict. As Council
members may recall, as described in the joint special
report of the Secretary-General and AU Commission
Chairperson, the concept envisages that common
United Nations system state liaison offices will be
established in the capitals of North Darfur, South
Darfur, East Darfur and West Darfur.
Accordingly, UNAMID and the United Nations
country team have agreed on elements of a concept of
State liaison functions that envisages the joint delivery
18-33306

22/10/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of programmes to build on the efforts undertaken by
UNAMID over the years. The State liaison functions
concept provides a common understanding between
UNAMID and the United Nations country team on the
way ahead during the two-year transitional period.
Our gathering today will also be considering
realistic and achievable exit benchmarks, in accordance
with the redefined priorities of UNAMID, for the
protection of civilians; monitoring and reporting human
rights and the facilitation of humanitarian assistance;
mediation of intercommunal conflict and other local
conflicts; as well as measures to address root causes
and mediation between the Government of the Sudan
and non-signatory movements.
Council members will have noticed that details
of these well-defined benchmarks and the progress
made towards the achievement of the strategic
priorities of UNAMID are provided in the report of
the Secretary-General on UNAMID of 12 October. It
is noteworthy that the new set of indicators for these
proposed benchmarks reflect the positive changes in
the security situation in Darfur in particular and the
Sudan in general. The indicators are not only realistic
and measurable time-wise, but they are also centred
on the Government of the Sudan, as ultimately the
Government is responsible for the provision of basic
services to its citizenry in Darfur.
I am pleased to report, as indicated in the reports
of the Secretary-General in recent months, that the
current situation in Darfur remains relatively calm
and peaceful, with the exception of pockets in the
Jebel Marra area where armed conflict between
Government and rebel forces continue. In addition, a
low level of intercommunal clashes has been reported.
However, despite all this progress, UNAMID has
recorded an increase in tensions between herders and
farmers — mainly internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and returnees — over land and resources.
The Council may also take note that, for the
first time, the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
(SLA/AW) also declared a three-month unilateral
ceasefire from 20 September to 18 December to allow
unhindered humanitarian access to areas affected
by landslides in Jebel Marra. However, on 20 and
21 September, the Sudanese Armed Forces reportedly
attacked SLA/AW positions in Saboon el Fag, Gur
Lumbung, Kuilla and Amra, all located in the area

S/PV. 8377

north-east of the Kass team site in South Darfur. Three
SLA/AW members were reportedly killed.
Between 12 and 14 October, infighting broke out
between two factions of SLA/AW in two villages located
some two kilometres east and north-east of the Golo
temporary operating base over differences relating to
participation in the signing of a peace agreement with
the Government of the Sudan. The infighting resulted
in eight deaths and the situation in both villages
remains tense. I wish to put on record that during the
recent mudslide disaster in the Tagulei area of Jebel
Marra, UNAMID and the United Nations country team
joined forces to deliver humanitarian aid and received
the cooperation of the Government of the Sudan and of
the SLA/AW elements in the areas under their control.
I must note, however, that despite the improved
security situation there is continuing concern among
IDPs regarding systematic attacks, assaults, farm
destruction, harassment, land occupation issues and
livestock theft. During this period, six intercommunal
clashes over land and livestock theft, resulting in 18
fatalities, were reported. UNAMID continues to focus
on early warning, preventive measures, capacitybuilding and efforts to address the root causes of the
conflicts, in collaboration with Government authorities,
the United Nations country team, community leaders
and relevant institutions.
Humanitarian partners continue to provide
assistance to people in need across the five States
of Darfur, despite limited resources. There were
challenges in accessing some areas in Jebel Marra
localities in South and Central Darfur due to ongoing
armed clashes and the rains, which have rendered some
roads impassable, resulting in civilian displacement
and the destruction of homes and assets in West,
South and Central Darfur. Details of the numbers of
vulnerable people who received assistance, those who
were displaced during the reporting period and those
who were verified and registered are contained in the
special report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations (S/2018/530).
Human rights concerns will continue to be an
important benchmark that the Government of the
Sudan, UNAMID, the United Nations country team
and the international community must seriously
address. During the reporting period, there was a
decrease in the number of new cases of human rights

18-333063/13

S/PV.8377

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

22/10/2018

violations and abuses, with UNAMID documenting
134 new cases involving 304 victims, as compared to
169 cases involving 508 victims during the period from
16 February to 10 June. These violations were largely
assaults, killings, criminal activities, abductions and
sexual and gender-based violence, thereby creating a
hostile environment in and around IDP camps. Our focus
should be on building the capacity of the Government
of the Sudan to deal squarely with these challenges
and to discharge its primary responsibility to protect
civilians and IDPs, provide security and address the
lack of confidence in reporting cases to authorities and
the lack of adequate law enforcement authorities, as
well as the inability to provide basic social services.

bridge their differences so that they can agree on and
sign a prenegotiation framework that would facilitate
the signing of a cessation of hostilities agreement and
the resumption of political negotiations based on the
AUHIP road map. Engagements with the non-signatory
movements is continuing. I continue to appeal to the
movements and the Government to engage in earnest
in the finalization of the negotiations. I shall continue,
in collaboration with the AUHIP and the Government
of Qatar, to exert pressure that, I hope, will lead to the
successful conclusion of the road map. We have received
extensive support from the German Government,
the Berghof Foundation and the United States and
British Governments.

UNAMID continues to work with the Government
of the Sudan in building capacity for members of the
criminal justice chain to ensure the effective discharge
of their duties. I wish to inform the Council that
preparations are under way to start a constructive
discussion with the Government of the Sudan on the
need to establish a country office of the Office of the
High Commissioner on Human Rights in the Sudan, as
called for by resolution 2429 (2018).

I recently briefed the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 19 September and announced that
all efforts to bring the leader of the Sudan Liberation
Army, Abdul Wahid Nour, into the peace process have
failed so far. I urge the Council to consider stern action
against the SLA leader because, by all accounts, he
prefers belligerence and armed struggle to the cessation
of hostilities and a political process. It is highly unlikely
that he will change that position any time soon. The
Security Council may wish to consider what actions to
take against the SLA leader.

The implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur continues, albeit at a slow pace due
to being undermined by capacity- and resource-related
constraints. A board meeting of the Darfur Internal
Dialogue and Consultation project was held in Khartoum
on 13 August, at which it was decided to extend the
project until 31 December. The meeting noted that
funding and the ongoing UNAMID reconfiguration are
major challenges to the process.
On 23 September, I met with the Commissioners of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur Commissions
in Khartoum and discussed the way forward towards
the full implementation of the Doha Document. The
Commissioners agreed that there was a need to explore
other funding opportunities and ways of bringing
more donors on board. That meeting was a follow-up
to the recommendations of the 13th meeting of the
Implementation Follow-up Commission, held on 11 July
in Doha.
In my capacity as Joint Chief Mediator, I have
continued to engage with the Government of the Sudan
and the non-signatory movements, the SLA-Minni
Minawi and the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the Justice
and Equality Movement in support of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) to
4/13

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Mamabolo for his briefing today.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo for his comprehensive briefing.
We are pleased to note that the security situation
in Darfur continues to improve. With intercommunal
conflict remaining low and criminality decreasing, we
commend the efforts of the Government, as well as the
concerted engagement of State authorities, local leaders
and security elements. That is a testament to the decision
of the Security Council in laying down the conditions
for African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) to exit the Sudan, based on the
transition concept outlined in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General on the UNAMID (S/2018/530).
The situation in Darfur can no longer be characterized
as an armed conflict between Government forces
and non-State actors. The problem now is a lack of
development, compounded by a protracted humanitarian
crisis and human rights violations.
18-33306

22/10/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8377

The Government of the Sudan is making significant
efforts to find durable solutions to alleviate the suffering
of the people of Darfur. It is working to fill the void
that could be created by the closure of UNMAID’s team
sites, by putting in place institutions to provide for law
enforcement and the rule of law. The weapons collection
campaign, for example, has considerably mitigated
intercommunal violence. However, it is clear that its
efforts have been constrained by a lack of capacity
and resources. The Government requires substantial
assistance from the international community. So far
that has hardly been forthcoming.

treat them as transnational organized criminal groups,
not as Darfur rebels.

It is in that context that we commended the decision
of the Deputy Secretary-General and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security to hold a highlevel event , on the sidelines of the General Assembly’s
general debate, on the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and development in Darfur. The
meeting successfully underlined the critical need to
fund the transition in Darfur and support the whole-ofsystem approach. We trust that the proposed pledging
conference, providing donors with the opportunity to
commit financial support, will be held soon.

The activities of Abdul Wahid and his groups
in Jebel Marra are already taking a toll on civilians.
The Peace and Security Council has called on Abdul
Wahid to cease and desist from engaging in deadly
clashes, which continue to cause unnecessary deaths
and displace civilians. It has asked the Security
Council and the international community at large to
follow suit. Abdul Wahid has publicly admitted that
he has no interest in any peace process. There can be
no reason for the Security Council not to act against
such openly belligerent behaviour. Mr. Wahid should
face the consequences of his damaging and destructive
role. We look forward to receiving the statement of the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan and of possible options
in that regard.

That is of particular importance. The impressive
gains made in Darfur can be ensured only through
sustained financing to the development efforts of
the Government, as well as by appropriate funding
arrangements to enable and enhance the work of the
agencies and programmes of the United Nations
country team. The international community has
invested too much in Darfur, and it cannot risk failure
due to a lack of resources. Investment in recovery and
peacebuilding efforts in Darfur remains necessary to
avert the possibility of a relapse into conflict, and that
remains a prospect while significant progress in the
security situation is not accompanied by progress in the
political process.
The Darfur rebel groups show no meaningful
interest in ensuring peace in Darfur. They are amassing
huge benefits from criminal activities in neighbouring
States and have no real incentive to pursue peace. It
is time, we believe, to make a paradigm shift in the
approach to the political peace process in the Sudan
and apply real pressure on those groups. They should
not be allowed to benefit from their illegal activities in
neighbouring States, using the Darfur peace process as
a pretext. If they continue in their refusal to participate
meaningfully in the peace process, the Council should

In that context, we commend the African Union
Peace and Security Council for its decision to seriously
consider taking appropriate action against those who
continue to obstruct efforts towards lasting peace and
security in Darfur. We urge the armed groups to join the
peace process before the expiration of the set deadline.
We sincerely hope that the Peace and Security Council
will immediately institute strict measures against those
groups that fail to heed its call for peace.

We have no doubt that the overall improvements in
the situation in Darfur, which have led to the significant
drawdown of UNAMID and the plans for its eventual
exit in 2020, also allows for major changes in the Sudan
sanctions regime. The Security Council has already
agreed to review the sanctions regime in the light of the
positive developments that have occurred. We hope that
action will be taken in that direction sooner than later,
and we are ready to engage constructively in that, which,
we believe, is particularly important both because of
the significant improvement on the ground and because
of the Government’s decisive role in dealing with peace
and security. That has included fighting terrorism,
combating human trafficking and illicit migration
and facilitating humanitarian relief. The Sudan’s
role in reaching a breakthrough in the South Sudan
peace process has been enormous. The Government’s
cooperation with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and
its Panel of Experts on the Sudan, as well as the wider
United Nations system, has also remained consistent.

18-333065/13

S/PV.8377

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The need to lift the arms embargo imposed against
the Government of the Sudan is urgent. The main
rationale for the imposition of the arms embargo no
longer exists, and the Government of the Sudan needs to
better secure and control its boundaries. Porous borders
pose a real threat to regional peace and security. Border
security requires effective military deployment, as well
as the free movement of troops and military equipment.
It is time to provide the Sudan with the means necessary
to protect its borders and security.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my condolences to
our brothers in the Republic of the Sudan following the
death of former President Field Marshal Abdel Rahman
Swar Al-Dahab. May God rest his soul in peace.
I would also like to thank the Joint Special
Representative for Darfur, Mr. Mamabolo, for
his valuable briefing on the work of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
In our discursion today, I will address four topics:
the security situation in Darfur, internally displaced
persons, the UNAMID exit strategy, and its review
and indicators.
First, on the security situation, we take note of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/912), which
highlights an improvement in the security situation
across most areas in Darfur and a reduction in criminal
acts. Undoubtedly, that is a positive sign that we
should build upon in order to achieve full security and
stability in Darfur. We underscore the need to support
the efforts of the Sudanese Government to extend
its sovereignty across all national territories and to
shoulder its primary responsibility to protect civilians.
We welcome the unity of the Council in adopting
resolution 2429 (2018), which contributed to reducing
the military component of UNAMID. That is evidence
of the continued stability in Darfur and a reduced need
for United Nations military forces in the region.
Secondly, I would like to touch on internally
displaced persons. The fight against rebel factions in
Jebel Marra has had an impact on the displacement
of some inhabitants of Darfur, as have flooding and
heavy rainfall, according to the Secretary-General’s
report. It is therefore important to recognize two things
when discussing displaced persons and their numbers.
Displacement is not due entirely to the deep-rooted
causes of the conflict; Darfur has seen the return of
6/13

22/10/2018

displaced persons and a new wave of displacement. On
the whole, when compared to the figures from last year
and previous years, it can be said that the number of
displaced persons continues to fall. According to the
report, displaced persons are concerned by several
factors, including the presence of armed groups in
camps. That is why it is important to continue the
weapons-collection campaign in the Sudan.
Thirdly, on the exit strategy of UNAMID, resolution
2429 (2018) had a substantial impact in encouraging
the Sudanese Government to further cooperate with
all parties in order to complete the strategy by 2020.
At the meeting of the Arab Ministerial Council held
in Cairo in September, the League of Arab States
welcomed the resolution, as well as the Sudan’s efforts
in implementing the objectives of that resolution. We
also take note of the annex and the proposed indicators
in the Secretary-General’s report, which are in line
with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We note
that the Implementation Follow-Up Commission is
continuing to work towards the implementation of the
Doha Document.
Fourthly, on the exit strategy and its indicators,
as we stated at the Council’s meeting on UNAMID
in March (see S/PV.8202), UNAMID’s mandate and
the Secretary-General’s reports are related to Darfur.
Therefore, the indicators should not be applied beyond
Darfur to the entire Sudanese territory. As the Special
Envoy of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
brotherly State of Qatar underscored in July, following
the thirteenth meeting of the Implementation FollowUp Commission — which included members of the
Council — 85 per cent of the provisions of the Doha
Document have been implemented. The indicators
should therefore focus on the points that have not yet
been implemented.
The Sudan sorely needs the support of donors, which
must honour their commitments. I commend the efforts
of the joint mechanism between the Sudan and the
League of Arab States pertaining to the follow-up and
implemention of Arab development projects in Darfur.
A donor conference should be organized to support the
Sudan and help it to move from the peacekeeping phase
to that of building peace.
In conclusion, it is time for the Council to strengthen
its support for the Sudan as it seeks to focus on
political solutions to achieve peace in the country and
neighbouring countries. The Sudan must be supported
18-33306

22/10/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

so that security and stability on its territories and in the
wider region can be achieved.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As this is the first time that I am taking the
floor since the Plurinational State of Bolivia assumed
the presidency of the Council, allow me to sincerely
congratulate you, Madam, on the dynamic activity
and important programme of work of the Council
throughout the month of October, particularly its visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to commend and express gratitude
for the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/912) that was introduced to us by Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). His briefing fully
illustrated the current situation in the Darfur region.
The briefing that we have just heard highlights a
relative improvement in the general security situation
in Darfur, where there were no significant clashes
between the Government forces and the armed groups
during the period covered by the report, which is worthy
of note. However, the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the region, which remains precarious.
While we commend the Sudanese Government for
providing an environment conducive to a continued
improvement in the situation in Darfur, we urge it to
keep working in that respect, as it did in deciding to
unilaterally extend the ceasefire until 31 December. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea lends its full support
to the Sudanese Government in seeking a definitive
solution to bring irreversible peace to Darfur.
In order to achieve that goal, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea believes that in the current phase,
the United Nations, the African Union, the international
community and the donor countries should lend greater
support to the Government of the Sudan and UNAMID
so that they can together address the root causes of the
crisis, which continue to cause isolated acts of violence
over land disputes, such as intercommunal attacks,
which require mediation and reconciliation efforts in
order to prevent and put an end to those conflicts.
The other aspect is the overriding need to support
the Government of the Sudan in its weapons-collection
campaign. The full implementation of that programme
is necessary not only to improve the relative calm that
prevails in Darfur, but also with a view to restoring

S/PV. 8377

definitive peace in the region, particularly since that
important programme is now being carried out in the
Jebel Marra area.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges the
Government of the Sudan to ensure that, just as we
have seen in the security situation, improvements
also be achieved in the political situation through the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur to reach a total ceasefire. In that regard, support
must be lent to the political process being carried out
by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
To that end and to show the Council how it can
support efforts to break the deadlock in the negotiations
between the Government and the rebel movements
in Darfur with regard to the implementation of Doha
Document for Peace, which was adopted in 2011, we
believe that it is necessary to invite the Chair of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
former President Thabo Mbeki, to brief the Council
about the efforts being undertaken to that end. The last
time President Mbeki delivered a briefing to the Council
was on the 12 January 2017, almost two years ago.
My delegation warmly congratulates the
Government of the Sudan, Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo and all UNAMID personnel for the
commendable work they are doing. We encourage them
to continue in their intercommunal and governmental
mediation efforts to improve the lives of the people
of Darfur, so that the precarious and relative peace
and tranquillity in the region at the moment become
sustainable peace throughout the Darfur region.
I conclude by expressing our resolute support for
the recommendation made by Mr. Mamabolo for the
Council to consider taking action against recalcitrant
groups of rebels and armed groups that do not yield to
reason and come to the negotiating table, by adopting
sanctions as was done is the case of the leader
Abdul Wahid.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our deep appreciation to Joint Special
Representative for Darfur Mamabolo for his
comprehensive briefing on the quarterly report of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2018/912).
Like previous speakers, we are encouraged
by the continuing improvement in the security
situation in Darfur, as well as the overall reduction

18-333067/13

S/PV.8377

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in intercommunal clashes, criminal activities and
human rights incidents. The ongoing arms-collection
campaign and the deployment of Government security
forces have contributed to improved security conditions
and consolidated the Government’s authority in Darfur.
Kazakhstan welcomes Khartoum’s commitment to
enhance the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence and the delisting of Government forces from
the annex to the Secretary-General’s annual report on
children and armed conflict. We believe that Khartoum
has demonstrated its political will to sustainably address
the challenges in the region. We therefore support the
need to review the sanctions regime as well.
However, we are concerned by the insufficient
progress in the peace process. My delegation underscores
the need for a permanent ceasefire agreement to create
an environment conducive to the resumption of peace
talks and reinvigorate the outstanding provisions of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We call on
all parties in Darfur to meaningfully participate in an
inclusive political process led by the African Union
(AU) High-level Implementation Panel and supported
by Joint Special Representative Mamabolo.
Another issue of concern is the ongoing clashes
in the Jebel Marra area, which have a negative impact
on the humanitarian situation in Darfur. We believe
that the Security Council should consider appropriate
measures to increase the pressure on those who refuse
to cease hostilities and continue to obstruct efforts
towards lasting peace.
Other areas that need attention include food
insecurity in Darfur and the large number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) with insufficient access to basic
economic and social services. There is certainly a need
for a paradigm shift in our approach by transitioning
to peacebuilding efforts. All measures should be taken
to address the root causes of the conflict, including
the provision of basic services in remote areas and
finding durable solutions for IDPs by implementing the
UNAMID-United Nations country team’s integrated
strategic framework for Darfur for the period from
2017 to 2019. The success of our actions will require
better coordination among all United Nations entities,
as well as greater and sustainable financial support to
the Government of the Sudan by the United Nations
system and donors.
In turn, the Government’s continued cooperation
with the United Nations and the AU and increased
8/13

22/10/2018

efforts on its part to improve the effectiveness of land
management, provide access to basic services and
ensure the right of return and property restitution, as
well as increase the presence of police and the rule of
law, are also crucial. Genuinely including women in
decision-making and providing education for children
and employment for youth are also important for
enduring stability.
With regard to implementing UNAMID’s
reconfiguration, we welcome the finalization of a new
mission concept aimed at preventing a relapse and
preparing for the mission’s exit in 2020. We therefore
look forward to the conclusion of integrated planning
to implement the envisaged reconfiguration. We once
again underscore that the success of that concept will
require greater investment by the United Nations system,
while delivering as one United Nations. We therefore
note the importance of a resource mobilization strategy
that ensures long-term financial support for sustaining
peace in Darfur.
Finally, we thank Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo, UNAMID personnel, Special Envoy
Haysom, the AU High-level Implementation Panel and
others for their tireless efforts towards achieving peace
and stability in Darfur.
Mr. Ipo (Côte D’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
D’Ivoire would like to thank the Bolivian presidency
for organizing this Security Council briefing to review
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/912) on the
evolving situation in Darfur and the implementation
of the mandate of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We also thank
Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of UNAMID, for the quality of
his briefing.
Having read the report, my delegation has some
observations concerning the political and security
situation, humanitarian and human rights issues and
UNAMID operational environment.
With regard to the political and security situation,
my delegation commends the progressive stability in the
region of Darfur. However, we remain concerned about
the impasse facing the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which is the cornerstone
of the peace process. Côte D’Ivoire is convinced that
there is no alternative to a political settlement to the
crisis in Darfur. We therefore expresses our firm
support for the political process to resolve the current
18-33306

22/10/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

crisis. We call upon all stakeholders, including the
non-signatory movements, to persevere in constructive
dialogue to definitively achieve the peace that the
peoples of Darfur have aspired to for so many years.
My country also calls upon the Sudanese authorities
to work towards developing consensus-based norms
that guarantee the transparency and credibility of the
elections planned for 2020.
On the security front, my delegation commends the
efforts undertaken by the Sudanese authorities to reduce
the level of violence and ensure security in Darfur.
However, we are worried by the sporadic clashes in
the Jebel Marra region, the intercommunal conflicts,
the growing tensions between herders and farmers and
militia attacks against civilians. We therefore call upon
the warring parties to immediately cease hostilities. My
delegation also calls on development partners to provide
multifaceted support to the Sudanese authorities in the
pursuit of solutions to the root causes of the conflict.
With regard to the humanitarian and human rights
situation, my delegation notes with concern the ongoing
food insecurity, which is exacerbated by the economic
crisis and climate hazards, as well as violent clashes
that have led to the destruction of houses and the mass
exodus of the civilian population. Moreover, the climate
of insecurity and heavy rains in some parts of Jebel
Marra have made it difficult to access areas where there
are substantial humanitarian needs. My delegation is
also worried by attacks against civilians, including
sexual violence in Darfur. Côte d’Ivoire invites the
international community to redouble its efforts to
provide appropriate responses to the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and human rights violations. In
that respect, my country asks that total access to all
conflict-affected parts of Darfur be granted to United
Nations agencies. We also invite stakeholders to work,
in close collaboration with United Nations entities and
humanitarian actors, to provide appropriate assistance
to distressed populations.
My country encourages the Sudanese Government,
in collaboration with all actors, to create the conditions
for the return of displaced persons and refugees in
safety and with dignity and for their resettlement
and reintegration. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire urges
the international community to support the Sudanese
authorities through a substantial contribution to
financing the 2018 humanitarian response plan for
the Sudan.

S/PV. 8377

Concerning the operating environment for
UNAMID, Côte d’Ivoire congratulates UNAMID on
the work that is has done in often difficult conditions,
which is characterized by a surge in acts of violence
against its personnel. The presence of UNAMID in
Darfur is needed for the protection of civilians and
humanitarian workers, as well as for peacebuilding and
development in the Sudan. It is therefore essential that
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur be able to operate in an appropriate environment.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the
international community to provide the financial and
technical assistance necessary for the establishment
of strong institutions that are able to overcome the
challenges related to establishing the rule of law, justice
and security in Darfur.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the Bolivian presidency for convening
this meeting and Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special
Representative for Darfur and Head of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), for his important briefing.
Peru appreciates the recent improvement in security
in Darfur and hopes that it can be extended across the
whole territory, including the Jebel Marra area, where
clashes are still arising between Government forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid. We also
underscore the need to put an end to intercommunal
conflicts and clashes over land and natural resources,
which discourage the return of internally displaced
persons to their places of origin.
We reiterate that only a political agreement will
allow the establishment of sustainable peace and, in that
regard, we regret the fact that, despite the negotiations
under way and the efforts of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, there is still no agreement
with the non-signatory armed groups of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We deem it necessary
that the African Union Peace and Security Council
must adopt strict measures against groups that do not
join the peace process by December, as laid out in their
communiqué 19 September. That topic should also be
considered by the Council, as Mr. Mamabolo indicated.
We trust that the new UNAMID mandate and
close cooperation with the United Nations country
team will allow the root causes of the conflict to be
addressed more effectively, among other important
factors, thereby contributing to the development of the

18-333069/13

S/PV.8377

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

institutional environment required to peacefully settle
land ownership disputes.
We highlight the need for the donor community to
contribute during the transition period in the long-term
perspective required for sustaining peace. That also
requires the promotion of an institutional capacity to
protect and promote human rights, guarantee the rule
of law and combat impunity for serious human rights
violations reported in Darfur, to which women, children
and displaced persons are particularly vulnerable. We
must reiterate our condemnation of any form of sexual
violence by expressing our concern about and deep
sympathy for the violations suffered by 80 minors over
recent months, and stressing that their medical and
psychological care must be a priority.
We underscore the importance of the cooperation
framework with the United Nations announced by the
Government to counter human rights violations and
in particular sexual violence linked to conflict. In
that regard, we highlight the importance of the recent
sentencing of a member of the Sudanese Armed Forces
to 20 years’ imprisonment for the rape of a minor. We
also highlight the progress made by the Government in
preventing the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. Furthermore, we recognize the improvements
made to access for humanitarian assistance, and in
particular the decision of the Government to allow
assistance in the rebel-held areas in Blue Nile and
South Kordofan.
Before I conclude, we would like to express our
support for the benchmarks and indicators for the exit
of UNAMID proposed by the Secretary-General, and
stress the need to continue supporting Darfur during
the transition period. UNAMID will require funds
and personnel in order to build sustainable peace. We
believe that a decrease in peacekeeping costs should
allow for more investment in sustainable development.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the African
Union and the United Nations to attract potential
donors, as well as the creation of a group of friends of
the transition.
We express our support also for the recommendation
that the joint strategic review of UNAMID to be
presented in May 2019 also include an assessment of
the implementation of the indicators of progress that
I mentioned.
10/13

22/10/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
We thank Joint Special Representative Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo for his briefing and take this opportunity
to commend the work he is doing together with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
First, we welcome the report of continued stability
in Darfur, and the fact that the security situation
continued to improve during the reporting period, as
well as the decrease in clashes among communities. We
therefore commend the great efforts being made by the
Government of the Sudan to that end. We highlight the
decision of both the Government and the armed groups,
including that led by Adbul Wahid, to unilaterally extend
the ceasefire in the areas of operations until the end of
this year, and we hope that this will be an important
step towards achieving a permanent ceasefire.
Similarly, we believe that this scenario allows us
to focus on addressing the root causes of the conflict
and to move towards building sustainable peace. To that
end, we need to strengthen the rule of law in Darfur,
promote institutional capacity and the rule of law, and
secure funding for activities that contribute to recovery
and development in the area.
With regard to the proposed benchmarks, we
underscore the way in which the Secretariat has worked
on them. It is important that they be agreed with the
Government, taking into account the provisions of
resolution 2429 (2018) with regard to UNAMID’s exit by
2020. My country agrees that we must comply with certain
parameters for the Mission’s exit, but those must have
realistic deadlines. We also emphasize that it is essential
to have adequate funding to support the Government’s
efforts, and we therefore call for international
cooperation to that end.
With regard to the political situation, we welcome
the communiqué of the African Union Peace and
Security Council of 19 September, in which it
announced its decision to consider taking measures
against those who obstruct the negotiations and called
on those actors to join the peace process by December,
at the latest. We encourage the Security Council to
support the communiqué and to take decisions along
the same lines.
18-33306

22/10/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We recognize the efforts of the Government,
the members of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and UNAMID to promote
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur. We also stress the need to redouble our
efforts to resolve the remaining differences on the Doha
Document for Peace. We call on the non-signatory
movements to participate constructively in the dialogue
with the Government so as to bring about a definitive
cessation of hostilities.
We emphasize that the only possible solution
to the situation in Darfur is a political process that
addresses the root causes of the conflict, primarily the
disputes over natural resources and land ownership. We
welcome the work of United Nations programmes and
entities to review the progress made on issues related to
land ownership, as it is key to resolving disputes among
internally displaced persons and enabling their safe,
dignified and voluntary return to their places of origin.
The humanitarian situation remains one of the
most important challenges. The living conditions faced
by internally displaced persons are a matter of great
concern. We must therefore ensure unhindered access
to UNAMID and humanitarian workers in order to
meet local needs. Mine action, in particular the removal
of explosive remnants of war, is critical to guaranteeing
the safe return of internally displaced persons and the
mission’s secure operation.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need to create
financing mechanisms to prevent the resurgence
of the conflict. The support and cooperation of the
international community will be fundamental to
promoting sustainable development in Darfur, building
the capacity of the United Nations country team and
ensuring the successful withdrawal of UNAMID.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I want to express my sorrow over the passing away
of the former President of the Republic of Sudan, Field
Marshal Abdulrahman Suwar Al-Dahab, on 19 October.
I would also like to thank you, Madam President, the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for the report they jointly presented
to the Security Council (S/2018/530). I thank, as well,
His Excellency Ambassador Mamabolo, Joint Special

S/PV. 8377

Representative of the United Nations and the African
Union, for his briefing via video-teleconference and for
his tireless efforts. Finally, I thank all Council members
who have spoken in this meeting. We will definitely
take their comments into account.
Since the adoption of resolution 2429 (2018), in
July, the situation in Darfur has been stable to a great
extent, as reflected in the report (S/2018/912) before
the Council. The Sudanese Government has made
considerable efforts to achieve and sustain security and
stability, in conjunction with the reduction of the forces
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and its reconfiguration through
the deployment of additional Sudanese police and
security troops, as well as through the establishment of
additional courts in districts, states and administrative
units in Darfur, where 13 additional courts were
established. The Government has also set up courts in
Zalingei, Amri Saleh and Gulu. Courts that specialize
in family and children, public funds, consumer
protection, counter-terrorism, cybercrime and drug
crime have also been set up in Darfur. Those efforts
have reassured the people of Darfur and made them feel
more secure. The establishment of additional courts
strengthens justice, policing and the rule of law. We
hope that the Council and its members will take note of
those positive measures.
To prevent impunity, the Office of the Public
Prosecutor examined 184 cases of violations from
1 January to 30 September. Of those, 102 were referred
to court and many have already been adjudicated, while
work is still ongoing regarding the remaining cases.
Those efforts led to an increase in the rates of voluntary
return. More than 385,000 previously displaced people
were able to return. The Government and peace partners
are working on ensuring the necessary conditions for
voluntary return.
In the two resolutions adopted in June 2017 and
July 2018 (resolutions 2363 (2017) and 2429 (2018)),
the Council acknowledged that the situation has gone
back to normal. It decided that it was time to move
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and that the
transitional phase should be the responsibility of three
parties, first, the Sudanese Government; secondly, the
United Nations and the African Union, to complete the
administrative and logistical process related to the exit
of the mission; and, thirdly, the United Nations country
team specifically and the international community
generally. In adopting both resolutions, the Council has

18-3330611/13

S/PV.8377

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

practically attained the main benchmark in paragraph
24 of resolution 1769 (2007), which established
UNAMID, namely, to achieve significant improvement
in the situation in Darfur.
The Council may recall that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations decided that until the adoption
of resolution 2363 (2017), in June, the benchmarks
that were consistently highlighted and included in the
report of the Secretary-General specified significant
improvement. That is the correct approach, which led
to the adoption of resolution 2363 (2017), followed
by resolution 2429 (2018). That is why we call for the
adoption of the same approach for the 2018-2020 time
period. The implementation of the exit strategy must not
therefore be subjected to the details of the benchmarks,
but rather the benchmarks should be subjected to
significant improvement.
At this juncture, we would like to thank all Council
members who positively engaged with our proposals in
the paper that we circulated to them two weeks ago. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for giving the
Sudanese Mission more than one opportunity to clarify
its view.
We refer to the statements made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Head of the Sudanese Mission
for the current session of the General Assembly in
his meetings with the Secretary-General and the
Under-Secretary-Generals at the high-level event on
28 September. He focused on the importance of the
ongoing peacebuilding process, which is a responsibility
shared by the three parties I mentioned, to achieve full
and lasting peace. We underscore that the Sudan will
continue its initiatives, which were commended by the
Security Council in its consecutive resolutions since
2014, and which were also commended by the Human
Rights Council in its latest resolution on the Sudan,
adopted in September.
The Council might also agree with us that the latest
report of the Secretary-General on UNAMID and the
peace process in Darfur relies primarily on the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. It also relies on the
implementation of that Document to measure progress
achieved in Darfur. We strongly support that approach,
and have said so repeatedly to the Council, especially
during a period that can be described as somewhat
uncertain. Since we have agreed on the centrality and
the importance of the Doha Document, we call upon the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
12/13

22/10/2018

to attach equal importance to the Implementation
Follow-up Commission, which is composed of the
permanent members of the Council, neighbouring
countries of the Sudan, donor countries and partners
in peace, in addition to the State of Qatar and signatory
parties. The reports of that Commission issued since its
establishment, in 2011, should be a point of reference
for the Under-Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in their reports to the Security
Council and the Secretary-General. In the upcoming
period we will be consulting with Council members,
the Secretariat and the Under-Secretary-General to
present concrete proposals in order to operationalize
the Doha Document and its mechanisms.
The great, continuous improvement we have seen in
the security and humanitarian situation in all states of
Darfur since 2015 made it incumbent upon the Sudanese
Government, with the support of the international
community, to move Darfur from the phase of conflict
to the phase of building, reconstruction and achieving
the desired developmental renaissance to solidify
stability. That is why the Sudanese Government
participated actively in the high-level meeting that was
held on the margins of the General Assembly to discuss
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in Darfur.
We look forward to the implementation of the
recommendation that was adopted at that meeting,
namely, holding a donor conference to fund the
transitional phase and support development projects
that are the basis for sustainable peace and stability in
Darfur. In that regard, we support what the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia said as well as the statements
made by the Representative of Kuwait and others:
filling the gaps in Darfur will only be achieved if the
pledges are fulfilled.
Council members raised an important point, that
is, Abdul Wahid is ignoring and disregarding all
Security Council resolutions. Abdul Wahid’s disregard
of Council resolutions and Council members shows
contempt for the international legitimacy embodied
by the Council. No concrete and decisive measures
have been taken against him. If they had been, he and
his brother — who killed five from the rebel forces
recently — would not have been able to commit such
heinous crimes. We commend the statement made
by Joint Special Representative Mamabolo and the
statements made by the representatives of Ethiopia,
Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait and Kazakhstan. We cannot
18-33306

22/10/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

forget that this pressure would be exercised on a person
that controls enclaves in the mountainous area, that is a
tiny piece of land — just 5 per cent of the Jebel Marra
area, which constitutes 5 per cent to 6 per cent of the
area of Darfur.
In conclusion, the prosperity, safety and security of
the Sudanese people are a sacred duty for the Sudanese
Government. That duty is complemented by the efforts of
the Sudanese Government to achieve sustainable peace

S/PV. 8377

in the region, starting with neighbouring countries.
That is precisely what the Sudanese Government is
currently doing, and what the Council is witnessing.
We will spare no effort to achieve those goals.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

18-3330613/13
