S/PV.8421

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8421st meeting

Thursday, 13 December 2018, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2018/1065)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43643 (E)
*1843643*

S/PV.8421

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2018/1065)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1065 which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
since the issuance of the report before the Council
(S/2018/1065). Allow me to highlight a few issues and
update members on the most recent developments.
In Sao Tomé and Principe, on 22 November, the
National Assembly was inaugurated and Delfim
Santiago das Neves, from the opposition coalition,
was elected as the Assembly’s new President. On
29 November, President Evaristo do Espirito Santo
Carvalho appointed Jorge Lopes Bom Jesus, the leader
of the Movement for the Liberation of São Tomé and
Príncipe/Social Democratic Party, as the new Prime
Minister. On 3 December, the President swore in the
new Government of Mr. Bom Jesus, which is composed
of 12 Ministers, including three women, and two
Secretaries of State. I must commend all stakeholders in
2/24

13/12/2018

Sao Tomé and Principe for their commitment to resolve
their differences through constitutional mechanisms to
defuse the tensions that arose following the 7 October
legislative elections. I also congratulate the people
of Sao Tomé and Principe for their tireless efforts to
maintain peace and stability. This is a positive example
to follow.
In Gabon, the situation remains calm after the
legislative and local elections held in October. However,
speculation over President Ali Bongo Ondimba’s health
conditions remains a source of concern, while some
opposition and civil society leaders continue to criticize
the decision by the Constitutional Court to amend
article 13 of the Constitution, on 14 November, in order
to authorize the Vice-President to chair the Council of
Ministers in the event of the temporary unavailability
of the Head of State. Meanwhile, in close coordination
with key international partners, I have continued to
hold meetings with political actors in Libreville and to
urge all Gabonese to respect the Constitution and to
preserve the unity, peace and stability of the country.
I remain concerned about the situation in the NorthWest and South-West regions of Cameroon. I reaffirm
the United Nations commitment to the territorial
integrity and unity of the country. Violence has not
diminished, and allegations of human rights violations
by all sides continue to be reported. A Kenyan priest
was shot dead on 21 November in Kembong, SouthWest region, and, on 24 November, three priests from
the Archdiocese of Buea, South- West region, and one
driver were abducted by unidentified gunmen.
The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees in neighbouring Nigeria is still high. Several
schools remain closed in the South-West and NorthWest regions. I am particularly concerned about the
effect of the crisis on women and children. During my
visit to Cameroon from 17 to 22 November, I met with
key Government officials and stressed to all actors the
necessity for inclusive dialogue as a constructive and
sustainable way forward towards a peaceful resolution
to the crisis.
I welcome the efforts of the Government to provide
humanitarian access and assistance. That is a step
in the right direction. In that regard, I also appeal to
the Government to continue to safeguard access by
humanitarian partners to the populations in need and to
ensure that all human rights violations are addressed. I
was encouraged by the Government’s commitment to
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

putting in place plans to address the root causes of the
crisis, including through accelerated decentralization
and the activities of the National Commission for the
Promotion of Bilingualism and Multiculturalism. I
encourage national authorities to pursue such efforts,
including by implementing confidence-building
measures as soon as possible.
On 30 November, President Biya signed a decree
creating the National Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration, based in Yaoundé,
with regional centres in Bamenda, Buea and Mora,
respectively in the North-West, South-West and Far
North regions. The National Committee, which is under
the authority of the Prime Minister, is responsible
for organizing the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants of Boko Haram
and the armed groups in the North-West and SouthWest regions. As part of a wider dialogue framework, I
encourage the Committee to work in close consultation
with relevant groups, including civil society and
communities, in order to ensure that the particular
needs of the three regions and their populations are met.
The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) stands ready to support the Government
in its efforts to seek a lasting solution to the crisis in
the North-West and South-West regions, as well as
to continue assisting national authorities in the fight
against Boko Haram in the context of existing regional
frameworks together with the relevant regional States
and organizations.
In Chad, legislative elections, which have been due
to take place since 2015 and were originally scheduled
for November 2018, were postponed. I encourage the
Chadian authorities to hold those elections as soon
as possible and call on the international community
to provide the necessary financial support to the
Government of Chad, as required. At the same time,
I welcome the effective functioning of the national
framework for political dialogue, which is playing a key
role in preparation of the legislative elections. On 6 and
7 December, while in Chad for the ministerial meeting
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), I met
with members of the Government to discuss, among
other things, peace and security issues in Central Africa
and increasing conflicts between farmers and herders
in the context of transhumance. I was also encouraged
by the commitment of national authorities to ensure
the safety and security of the population in the Tibesti

S/PV. 8421

desert, near the border with Libya, affected by recent
attacks carried out by armed elements. I appeal to the
Chadian authorities to seek peaceful ways to address
that situation in a sustainable manner.
(spoke in French)
The recent increase in violence in the Central
African Republic poses a threat to security in the
subregion. A large part of the population remains
internally displaced and in need of humanitarian
assistance. In accordance with my mandate for the
region, I continue to urge the countries of the subregion
to ensure that their efforts coalesce in supporting the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and to maintain their
concerted and constructive commitment during the
critical phase of the implementation of a possible
agreement. Moreover, I continue to support the work
under way to operationalize and revitalize the joint
commissions comprised of the Central African Republic
and its neighbours as mechanisms for improving
cooperation among those States in the effective
management of cross-border issues. I will continue to
enlist the necessary support for the African Initiative
in cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continues to
threaten the security of the population in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I therefore encourage the African Union to
adopt a comprehensive and cautious approach in its
ongoing efforts to replace the Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA in order to
eliminate the possibility of any security vacuum that
the group could exploit to relaunch and intensify its
destabilization activities.
Violent extremism and terrorism remain a
significant threat to the security and development
of the subregion. Although much progress has been
made in the fight against Boko Haram, that terrorist
group continues to pursue its indiscriminate attacks on
defence and security forces and civilians. In response,
the countries of the subregion continue to intensify their
efforts to combat the group through better cooperation.
It is important for the States of Central and West Africa
to develop strategies that address the root causes of
the insurgency. To that end, I welcomed the holding on
29 November of an extraordinary summit of the Lake

18-436433/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

Chad Basin Commission in N’Djamena to discuss the
ways and means of responding to the recent increase in
Boko Haram’s activities in the region.
The joint summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic
Community of Central African States on peace,
security, stability and the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism, held in Lomé on 30 July, marked
an important step for both subregions in their fight
against shared security threats. UNOCA has already
begun to take action, in conjunction with the ECCAS
secretariat and in cooperation with the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), to
support the effective implementation of the Lomé
Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and the
Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism,
which sets out the decisions arrived at during the joint
summit. Accordingly, a meeting of experts from the
ECCAS secretariat and the ECOWAS Commission
has been planned to agree on a joint action plan for
the implementation of the Lomé Declaration. In the
meantime, I continue to work closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, in
coordinated support of efforts to address the threats
posed by terrorism and violent extremism.
Insecurity related to transhumance is increasing in
Central Africa. According to reports, on 22 November
eight people were killed in a clash between farmers
and herders in Abéché, in eastern Chad. In that regard,
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa is facilitating
discussions on that issue, which is transnational
in nature and has economic, security, political and
environmental implications. UNOCA will continue
to work with ECCAS to address that issue, while
maintaining close cooperation with UNOWAS, given
the issue’s interregional ramifications. During the first
half of 2019, Special Representative Chambas and I will
conduct a field visit to some of the areas affected by the
conflicts between farmers and herders. UNOCA, which
serves as the secretariat for UNSAC, supported the
holding of the forty-seventh meeting of the Committee
in N’Djamena from 3 to 7 December 2017. To date,
UNSAC is the only forum enabling Central African
States to meet regularly at the ministerial level to
discuss common security issues.
4/24

13/12/2018

The Secretary-General of ECCAS and I took that
opportunity to call on all ECCAS member States to
ratify the Central African Convention for the Control
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for
Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly — known as
the Kinshasa Convention. Together with the Director
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, we launched a joint project on
the margins of UNSAC, entitled “Support for African
States towards achieving the vision of ‘Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020’: capacity-building of Central
African States”.
In accordance with the mandate granted to it by the
Council, UNOCA remains committed to supporting
Member States and subregional organizations from
Central Africa, in particular ECCAS. While supporting
efforts to maintain peace, I urge ECCAS member
States to remain committed to the institutional reform
of that subregional organization and to accelerate that
process. I am confident that the successful completion
of its reform will be an important step for the
organization in improving its functionality, including
funding mechanisms, in order to ensure the effective
implementation of key projects in the areas of peace
and security and governance.
As recommended by the Security Council in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/17 of 10 August,
the mandate and activities of UNOCA will be subject
to strategic review in 2019, prior to the submission of
the Secretary-General’s next report on the situation in
Central Africa and the activities of the Regional Office.
In that regard, I welcome the Council’s continued
support for the specific role played by UNOCA as the
United Nations regional office responsible for political
affairs and peace and security in a subregion that has
considerable resources yet faces enormous challenges,
requiring a concerted and coordinated approach by
the international community. As Head of UNOСA,
I remain committed to providing the best possible
support to Member States and to producing positive
results in preventing conflict and maintaining peace in
Central Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Fall
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
Ms. Ghelani: Violence, extreme poverty, climate
change and population growth are driving record
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

levels of vulnerability among millions of people in
Central Africa. My briefing today focuses on the main
humanitarian crises in the region, including those
affecting the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, Chad and Cameroon.
Out of the estimated more than 180 million people
living in Central Africa, nearly 26 million people will
need humanitarian assistance and protection in 2019.
That is a dramatic increase of 22 per cent from 2018.
One person out of seven in Central Africa is caught up
in a crisis and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance
and protection. That is compared to a global calculation
of 1 in every 70 people.
Around half of those requiring humanitarian
assistance and protection in Central Africa are
found in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
humanitarian situation in the country has deteriorated
further in 2018 and is one of the world’s largest and
most complex crises. As noted in resolution 2439 (2018),
the Ebola epidemic in the north-east is occurring in a
context of much wider humanitarian needs. Ebola has
already claimed 289 lives and is still spreading. The
response is particularly difficult given the extremely
challenging security environment, with attacks against
civilians by non-State armed groups interrupting Ebola
containment efforts. To mitigate the possible impact
in the event that the outbreak spreads to neighbouring
countries, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, yesterday approved a $10 million regional
allocation from the Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF).
The welcome attention given to the Ebola outbreak
should not, however, overshadow the multitude of
simultaneous crises that affect the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In all, more than 12 million people need
humanitarian assistance. The current cholera outbreak
is the largest on record over the past 15 years. With
more than 26,000 people affected and almost 900
deaths this year, cholera has killed even more people
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo than Ebola.
The security situation has deteriorated in the east of the
country, causing new and large-scale displacements of
people in search of safety and protection. Furthermore,
the influx of more than 360,000 Congolese nationals
returning from Angola is adding pressure to the
fragile Kasai province, already affected by years of
inter-ethnic conflicts.

S/PV. 8421

I have just returned from the Central African
Republic, where, as Special Representative Fall noted in
his briefing, the humanitarian situation is also extremely
dire. Areas that were relatively stable in the past, such
as the south-east, where recovery and development
programmes are about to be rolled out, have this year
relapsed into conflict. The escalating violence has
taken a heavy toll on the people of the Central African
Republic, with 2.9 million people — well over half the
population — now requiring humanitarian assistance.
The number of internally displaced persons has reached
more than 640,000 — an increase of over 60 per cent in
this year alone. One in four children in the country is
displaced. While the needs have grown, the increasing
number of security incidences, including direct attacks
on aid organizations and their staff, has made it even
harder to access the people requiring assistance.
As previously noted, the worsening situation in
the Central African Republic has also had a significant
impact on neighbouring countries. Cameroon is today
hosting 268,000 refugees from the Central African
Republic, while Chad is hosting more than 100,000
refugees. That translates into a significant burden on
already vulnerable host communities, and many of the
refugees have few prospects of returning home to the
Central African Republic in the near future.
Furthermore, Chad and Cameroon, in addition to
Nigeria and the Niger, are seriously affected by the crises
involving Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. Now in
its ninth year, that regional crisis has led 2.4 million
people to flee their homes, and some 10.8 million
people currently require humanitarian assistance and
protection. Continuing insecurity remains a major
impediment to people being able to return home and
re-establish their livelihoods. The protection situation
in the Lake Chad basin remains particularly serious,
with frequent killings, kidnappings, suicide bombings
and other attacks attributed to Boko Haram, as well as
high levels of sexual and gender-based violence. Girls
remain at serious risk of kidnappings and continue to
be used for suicide attacks. As Special Representative
Fall noted, the situation for women and children is
particularly concerning.
Beyond the regional crisis in the Lake Chad
basin and the influx of refugees from the Central
African Republic, Cameroon is facing an additional
humanitarian crisis in its South-West and North-West
regions, as already expressed. Since the Council was
last briefed by Special Representative Fall on Central

18-436435/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

13/12/2018

Africa half a year ago (see S/PV.8284), internal
displacement in those parts of Cameroon has tripled and
today counts more than 430,000 internally displaced
persons. In addition, more than 30,000 Cameroonians
have fled across the border to Nigeria, seeking refuge.
This is now one of the fastest-growing displacement
crises in Africa. The majority of the displaced persons
are hiding in dense forests, without adequate shelter
and lacking food, water and basic services. Schools and
markets are also being disrupted and there are alarming
health needs.

protection of civilians — a core issue on the Security
Council’s agenda — is of the utmost importance in
that region. Our hope is that today’s discussion will
take us further towards a collective response that is
commensurate with the needs and aspirations of the
people in Central Africa.

As highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/1065), we note with grave concern the
deteriorating situation with respect to the protection
of civilians, including reported killings, the burning
of homes and villages, extortion and kidnappings in
the South-West and North-West regions of Cameroon.
There have been multiple attacks on schools and threats
against students and teachers, including two large-scale
abductions and subsequent releases last month of 78
students and 3 teachers in Bamenda and 20 students
in Kumba.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Special Representative Fall and Ms. Ghelani of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for briefing the Council today
and for all that their respective teams are doing in what
is a complicated and difficult region, as they have both
set out.

Despite limited access, humanitarian partners are
scaling up their presence in those parts of Cameroon.
Food distribution has so far reached more than
17,000 people and some 4,000 people have received
shelter materials. However, severe underfunding has had
a significant impact on the humanitarian community’s
ability to respond to the escalating crisis. The main
sources of funding are currently CERF — whose
rapid response allocation will be depleted at the end
of this month — and the agencies’ own internal,
unearmarked funding.
The lack of funding experienced by humanitarian
partners in Cameroon reflects a broader regional trend.
This year, every single humanitarian response plan in
Central Africa — for Burundi, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Chad and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — is funded far less than the global average
of 56 per cent. Cameroon is the least funded of all, at
39 per cent of the requirements. This needs to change
if the humanitarian response in the region is to be fully
effective, and we are calling on Member States for their
urgent support.
Over the past six months, not only have the
humanitarian crises in Central Africa persisted, but
several have grown further. Many of the crises are
rooted in ongoing armed conflicts. Strengthening the
6/24

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

Today, I will address issues that affect the region
as a whole: the situation in the Anglophone north-west
and south-west regions of Cameroon and the impact of
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. I will not address
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi or the
Central African Republic, as we have the opportunity
to discuss these issues in other Council meetings.
The United Kingdom welcomes the holistic
approach that the Special Representative has taken,
both with this report (S/2018/1065) and to promote
peace and stability in Central Africa. An approach that
covers the political, humanitarian and human rights
situation and addresses root causes is crucial to conflict
prevention and resolution. We also welcome the work of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to drive forward the women and peace and
security agenda under resolution 1325 (2000). We
encourage UNOCA to continue to focus on building the
capacity of regional organizations to enable delivery of
their early-warning mechanisms, conflict prevention
and peacebuilding initiatives.
I would like to focus now on a country of particular
concern in the region — that is, Cameroon. I should
start by saying that the United Kingdom recognizes
the many positive contributions Cameroon is making
to stability in the region, including its continued
commitment to the fight against Boko Haram and
the sanctuary that Cameroon offers to refugees from
Nigeria and the Central African Republic. However, we
are concerned by the reality of the rapidly deteriorating
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

security and humanitarian situation in the North-West
and South-West regions of Cameroon.
In particular, we are concerned about high levels
of displacement and take very seriously Ms. Ghelani’s
warning that this is now one of the fastest growing
displacement crises in Africa. Reports of human
rights violations and abuses perpetrated by armed
separatist groups and Government forces — including
extrajudicial killings, other killings, abductions,
restrictions of movement and restrictions of access to
health and education, as described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report — mean that we must always be alert to
the risk of the situation escalating, affecting the broader
peace and stability of the Central African region. We
have already seen over 30,000 Cameroonians flee into
Nigeria. If grievances are not addressed, tensions are
likely to increase further.
These concerns are not new. I raised them in
the Council’s discussion in March, as did others (see
S/PV.8212). Unfortunately, we have not seen the action
needed to address the situation and, since March, it has
deteriorated further. We welcome President Biya’s recent
pledge to address the situation, but words alone will not
improve things. We strongly urge the Government of
Cameroon to take urgent action, including by actively
addressing the situation through inclusive dialogue
with the Anglophone leadership to address underlying
issues; undertaking confidence-building measures
in order to defuse tensions and build conditions for
dialogue, including the release of political detainees
and implementing the Government’s own commitments
on decentralization and the recommendations of the
National Commission for the Promotion of Bilingualism
and Multiculturalism; and allowing full humanitarian
access and access for human rights monitors to all
parts of the country. I would also hope and expect
that our own Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral will have access to wherever he wanted to
go. Accountability must also be ensured for all those
responsible for human rights violations and abuses. We
also call on the armed groups involved to cease their
attacks on civilians; to allow full humanitarian access
and access to human rights monitors; and to engage
with the Government on these issues.
The United Kingdom, for its part, is committed to
supporting Cameroon, and I am pleased to announce
today that the United Kingdom is contributing
$3.1 million to the United Nations response in the
Anglophone regions. That is equivalent to 20 per cent

S/PV. 8421

of this year’s flash appeal for the Anglophone crisis to
address immediate humanitarian and medical needs.
We strongly encourage other Member States to fund
this as an important part of the conflict prevention
effort. Preventing a crisis costs significantly less than
resolving one.
We have raised our concerns quietly and directly
with the Government so far, and we are committed to
working with the Government of Cameroon in every
way we can to help resolve this situation. But I fear
that, unless action is taken and the situation improves,
concern over the situation in Cameroon is likely to
increase among Security Council members and become
a more prominent part of our discussions.
In addition to Cameroon, I would like to raise
our ongoing concerns about the humanitarian and
security situation in the wider Lake Chad basin, which
continues to deteriorate. The United Kingdom has
played its part in providing humanitarian support, as
well as significant support particularly to assist the
Nigerian security forces in the fight against Boko
Haram and Islamic State in West Africa (ISWA), but
this matter needs the ongoing focus and support of the
international community.
The deteriorating security situation in northeastern Nigeria is of particular concern and one, I
note, that is shared by the Secretary-General. ISWA
has increased the frequency, range and sophistication
of its attacks and has attacked forward operating
military bases in north-eastern Nigeria. The execution
by ISWA of humanitarian workers like Saifura Khorsa
and Hauwa Liman, who were both abducted while
providing antenatal care to communities in desperate
need, is a telling reminder of the brutality of the
activities of ISWA.
Let me conclude by reiterating that we have
an opportunity to prevent further conflict and the
inevitable suffering and insecurity together. I hope we
can all act to do so.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We thank Special
Representative Fall and Ms. Ghelani for their briefings
today and for their tireless and very important efforts.
They can count on our support, both in the preventive
action of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and the humanitarian efforts
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

18-436437/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

13/12/2018

Advocating for an increased focus on preventive
diplomacy has been a priority for Sweden throughout
our tenure on the Council. One of the most effective
operational tools the United Nations has for preventing
conflict is precisely its regional offices, which
are uniquely positioned to engage in constructive
dialogue and provide political accompaniment, with
local knowledge, continuity and respect. They can
take a comprehensive approach to challenges and
support countries in addressing the root causes of
conflict, as well as effective and coordinated regional
responses, including to promote regional integration,
cross-border cooperation and development. The
work of these important regional offices and of our
regional envoys must therefore continue to be actively
supported, and we believe that their capacity should be
further strengthened.

In the spirit of preventive diplomacy, the
deteriorating situation in Cameroon must be addressed.
We are deeply concerned over the acute humanitarian
situation that I have described today and the massive
displacement caused by the crisis in the North-West
and South-West regions of the country. Continued
disturbing reports of grave violence, including
extrajudicial killings, abductions and restrictions of
movement, must be investigated, and accountability for
all human rights violations and abuses must be ensured.
A continued crisis risks having serious regional
implications, including on the fight against terrorism
in the Lake Chad basin and efforts to bring peace to
the Central African Republic. As we have heard today,
that is the fastest-growing displacement situation,
which represents a clear threat to international peace
and security.

My Foreign Minister, Ms. Margot Wallström,
witnessed first-hand the devastating effects of climate
change on local communities, especially women,
during her joint visit to Chad this summer with Special
Representative Fall and Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed. Climate-related security risks
are among the challenges that require both a holistic
approach and a regional response. We welcome the
expanded analysis on climate and security in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1065). We hope to
see that approach also replicated in other regions and in
all parts of the United Nations system.

To change that trajectory, the post-electoral period
should offer a window of opportunity. We therefore
urge all parties to immediately end the violence call
on the Government to urgently take concrete steps to
build genuine trust and confidence, as underlined by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
this morning. That includes engaging in an inclusive,
mediated dialogue with communities in the Englishspeaking region, as well as to release political detainees.
Safe and unhindered humanitarian access must
always be ensured, in accordance with humanitarian
principles. Access should also be provided to human
rights monitors and the media to help establish the facts.

The increase in conflicts between farmers and
herders, aggravated by the impact of climate change,
is a worrisome development. We welcome the regional
plan to reinforce conflict prevention and early-warning
mechanisms at the national and regional levels, with
the participation of women and youth. We appreciate
UNOCA’s efforts in that regard.
The situation in Central Africa has been dominated
by elections in a number of countries in the subregion,
as we have just heard. We must continue to ensure the
equal and unhindered participation of women in those
processes, including possibilities to run for office.
The situation room platform, set up by the Women’s
International League for Peace and Freedom in
Cameroon, is a good example of how women can be
encouraged to take part in elections. Operationalizing
the regional action plan for the women and peace and
security agenda remains critical, and related initiatives
by UNOCA and regional organizations should
be supported.
8/24

United international engagement is needed to assist
Cameroon in managing the crisis, including building
trust and overcoming divisions. International support
is also needed to address the humanitarian situation.
We therefore encourage the Government to seek
support from the United Nations and regional actors.
If the crisis continues to deteriorate and steps are not
taken to address the situation, the Council should
consider options for more active engagement in a spirit
of prevention.
The security situation in the wider Lake Chad
basin remains one of deep concern. The number of
attacks carried out by Boko Haram has increased
in recent months and the humanitarian situation is
not improving, as we have heard. The international
community needs to do more to support national
and regional efforts in addressing the situation. We
welcome UNOCA’s continued support to the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and the implementation
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

of the regional strategy for stabilization, recovery
and resilience of the areas affected by Boko Haram.
Sweden will continue to contribute, including with
substantial humanitarian assistance, as well as through
the European Union’s development cooperation and
support, to the Multinational Joint Task Force in the
fight against Boko Haram.
In conclusion, United Nations regional offices,
including UNOCA, have an important role to play as
the United Nations moves towards a prevention-centred
approach in the spirit of sustaining peace. Many of
the security risks that we face today, such as climate
change and terrorism, are not bound by national borders
but will, by default, need regional and international
responses. Beyond our membership on the Council,
we will continue to advocate for effective conflict
prevention, including through supporting regional
responses by United Nations regional offices and
regional organizations. We expect to remain a major
humanitarian donor in response to the huge needs
outlined by Director Ghelani today. We urge others to
join us and respond to her appeal this morning.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Fall and Director
Ghelani for their briefings today. Their work is vital to
a region facing a wide range of political, economic and
social challenges, particularly in Cameroon, on which I
will focus my remarks.
The security and humanitarian conditions in
Cameroon’s North-West and South-West regions have
significantly deteriorated since the previous briefing to
the Security Council on the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), held in June (see
S/PV.8284). Violence continues to escalate, obstructing
vital humanitarian aid delivery to over 430,000
internally displaced persons and blocking health and
education services to rural children.
October was the most violent month on record in
Cameroon in recent years. Judging from anecdotal
reports, we fear that November will surpass October
as the bloodiest month on record. We do not want to
see that horrible trend continue again in December. The
violence must stop now. Violence between Government
and Anglophone separatists has resulted in killings
and abductions of civilians, including a United States
missionary, who was killed on 30 October.
Faced with mounting insecurity, tens of thousands
of Cameroonians have fled to neighbouring Nigeria, as

S/PV. 8421

we have heard, while hundreds of thousands have been
internally displaced and need humanitarian assistance.
The stakes in Cameroon are too high for that crisis to
continue unaddressed. Cameroon remains an essential
security partner in the fight against Boko Haram and
the Islamic State in West Africa, including as a member
of the Multinational Joint Task Force. The continuing
crisis threatens to detract from our mutual security
objectives in the Lake Chad basin.
The United States calls for an immediate and broadbased reconciliatory dialogue, without preconditions,
between the Government of Cameroon and separatists
in the North-West and South-West regions. We urge all
sides to forswear violence, restore peace and resolve
their grievances through political dialogue. We note
that in his inaugural address on 6 November President
Biya expressed confidence that “there is an honourable
way out in everyone’s interest”. We encourage President
Biya to make good on his commitment to accelerate the
decentralization process and adopt the recommendations
of the Cameroonian National Commission for the
Promotion of Bilingualism and Multiculturalism.
The creation of a Government-led humanitarian
assistance coordination centre is a promising
development. However, the Government has done little
to address concerns over its own lack of respect for the
humanitarian principles of neutrality and impartiality
and the guarantees of unhindered access to conflictaffected populations. We urge the Government of
Cameroon to prioritize respect for humanitarian
principles and ensure unobstructed access for United
Nations agencies and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations assisting conflict-affected populations.
The United States believes that UNOCA, through
the good offices of Special Representative Fall, could
provide technical assistance and mediation support
to facilitate a broad-based reconciliatory dialogue
without preconditions. We hope that the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union (AU) and the AU
Commission will enhance their efforts to support the
peace process. We encourage them to coordinate with
UNOCA in that effort.
A peaceful and stable Cameroon is critical to
regional stability in Central Africa, and both deserves
and requires the continued and close attention of the
Council. As noted by our Assistant Secretary of State for
African Affairs last week, the last thing we need, given

18-436439/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

the challenges in the region, is for a disproportionate
response by security forces to result in the growing
radicalization and hardening of separatist groups.
In the presidential statement that we adopted in
August (S/PRST/2018/17) the Security Council called
for a strategic review of UNOCA’s mandate by 1 August
2019. We look forward to further discussions in the
coming months to make sure that UNOCA’s mandate
is appropriately focused on the most pressing political
challenges in the Central African region and that they
are well-coordinated with the four United Nations
missions operating in the same geographic area, so as
to ensure that our efforts have maximum impact and
maximum efficiency.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): First,
allow me to thank Special Representative Fall and
Ms. Ghelani of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their very
clear briefings today. Let me also thank their teams for
the very important work that they are doing.
I will focus on three issues today: first, the situation
in Cameroon; secondly, the need to have comprehensive
risk assessments for the root causes of conflict; and,
thirdly, the importance of coordination among the
different United Nations offices in the region.
Teachers and lawyers in the Anglophone region of
Cameroon asked for their minority rights to be protected
in a peaceful protest two years ago. Today the health
and education sectors are shut down. Indiscriminate
violence has led to civilian deaths, reportedly by the
Cameroon army and the armed groups. There are over
437,000 people displaced, and there is a clear risk of
spillover to the wider region. The escalation of violence
shows that conflict prevention requires more than just
words; it must be followed up with action.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
the territorial integrity of Cameroon. We call on
the Government to start a meaningful and inclusive
dialogue with all relevant parties, including with
women representatives. We fully support the work of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
and call on the Government of Cameroon to implement
confidence-building measures, including the release of
political prisoners. We thank the Special Representative
for his recent visit to the country and for giving this
crisis the attention it deserves.
10/24

13/12/2018

Human rights violations by all parties need to
be investigated and the perpetrators should be held
to account. We call on the Government of Cameroon
and armed groups to grant full access to human rights
observers and humanitarian workers to the Anglophone
regions. To address the needs of the displaced
population, increased funding of the humanitarian
relief plan is essential.
With regard to my second point, on the need to
strengthen joint and comprehensive risk assessments
for all root causes of conflict, the situation in the Lake
Chad basin continues to be a matter of concern. As
highlighted in the two briefings today, the situation
provides a breeding ground for organizations like Boko
Haram and causes instability and displacement.
During our presidency of the Council in March, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands organized an open briefing
on the root causes of conflict in the Lake Chad basin (see
S/PV.8212). Briefers, Council members and affected
countries confirmed the urgent need to address the root
causes of conflict, including climate change and water
stress in the Lake Chad basin. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/17, on UNOCA, which was adopted in
August, highlights the needs for risk assessments and
long-term strategies to support stabilization and build
resilience in the Central African region.
As confirmed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1065) in a section specifically addressing the
topic, the adverse effects of climate change continue to
be a threat to regional stability. UNOCA has an important
role to play in developing sound risk assessments and
ensuring conflict- and climate-sensitive programming.
We encourage UNOCA to continue to work with the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the African Union, the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
the Economic Community of Central African States and
other relevant organizations to build on the information
in the report of the Secretary-General through further
joint risk assessments for climate- and water-related
security risks.
That brings me to my third and final point, on
cooperation among the United Nations offices in the
region. Given the complex situation in Central Africa, it
is important that the different United Nations offices in
the region maximize their cooperation and complement
each other. It is essential that each office focus on its
niche role. The Kingdom of the Netherlands sees a clear
role for UNOCA to focus on conflict prevention, given
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

its unique position as a regional office. In that light, we
welcome the Special Representative’s engagement on
the process of peaceful elections in countries that are
not served by other United Nations offices, including
in Sao Tomé and Principe and Gabon, as well as on
cross-border issues, including transhumance and
farmer-herder conflicts. It is important that the Special
Representative be allowed to use his good offices in
the best possible way in the countries he focuses on.
We encourage all United Nations offices in the region
to consider how to further increase cooperation and
efficiency in the future.
In conclusion, the important work of UNOCA and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
show us that there are situations in Central Africa that
are at risk of becoming a threat to international peace
and security. We hope that, the next time the Council
meets on this item, we can see that joint efforts by the
United Nations and Governments in the region will
have led to tangible results.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
grateful for the convening of this briefing and the
briefings provided by Mr. François Louncény Fall and
Ms. Reena Ghelani.
At the outset, we want to acknowledge and support
the important work being carried out by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in
harmonizing efforts and forging strategic partnerships
to tackle cross-border threats and the root causes of
conflicts affecting the Central African subregion,
which, in many cases, is carried out under difficult
political and security conditions. We underscore the
consistent and systematic deployment of good offices
and the work of the Office to bring together and arrive
at agreement among various stakeholders to support
various peace processes. We also commend the support
UNOCA has provided in the holding of elections in four
countries of the subregion and its promotion of greater
participation by women in politics.
We would also like to highlight the political dialogue
and confidence-building measures that UNOCA has
been fostering among political and civil society actors
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in view of the
upcoming elections to be held in December and in line
with the political agreement of 31 December 2016. We
also acknowledge and express our gratitude to UNOCA
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for the work they are undertaking in Cameroon

S/PV. 8421

and the important role that they are both called upon
to play in order to prevent a further deterioration of
the humanitarian and security situation in the NorthWestern and South-Western regions of the country and
to promote better respect for human rights.
We note with sorrow and concern the repeated
escalations of violence in that country and in much of the
subregion, which continues to claim lives. We condemn
the terrorism of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region
and of the so-called Lord’s Resistance Army in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Political instability, institutional fragility,
extreme poverty and environmental degradation, which
have been exacerbated by climate change, continue to
produce forced displacement, humanitarian crises,
violent extremism and massive human rights violations,
including gender-based violence. In that connection,
we welcome UNOCA’s participation in and support
to various conferences and workshops designed to
strengthen local capacities to address those challenges
and protect the most vulnerable groups through holistic
and consistent strategies that are in line with the
objective of building sustainable peace.
We emphasize the relevance of initiatives aimed
at investigating and dismantling the links between
terrorist groups and criminal organizations involved
in the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
poaching. We welcome the European Union’s support
for those efforts, which are equally important in
protecting the environment.
We also stress the importance of promoting
greater participation by young people in the political
and economic life of their respective countries, in
accordance with the study carried out by UNOCA,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and UNESCO. We would like to recognize UNOCA’s
efforts to foster adequate coordination with regional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States. Cooperation
among those organizations should foster synergies to
achieve more effective execution of their respective
mandates, under the overarching objective of building
sustainable peace.
I conclude by stressing that the international
community must increase its support to those most
in need in the Central African subregion and to
efforts to address the root causes of conflicts and

18-4364311/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

humanitarian crises and guarantee free and safe access
for humanitarian and human rights agencies.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First and foremost, allow me to thank
Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), and his
team for the comprehensive and enlightening briefing
on the activities of UNOCA in Central Africa.
In the light of the important work being undertaken
by UNOCA in the subregion, allow me, on behalf of
my delegation, to support the extension of UNOCA’s
mandate to 31 August 2021 so that it can continue to
fulfil its mandate to hone and take a comprehensive
and integrated approach to the areas of capacity
development for conflict prevention and peacebuilding
in the Central African subregion.
Strengthening the cooperation framework signed
in June 2016 between UNOCA and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
secretariat and closely monitoring the tripartite
agreement signed on 23 May 2011 in Khartoum by the
participating parties are essential to ensuring security
along their shared borders, given the porous nature of
those borders, which is a source of tension. That tension
poses major challenges, which are linked in particular
to arms trafficking, piracy, transnational organized
crime, the proliferation of armed groups, mercenary
activity and maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea.
We urge UNOCA to continue to work hard to create
synergies to promote bilateral cooperation among
neighbouring countries to strengthen cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations — in particular
the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission — on matters of peace, security, and
conflict prevention. In that context, we thank the
Government of the Republic of Chad for hosting the
forty-seventh ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), which took place from 3 to
7 December in N’Djamena. I would like to point out that
some of the issues addressed at that meeting concern the
mercenary activity in the Central African subregion.
That phenomenon is currently of great concern to
the region, given the exponential increases in the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons and the conflicts
12/24

13/12/2018

taking place in the region, which pose a serious threat
to the peace and security of the States of the subregion.
It should be noted that the mercenary activity that we
have witnessed in the past years is being perpetrated
by adventurers and illegal uncontrolled entities whose
objective is always to destabilize Governments and sow
desolation in the countries they seek to invade.
I would like to recall the statement made by the
President of the Security Council dated 10 August
2018 (S/PRST/2018/17), in which the Council recalls
the important work carried out by the Special
Representative and Head of UNOCA over the past three
years as set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/521). It acknowledges, inter alia, that UNOCA
plays an important role in facilitating inclusive dialogue
in Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, the Republic
of the Congo, Sao Tome and Principe and Chad, and
in promoting stability in the region and preventing
and mitigating electoral and post-electoral crises. I
would also like to recall the letter dated 16 July 2015
addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the Secretary-General (S/2015/554), which informs him
of the extension of UNOCA’s mandate to enable the
Regional Office to cover the electoral cycle process in
the subregion.
As we are a country of the Central African subregion
that is integrated into its regional and subregional
economic communities, Equatorial Guinea encourages
Governments and all political actors implicated in
the ongoing politico-military crises of our region to
continue on the path of inclusive internal dialogue and
close regional and subregional cooperation, bearing
in mind that if the subregion in particular and Africa
in general succeed in overcoming these challenges,
it would facilitate the achievement of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063. It would be difficult to achieve
that without the participation and involvement of
political actors and the different strata of society in an
inclusive dialogue.
In that perspective, and aware that national
cohesion and the peaceful resolution of conflict can be
achieved only through inclusive national dialogue, His
Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, convened on
18 July our sixth national political dialogue round
table, in which Mr. Fall and his team participated.
That initiative enabled the pardoning of all political
prisoners on 2 October in commemoration of Equatorial
Guinea’s fiftieth anniversary of independence, which
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

helped bring calm and promote harmony throughout
the country.
We countries of the subregion are highly mindful
of the efforts of the Government of Cameroon to
reach a peaceful and dialogue-based solution to the
internal crisis being faced by the Anglophone regions
of that brother country. We call on the international
community to support the Government’s efforts and
to provide UNOCA with the means necessary for it
to continue to carry out its constructive role. The fact
that presidential elections were held in Cameroon a few
weeks ago without major incidents is proof that those
efforts are being carried out. Let us not limit ourselves
to making calls to the Government of Cameroon, let
us also provide it with support so that it can carry out
those efforts to overcome the crisis.
Let me conclude my statement by congratulating
Mr. Fall, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, for the excellent work he is doing
in our subregion; for highlighting his ongoing contact
with our Governments; for conducting frequent visits
and promoting dialogue; and for his presence at all the
major political events in each of our countries. All of
that gives him an exhaustive knowledge of the day-today political events in the subregion, as demonstrated
by the briefing he gave us today.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me start by expressing
our gratitude to Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
comprehensive and informative briefings.
Central Africa continues to face serious political
and security challenges; however, we have noted
some positive developments towards the consolidation
of democratic governance. As electoral processes
dominate the political agenda in the region, we
commend the fact that several of them took place
without major incidents. Nevertheless, further steps
towards consolidating stability are needed. Building
trust among all the stakeholders remains an essential
precondition for the establishment of a stable and
constructive political environment.
We praise the important work carried out
by UNOCA in terms of good offices, preventive

S/PV. 8421

diplomacy and mediation, as well as in support of
the United Nations and regional initiatives to achieve
peace and security in the region. At the same time, we
remain concerned about the human rights situation in
some countries of the subregion. Poland calls on the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi to take immediate steps to prevent further
violations and abuses in that regard and to ensure
respect for the fundamental freedoms for all citizens.
We also appeal to the authorities of Cameroon to take
the necessary mediation efforts aimed at a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in the South-West and NorthWest Anglophone regions.
The security situation in Central Africa remains
complex and fragile. Many sources of instability
persist, including cross-border threats such as illicit
trafficking in wildlife and natural resources, as well as
violent conflicts between herders and farmers. Climate
change is a root cause of conflicts and a threat multiplier
in Central Africa. We must emphasize adaptation to
climate change and at the same time work to strengthen
countries’ resilience to such threats.
Acts of terrorism and violent extremism also
continue to hamper socioeconomic development.
We are concerned about the fact that Boko Haram
and the Lord’s Resistance Army continue to pose a
serious threat to security across significant parts of the
region. Poland condemns all acts of violence by those
groups, including attacks on civilians, the recruitment
of children and sexual and gender-based violence. In
that context, we welcome the African Union Peace and
Security Council’s decision to maintain its regional
cooperation initiative for eliminating the Lord’s
Resistance Army, and hope that it will obtain renewed
support from other international partners. It is important
that the underlying causes of these problems receive an
urgent and consistent response, especially through the
promotion of good governance and economic reforms,
since the unstable situations in some States of Central
Africa are the main cause of the humanitarian crisis
that persists throughout the region.
In conclusion, Poland fully supports the actions
undertaken by the United Nation and the European
Union in Central Africa. At the same time, we recognize
the key role of the relevant regional partners and
organizations and commend their efforts to address the
challenges to peace and security and enhance regional
cooperation. I also want to express our full support to
Special Representative Fall and the staff of UNOCA.

18-4364313/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

We are grateful for their continuing efforts to advance
peace and security in Central Africa.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. François Louncény Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Reena Ghelani for their information on the situation
in the Central African subregion.
We firmly believe that the approach that is
fundamental to effective crisis prevention and conflict
resolution in Africa is one that combines a leading role
for the African people themselves with support for
their efforts on the part of the international community.
In that connection, we welcome the efforts by the
countries of Central Africa to counter the threats and
challenges that they face, including through the joint
programmes and initiatives to combat Boko Haram and
ensure maritime security. Those efforts unquestionably
need additional international support. In that context,
we note the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa in strengthening peace and
security in the region, as well as Special Representative
Fall’s personal good offices.
It is important to continue to expand our
engagement with regional stakeholders, including the
Economic Community of Central African States. We
concur with the assessment in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/1065) that Central Africa is dealing with
a huge number of challenges on the security, political
and economic fronts. Boko Haram’s terrorist activity
remains one of the chief threats to regional peace and
stability and also brings with it serious humanitarian
consequences, particularly in the Lake Chad basin
region. In that context, we must not lose sight of the
fact that the destabilization in the region assumed
catastrophic proportions in the wake of the collapse
of statehood in neighbouring Libya. The situation in
Libya is still far from normalized and continues to have
negative repercussions for the situation in the region
in general. We welcome the efforts undertaken by
Africans themselves to eradicate the terrorist threat,
and we hope that the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel can make a meaningful contribution to
stabilizing the security situation in the subregion.
The situation in the Central African Republic is
very worrying. Armed groups have engaged in brutal
clashes over resources and territory. We support
President Touadera’s efforts to hold an inclusive
political dialogue, work quickly to reform the security
14/24

13/12/2018

sector and improve the armed forces’ capacity. For our
part, we will continue to fully support the country’s
nascent national reconciliation, acting in coordination
with the authorities in Bangui and with the African
Union and the leadership of the Sudan, as well as
with other stakeholders seeking ways to normalize the
situation there.
One of the other factors behind the instability in the
Central Africa is piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. In the
light of the unceasing attacks on vessels along the coast
of Somalia, a dangerous trend is emerging. We must
not forget the importance of a comprehensive approach
to combating piracy. We hope that with the support of
the international community the pan-regional efforts
will help to solve the problem of piracy in an area as
economically important as the Gulf of Guinea.
We note that the destructive capacity of the Lord’s
Resistance Army has shrunk considerably in the past
few years. Its numbers have fallen and its activity is
limited to sparsely populated areas in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe that it should no longer be seen as
a significant threat to peace and security in the region.
Like my colleagues, I would like to briefly touch
on Cameroon. We are monitoring developments there
closely. The information we have is troubling but so
far extremely contradictory and not something that we
should base any hasty or far-reaching decisions on. We
understand the concerns of our British and American
colleagues about the information on violations of the
rights of the English-speaking population. I have to
say that I can only hope that London and Washington
will display an equally principled attitude to the
infringements on the rights of the Russian-speaking
population that are happening right under our
colleagues’ noses in the Baltic States and Ukraine.
With respect to Cameroon, it is important not to cross
the line between prevention and intervention in States’
internal affairs. There is every evidence that a number
of our colleagues have come very close to that. For
the time being we have every reason to believe that
Cameroon is capable of dealing with this tricky issue
by itself. We are willing to help, but only if our partners
in Cameroon deem it necessary. At this stage, we urge
all the parties in Cameroon to refrain from violence and
focus on substantive national dialogue.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that
the threats and challenges that the Central African
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

S/PV. 8421

region is dealing with today are closely entwined and
interrelated, while the States themselves are highly
dependent on one another. The destabilization of the
situation in one country is liable to ignite the entire
subregion, shattering the security of its neighbours. It
is therefore exceedingly important to keep a finger on
the pulse of evolving events, for which the activity of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
is useful.

by the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation,
particularly efforts aimed at achieving a direct dialogue
between the Government and the main armed groups,
continues to be a priority. Similarly, the progress
made in implementing the 31 December 2016 political
agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
an important step towards ensuring long-term stability
in the region, and UNOCA’s support to those efforts is
also instrumental.

Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. François Fall, Special Representative of the
Secretary General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), for
his briefing on the political and security situations in
the Central African region, including the Lake Chad
basin, and the activities of UNOCA during the last
six months. I also want to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for her briefing.

As we all agree, despite many efforts, the armed
violence in the eastern and north-eastern regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Central
African Republic, as well as the recent repeated attacks
by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin and other
intercommunal conflicts there continue to present
serious obstacles to peace and stability in the region.
The deteriorating humanitarian situations in the Central
African Republic and the Lake Chad basin, chiefly
owing to land degradation and diminishing resources,
are creating chronic food insecurity, malnutrition
and loss of livelihoods. Those are hard facts that
cannot be ignored, and it is important to ensure that
the international community and the Council provide
the necessary support. We should also note the
displacements that are triggering humanitarian crises,
including return movements that are exacerbating the
problem in the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
greater Kasai region and Tanganyika province. We
agree with the Secretary-General’s report that the
increased frequency of attacks by armed groups in
the Beni area, which continue to hinder the efforts to
prevent the Ebola virus disease outbreak in North Kivu
province from spreading, has been another challenge
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We note that the major political developments
in the region during the period covered by the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2018/1065)
were
related to the holding of elections and preparations
for the presidential, parliamentary and local elections
scheduled to be held on 23 December in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that connection, we want
to congratulate Mr. Fall for using his good offices in
helping to prevent election-related violence. We would
also like to recognize the contributions of the regional
actors, international partners, religious organizations
and local community leaders who are helping to resolve
hostilities, in some cases by facilitating the cessation of
military or insurgency operations.
Fights for resources in areas such as illegal mining,
the exploitation of wildlife and forest products, cattle
rustling and transhumance-related clashes are taking
more aggressive forms in some countries in the region.
In that connection, we want to encourage UNOCA
to continue its critical role, particularly in support of
inter-State and intercultural mediation efforts.
We should encourage combined mediation efforts,
law enforcement and political dialogue involving
local communities in order to reduce long-term
socioeconomic tensions. United Nations peacekeeping
missions and other agencies must work to help reduce
and avoid cross-border conflicts. The implementation
of the peace process in the Central African Republic led

We believe that the efforts of countries in the Central
African region to stabilize their economic and monetary
situations, as well as the reform activities of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community aimed
at improving real gross domestic product growth, are
an encouraging sign of the prospects for development.
The support of the international community in that
regard will be vital to ensuring success across the
entire spectrum of socioeconomic development in the
region. Enhancing coordination between the United
Nations, the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and other international
partners will be essential to facilitating coherent and

18-4364315/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

effective stability, reinforced by the impetus provided
by economic development.
We support the recent validation of a stabilization,
recovery and resilience strategy for the region by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission in
the areas affected by activities of Boko Haram, as well
as the continued commitment of the troop-contributing
countries to the Multinational Joint Task Force in their
fight against terrorism and transboundary crimes. We
also appreciate the decision of the African Union Peace
and Security Council concerning the need to maintain
the African Union’s regional cooperation initiative for
the elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, as the
security vacuum in the area is worsening. In Cameroon,
we encourage the primacy of internal consultations,
inclusive dialogue and silent diplomacy.
In conclusion, we strongly support UNOCA’s
continued efforts and the personal commitment of
Special Representative Fall, who is working with all
regional and international actors, particularly with a
view to implementing the African Union’s vision of
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020. That unquestionably
requires a holistic and coordinated effort.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. François Louncény
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
their briefings. I also wish to commend the efforts and
activities made by members and staff of the Regional
Office in discharging its mandate.
I shall focus on three aspects in my statement.
First, with respect to the security and political
situations in the region, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1065) on the situation in the Central Africa
region outlines the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, as well as a detailed
explanation of the recent political, economic, social
and security developments in the region and their
impact on peace and security in Central Africa and the
States that are facing various challenges there. On the
political level, elections have taken place in a number of
Central African States, such as Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, Gabon and Cameroon, without significant
violent incidents, despite ongoing security instability
in Cameroon. We share the concerns expressed by the
16/24

13/12/2018

Secretary-General regarding the deterioration of the
security and humanitarian situations in the North-West
and South-West regions of Cameroon.
The scheduled elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are 10 days away. We hope that they will
take place with inclusiveness, transparency and safety.
In that regard, we emphasize that the political processes
and the elections in any State of Central Africa, if
conducted in an inclusive, free and credible manner,
represent an important step towards maintaining peace
and security and achieving the peaceful transfer of
power. That would also have positive effects on stability
across the whole region.
We are monitoring the political and security
developments in the States cited in the report, and would
like to stress the importance of the efforts made by the
Regional Office, as well as the regional organizations
and United Nations peacekeeping operations in the
region, with the aim of establishing a comprehensive
dialogue between Governments and all community
groups, especially in certain States of the region, and
attaining the political transfer of power during the
upcoming periods.
We are very concerned by the waves of violence
and armed conflict in the region, regrettably claiming
innocent and civilian lives. We need to find radical
solutions to stop the violence and hold the perpetrators
accountable. In that regard, we condemn in the strongest
terms the criminal acts, suicide attacks, repeated armed
attacks, looting and abductions perpetrated by Boko
Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army in the region.
Those acts hinder progress made at the political,
security and development levels and even at the social
and humanitarian levels. It is the responsibility of
the United Nations, the Security Council, regional
and subregional organizations and all the States of
Central Africa to confront those attacks and ensure
that sustained and common solutions are found for acts
of vandalism.
Secondly, we regret the generally worsening
humanitarian situation in the region. The number of
those in need of urgent humanitarian assistance is on the
rise, as is the number of refugees and forced displaced
persons. The reason is violence and the outbreak of
cholera, Ebola and other diseases.
Regional organizations have cooperated with the
States of the region, and we commend the adoption by
the Economic Community of Central African States
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

(ECCAS) of a strategy to prevent and combat terrorism
in Central Africa. We also commend the decision to
carry out a comprehensive reform of the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX). We
pay tribute to the fruitful cooperation between ECCAS
and the Economic Community of West African States,
as embodied in the summit convened in Lomé in July.
The summit exemplified the genuine commitment of
both communities to working together to address the
various challenges faced by the States of the region.
We look forward to the continued cooperation between
the two communities and other international partners
interested in achieving the desired peace and stability
in the region.
Thirdly and lastly, cooperation between the
Regional Office and other regional and international
organizations. The many challenges faced by Central
Africa, such as the increasing number of conflicts
linked to transhumance, climate change, armed
conflict and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, along with other economic challenges and
social problems, require serious cooperation among the
Governments of the region, ECCAS, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, the African
Union and all regional and subregional organizations.
Such cooperation is necessary if the aspirations of the
people of the region to stability, security and decent
living conditions are to be fulfilled. This is all the
more crucial, given that the region has a vast wealth
of natural resources, which, if properly tapped, would
help it to achieve those aspirations.
I would like to conclude by thanking once again
Mr. Fall and the staff of the Regional Office for their
tireless efforts.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Louncény
Fall and Ms. Ghelani for their informative briefings.
We commend the calm with which the majority of
the electoral processes in Central African countries
took place and encourage all countries in the subregion
to work towards consensus in all areas in order to
build peace and stability. Similarly, we invite them
to develop measures to build trust in those processes
and encourage the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) to continue to support the
holding of inclusive, credible and peaceful elections.
In that regard, we acknowledge the work that UNOCA
conducts in those areas, including mediation, preventive

S/PV. 8421

diplomacy, and the support it provides to regional and
subregional organizations in order to contribute to the
reduction of tensions in the region.
With that in mind, we welcome the Joint Summit
held on 30 July between the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on
peace, security, stability and the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. Similarly, we commend the
work of the UNOCA secretariat at the forty-sixth
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa and look forward to the speedy adoption of a
declaration on confidence-building measures. We
commend the endorsement of the regional action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. We believe that greater women’s
participation in the area of decision-making will enable
progress to be made in building peace in the region.
We encourage UNOCA to continue its efforts in that
regard and to continue promoting the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). We also appreciate the study
conducted by UNESCO and ECCAS on the status of
youth organizations in seven Central African States in
order to combat violent extremism.
We also welcome the various workshops and
technical meetings that were held in partnership with
subregional organizations. The assistance provided
by cooperating with such organizations should not be
overlooked, but rather, further deepened, under the
principle of respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of each of the States in
which UNOCA implements its mandate. Current and
emerging threats should be addressed by working with
those organizations in order to diminish the impact
they could have on stability in the subregion.
In the same vein, we welcome the regional seminar
held in Libreville on the regional integration strategy
paper for Central Africa for 2018–2025, developed by
the African Development Bank, which recommended
accelerating the process of regional integration in Central
Africa and finalizing the strategy document on regional
integration. Similarly, we praise the endorsement of the
Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and
Resilience of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of the
Lake Chad Basin Region.
In line with the points I have just mentioned,
we reiterate that consideration should be given to

18-4364317/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

replicating the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel in Central Africa, in order to address security and
counter-terrorism challenges, within an institutional
framework of regional cooperation and coordination.
In that regard, we highlight the progress made by
the Multinational Joint Task Force and regional and
international partners in their fight against Boko Haram
in the Lake Chad basin, as well as the efforts of the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
in line with resolution 2349 (2017). We believe that,
to address those challenges, both the countries of the
region and the international community, as a whole,
must delve into their root causes. One such cause is the
lack of control over the exploitation of natural resources
which, in turn, are used to supply and finance the
illegal activities of armed groups, including the Lord’s
Resistance Army — a group that continues to pose a
threat to the security of civilians in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We also urge the international community to
take into account the humanitarian situation in the
subregion. In the Central African Republic, as of
1 October, the number of refugees has increased to
more than 572,000, while approximately 616,000
are internally displaced persons. In the Democratic
Republic of Congo, approximately 13 million people
are in need of protection and humanitarian assistance,
8 million are facing food insecurity and 4.5 million are
internally displaced. In addition, they all face the threat
of diseases, such as Ebola, and lack basic services.
With respect to Cameroon, we echo the sentiments
expressed by the delegation of Ethiopia, with regard to
the Government’s primary responsibility of addressing
the challenges faced within the framework of political
dialogue. It is imperative to continue working and
redoubling efforts to mobilize political, technical and
financial support in order to achieve peace, stability
and development in Central Africa. With that in mind,
ongoing support should also be given to the work
of UNOCA which, together with the Multinational
Joint Task Force, the various entities of the United
Nations system, regional offices and country teams,
among others, devote their efforts and commitment to
achieving peace and stability in the subregion.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary General, Mr. Louncény Fall, for his
briefing and, in particular, for his efforts at the helm of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
18/24

13/12/2018

(UNOCA). France shares his overall analysis of the
situation in Central Africa and assures him of its full
support. Not only are the efforts of Mr. Fall very relevant
and reflect the value-added of a regional approach
to understanding the situations and the dynamics of
conflicts, which are often interlinked; they also allow
for a preventive approach. That is why France welcomes
the three-year extension of the UNOCA mandate, which
will enable the Regional Office to conduct its mission
of good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation,
as well as its support for regional initiatives towards
peace and security in Central Africa, in particular,
strengthening its partnership with the Economic
Community of Central African States.
In addition to the fight against Boko Haram, which,
regrettably, remains on the agenda, four situations
deserve special mention today. First, let us consider the
Central African Republic. We are concerned about the
security situation, which remains volatile, as seen by
the outbreak of violence in Alindao in mid-November.
That new wave of violence is a reminder that disarming
armed groups, restoring State authority throughout
the country and protecting civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, remain priority
issues in the Central African Republic. It is imperative
that the armed groups commit immediately without
preconditions to the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We
also reiterate our full support for President Touadera
and recall our commitment to assisting the authorities
of the Central African Republic in finding a solution
to the crisis. To that end, it is necessary to continue to
promote the rapid and ambitious implementation of the
African Union (AU) road map.
The African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic is the only platform for
holding discussions with the armed groups that includes
the participation of neighbouring States from which
a comprehensive political agreement could result.
It therefore appears necessary that direct dialogue
between the Government of the Central African
Republic and the armed groups take place as soon as
possible. It will be incumbent on the African Union and
the future United Nations-AU Joint Special Envoy to
identify the modalities of the meeting that must take
place between the Government and the armed groups.
We would encourage the authorities of the Central
African Republic to take the necessary steps to achieve
a national consensus on the implementation of African
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

Initiative. The people of the Central African Republic
voiced their views on many issues during the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation. The fight against
impunity is a key component to the reconciliation
process. As Ms. Reena Ghelani just reminded us, the
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic
must continue to galvanize us, as more than half of the
population is suffering from extreme poverty and in
need of humanitarian assistance.
Lastly, we are counting on the support of all
Security Council members for the renewal of the
mandate of United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
this afternoon.
The second situation involves Cameroon. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his commitment to confronting the crisis in the
English-speaking areas and for the approach he has
taken vis-à-vis the Cameroonian authorities. France
is concerned about the deteriorating situation in the
North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon. The
toll in human lives is becoming increasingly high, and
the humanitarian situation is increasingly difficult
with — I believe — nearly 30,000 refugees in Nigeria
and more than 400,000 internally displaced persons.
In this regard, we are pursuing our own efforts aimed
at encouraging the Cameroonian Government to take
ambitious steps to achieve a lasting settlement to the
crisis through inclusive political dialogue, de-escalation
measures and broader decentralization measures with
respect for the unity and integrity of the country. It
is necessary that access to humanitarian assistance to
those in need be facilitated and that the perpetrators of
human rights violations be prosecuted.
The third situation involves the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. France is concerned about the
events that have punctuated the elections campaign
over the past several days. In particular, France
is dismayed by reports according to which live
ammunition was allegedly fired to disperse protesters,
and calls on the Congolese authorities to shed full light
on these incidents.
The general elections, scheduled to be held
23 December, represent a historic opportunity as the
first-ever democratic and peaceful transfer of power
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. France calls
on the Congolese authorities to create the necessary
conditions for the holding of credible elections in

S/PV. 8421

a peaceful environment. We must stand ready to
support the electoral process in close cooperation with
all African partners in the event that the Congolese
authorities request us to do so.
Finally, turning to Burundi, we are concerned about
the recent developments in that country. In particular,
I note the temporary suspension of the activities of
foreign non-governmental organizations, the absence
of the Government at the fifth and last session of the
inter-Burundian dialogue in Arusha, and last week’s
closure of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. In this regard, we
reiterate our support for the mediation led by the East
African Community. We hope that the forthcoming
summit of this organization, to be held on 27 December,
will lead to tangible solutions to facilitate the holding
of free, transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.
Preventing conflicts, avoiding the escalation of
existing crises and smoothing the way for a return
to lasting peace demand a cross-cutting and holistic
approach that considers all the dimensions and factors
of conflicts as well as their root causes, whether they be
inequality, the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
or climate and environmental conditions. They also
demand responses and commitments at the regional
level. In this regard, United Nations regional offices,
such as the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, are a critical tool for strengthening the capacity
of the Organization to act in a more effective manner.
France will continue to support this constructive and
necessary evolution in the work of the Organization
in the service of international peace and security
in a spirit of coherence and greater partnership with
African stakeholders.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
François Louncény Fall and Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their respective briefings.
Recently, progress has been made in the political
processes in the countries of the Central African
region. The Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) held a joint summit
of their Heads of State and Government and adopted
the Lomé Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and
the Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism

18-4364319/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

to strengthen subregional cooperation in the fields of
peace and security. China commends and welcomes
those developments.
On the other hand, the Lord’s Resistance Army,
Boko Haram and other armed groups and terrorist
organizations continue to pose serious threats to
the countries of Central Africa. The international
community should pay greater attention to this and
support countries of the region in their efforts to
respond. The settlement of regional issues requires
the cooperation of all parties. To achieve collective
security and common development in Central Africa
the joint effort of all countries is needed. The United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
can play an active role in this regard. China would like
to emphasize the following three points.
First, respect for the leadership of Africa is a
precondition for resolving regional issues. In recent
years, the African Union (AU), the ECCAS and other
regional and subregional organizations have committed
to finding strength in unity and solving African issues
in an African way. Many efforts have been made
to promote regional peace and development. When
assisting Central Africa in solving its issues, the
international community should fully heed and respect
the views of the countries concerned and maintain
close communication with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the AU, help them strengthen
capacity-building and enhance their capacity to solve
their problems independently.
Secondly, achieving security and stability is the
foundation for the region’s long-term development.
China appreciates and supports UNOCA in exercising
its good offices and its role in mediation and preventive
diplomacy, while continuing to promote political
dialogue in the Central African Republic and other
countries of the region. The international community
should provide further support to such cooperation
efforts among countries in Central Africa, for example,
in combating cross-border arms smuggling, drug
trafficking, terrorism and organized crime with the
aim of achieving regional peace and stability as soon
as possible.
Thirdly, promoting economic development is a
guarantee for the long-term stability and security of
the region. ECCAS, ECOWAS, and other subregional
organizations play an important role in promoting
regional integration and development in Central
20/24

13/12/2018

Africa. The international community should support
UNOCA and Special Representative Fall to strengthen
coordination with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, promote cooperation in the economic
and social fields and help countries in Central Africa
achieve development and eliminate the root causes
of conflicts. China stands ready to continue working
to strengthen cooperation with Central African
countries and to support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNOCA
so as to play a constructive role in helping the countries
in Central Africa maintain security and stability,
cope with economic difficulties and improve the
humanitarian situation.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General François
Louncény Fall and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
their informative briefings that have contributed to
our meaningful discussion today. We also underscore
the President’s excellent stewardship of the Security
Council this month.
Kazakhstan recognizes the importance of the
work of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) in preventive diplomacy and
mediation, as well as the support it provides to regional
and subregional organizations to achieve lasting peace
and stability.
We express our deep concern at the violence
perpetrated by armed groups in the Central African
Republic against civilians, peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers. We also strongly condemn the
increasing incitement of ethnic and religious hatred
and violence. We note the important role of the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) in promoting peace and reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. We fully support the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, which is an essential tool
in stabilizing the country. We highlight the regional
dimension of the conflict in the Central African Republic
and therefore believe that the further strengthening of
political and financial obligations on the part of regional
guarantors and international partners will increase the
effectiveness of this mechanism. Providing coordinated
support to the Central African Republic authorities
and its political process is important for any future
resolution of tensions.
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

The unrelenting atrocities committed by the
Lord’s Resistance Army in the subregion and their
subsequent negative impact on the civilian population,
especially in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, remain the biggest
threat to the peace and security of the entire region.
We stress the importance of regional and international
support for the African Union Regional Task Force,
especially in the context of the security vacuum, which
has been exploited by the Lord’s Resistance Army and
other armed groups in order to intensify their criminal
activities. We commend the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council to maintain the
African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative for
the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, and we
also call on the African Union and international partners
to provide renewed support for this mechanism.
The security and humanitarian situation in the Lake
Chad basin deserves urgent attention. The terrorist
attacks and destabilizing activities of Boko Haram and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have caused
large-scale loss of life and the displacement of civilians,
with a devastating humanitarian impact. In this regard,
we welcome the recent validation of the regional
strategy of the African Union and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission for the stabilization, recovery and
resilience of the areas of the Lake Chad basin that have
been affected by the actions of Boko Haram. In view of
the urgency of the situation, we encourage international
partners to speedily disburse their pledges.
The States of the region have encountered
unprecedented challenges in combating terrorism. We
must therefore support UNOCA’s outreach to coordinate
the activities of regional organizations in the fight
against terrorism. The challenges posed by widespread
violent extremism and the continuing threats to crossborder security and crime are exacerbated by the illicit
influx of small arms and light weapons throughout the
region. We welcome the outcomes of the first Conference
of the State Parties to the Central African Convention
for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components that can
be used for their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly,
including its decision to establish a secretariat with
a trust fund. This Convention contributes to Agenda
2063 of the African Union and the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative and creates a framework for Africa to
meet the Sustainable Development Goals. It is important
for countries that have yet to ratify the Convention to

S/PV. 8421

do so at the earliest opportunity in order to boost its
implementation and facilitate resource mobilization.
Despite the existing problems in the region, we
note the commitment of countries and efforts aimed at
increasing subregional integration and ongoing reforms
to strengthen democratic governance by facilitating
the electoral process, in order to ensure peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections. Still, much work remains
to be done to implement confidence-building measures,
consolidate the gains achieved and make progress
towards the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s strategies and
programmes, in particular Agenda 2063 and Silencing
the Guns by 2020, which should be carried out with the
support of the international community.
UNOCA is therefore playing a coordinating role
as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, thereby making an invaluable contribution. It
is important that the African Union, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and the United Nations continue
to work towards formulating and implementing a
well-coordinated regional strategy and finding the
root causes of the crisis, which are transnational and
transboundary. At the same time, to be effective and
streamlined, the United Nations must deliver as one,
with a strengthened security and development nexus for
more enduring political and socioeconomic stability,
together with a robust approach involving regional
collaboration and the engagement of influential
countries and leaders in the region.
Upon the completion of its term as an elected member
of the Security Council for 2017-2018, Kazakhstan is
stepping down at the end of this month. We were deeply
committed to Africa, as we see its great potential as a
rising leader in the world’s economy in this century.
We see its great promise, as well as its problems. Even
though this is the last meeting on UNOCA and the Lake
Chad basin during my delegation’s term in the Council,
we will continue to address and support Africa in
overcoming the threats that it faces. We offer our
solidarity to help the region achieve the great objectives
it has set for itself. Kazakhstan will continue to work
through the General Assembly and other forums to
accomplish the vision of the African continent and
its people.

18-4364321/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
My delegation is grateful to Mr. François Louncény
Fall for his briefing on the biannual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1065) on the sociopolitical
and security situation in Central Africa and the Lake
Chad basin and on the activities carried out by the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), within the framework of his mandate.
I would like to inform Special Representative Fall
that in Côte d’Ivoire, as in his country, the outstanding
efforts he is undertaking in a subregion that is close
to the hearts of all Africans, but which unfortunately
finds itself today confronting tremendous problems
stemming from human inconsistency but also because
of the unpleasant surprises that nature sometimes keeps
in reserve for human existence, are greatly appreciated.
I am thinking in particular of the rapid drying up of
Lake Chad, which was once a source of life and which
is now becoming a source of problems that, in turn, has
brought about vast humanitarian needs. That is why
I would like to welcome the presence among us this
morning of Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and express my
gratitude for her comprehensive briefing and for all
that she has done to draw our careful attention to the
humanitarian issues in the subregion.
Côte d’Ivoire commends the recent progress
made in a number of Central African countries,
including the holding of elections under more or less
peaceful conditions. However, my delegation remains
concerned at the persistence of such multifaceted
political and security challenges as armed conflict,
terrorism, trafficking in natural resources, poaching,
transnational organized crime and maritime piracy, all
of which have disastrous humanitarian consequences,
as I mentioned before.
In the Central African Republic, the absence of
State authority across significant parts of its national
territory, the contradictory attitudes of leaders of armed
groups vis-à-vis their commitment to a comprehensive
peace agreement in the Central African Republic,
the resurgence of ethnic and religious violence, such
as the deadly events of 15 November in Alindao, in
the north-east of the country, as well as the repeated
attacks against the United Nations Multidimensional
22/24

13/12/2018

Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, all remain sources of concern. Given
that situation, Côte d’Ivoire commends and further
encourages the efforts of the President of the Central
African Republic, Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera,
and his Government in giving priority to constructive
dialogue and consultation with all national and regional
actors, including armed groups and civil society, with a
view to achieving inclusive and indispensable national
reconciliation towards realizing a lasting peace.
In that regard, the implementation of the road map
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, to which my country
extends its full support, could be the key to a peaceful and
lasting end to the crisis in the Central African Republic.
In this context, the decision of the United Nations and
the African Union to jointly appoint a Special Envoy
to generate fresh momentum in the implementation of
this initiative is of paramount importance. Moreover,
the commitment of countries of the region — and
neighbouring States in particular — including through
joint commissions, remains fully relevant to the
efficient management of this crisis, especially in light
of the challenge of transnational crime.
With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, progress made in the implementation of the
political agreement of 31 December 2016, known as the
New Year’s Eve agreement, and the smooth conduct of
preparations for the general elections on 23 December
2018 — which are so important for the stability of the
country and the subregion — are welcome developments.
In order to maintain this positive momentum, my
delegation calls on all Congolese political actors to
work to create an environment conducive to the conduct
of free, transparent, credible and peaceful elections.
Furthermore, the vast challenges posed to security,
humanitarian and health — particularly in the eastern
part of the country, which is marked by the persistence
of the Ebola virus — require the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the international
community to intensify and better coordinate efforts in
order to cope with this epidemic.
In this regard, resolution 2439 (2018), adopted
by the Council on 30 October, which concerns Ebola
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
action of all relevant stakeholders — including the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and bilateral
and multilateral partners — is necessary in the fight
18-43643

13/12/2018

Central African region

against the epidemic in order to create an environment
conducive to the return of lasting peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Turning to the situation in Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire
commends the efforts of the East African Community
facilitator and the mediator of the Inter-Burundi
Dialogue with a view to ensuring its inclusiveness
while addressing the crisis plaguing this country.
However, we fear that the absence of the Government
of Burundi and certain political actors at the fifth
session of the inter-Burundian talks, held from 24 to
29 October in Arusha, will contribute to relaunching
the stalemate in the political process. Therefore, my
delegation encourages the international community,
the African Union and the Community of East African
States to continue in their efforts for peace and stability
in Burundi towards the holding of peaceful elections
in 2020.
The security situation in the Lake Chad basin is
also a source of concern to my delegation in view of
the continuing threat posed by Boko Haram, whose
criminal and terrorist activities have disastrous
consequences for civilian populations, particularly
children, women and girls in Cameroon, Chad and the
Niger. In the fight against this scourge, we welcome the
implementation of a regional strategy, endorsed by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission
on 30 August, for stabilization, recovery and resilience
in the areas of the Lake Chad basin affected by Boko
Haram’s activities. We call on international partners
to honour their pledges of assistance, as announced on
3 and 4 September in Berlin at a high-level conference
on the Lake Chad region.
Furthermore, the actions of the Lord’s
Resistance Army — despite its waning operational
capacities — continue to threaten the safety of civilians,
particularly in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The decision of
the African Union Peace and Security Council to
maintain the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, pending the
development of a strategy for the gradual withdrawal
of the Initiative, would keep that armed group under
pressure and weaken it considerably further.
The difficulties identified demonstrate the need
for a participatory and inclusive regional cooperation
strategy for all components of the populations concerned
in order to provide an appropriate response to the

S/PV. 8421

challenges facing the region. In this regard, my country
supports the efforts of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) for the advancement
of peace and security, and welcomes the approval of
a regional action plan to promote the participation of
women in human rights and crisis resolution activities
in the region, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and
in accordance with the recommendations of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.
The partnership among regional, subregional and
intergovernmental organizations, in the framework of
shared experiences and mutual support to address the
challenges to the fight against instability, is proving
to be of immense importance. The ECCAS-Economic
Community of West African States joint summit on
peace, security, stability and the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism, held on 30 July, exemplifies
such cooperation. We call on the international
community to support the implementation of this
summit’s conclusions.
We stress the importance of collaboration between
ECCAS and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community in the context of integration and
regional cooperation, particularly on issues pertaining
to peace and security, as well as the good cooperation
between UNOCA and the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, aimed at harmonizing
the United Nations approach to peace and security in
Africa in their respective subregions.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1065)
provides useful information on the good offices,
preventive diplomacy and mediation activities of
UNOCA, which has made progress in recent months
in the area of peace, security and stability in Central
Africa. They placed a particular focus on the prevention
and mitigation of crises, support for the implementation
of inclusive political reforms and the promotion of
dialogue, thereby contributing to the peaceful outcome
of elections, particularly in Sao Tome and Principe.
Likewise, the coordinating role played by UNOCA
among the various United Nations agencies in the
region is a key component of the synergy of United
Nations actions in Central Africa. This is attested to
by the first workshop attended by representatives of
United Nations political components in the region, held
on 5 and 6 November in Libreville under the auspices

18-4364323/24

S/PV.8421

Central African region

of the Regional Office, in response to presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/17, of 10 August.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support for
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, whose mission of good offices and preventive
diplomacy remains of utmost importance in the quest
for peace, stability and socioeconomic development in

24/24

13/12/2018

the States of Central African. Côte d’Ivoire therefore
extends its full support to the renewal of the UNOCA
mandate until 31 August 2021.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

18-43643
