A /68/PV.87

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

87th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 20 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly concluded its consideration of sub-item
(a) of agenda item 65 at its 70th plenary meeting, on
18 December 2013. In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 65.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item
65?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (a) of agenda
item 65 to the Third Committee. To enable the General
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the document,
may I also take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
sub-item (a) of agenda item 65 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 65 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights
of children
Draft resolution (A/68/L.46)
The President: I call on the representative of
Sweden to introduce draft resolution A/68/L.46.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the pleasure to
introduce draft resolution A/68/L.46, entitled “Highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child”, on behalf of Botswana, Jordan,
Mexico, Poland, Thailand and Sweden, as well as more
than 52 sponsors representing all regions.
The draft resolution seeks to establish the modalities
of a high-level meeting to commemorate the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child by the General Assembly
on 20 November. The Convention on the Rights of the
Child is recognized as the international standard in
the promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
as illustrated by its almost universal ratification. We
are therefore very pleased that the membership of the
United Nations has so positively supported the prospect
of dedicating a one-day meeting of the General
Assembly to that important topic.
On behalf of the core group, we would like to thank
all delegations for their contributions to the fruitful and
productive discussions on the draft resolution, both in
open informal consultations and bilateral contacts. We

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-40414 (E)

*1440414*

A/68/PV.87

appreciate all efforts that contributed to the constructive
negotiating atmosphere. The commemorative event
in November represents an opportunity to once again
reaffirm our common dedication to the realization of
the rights of the child. We look forward to the support
of members today.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/68/L.46.
I shall now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/68/L.46, entitled “High-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child”, I wish to put on record the following statement
of financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/68/L.46, the General Assembly would decide to
convene a high-level meeting on 20 November on the
occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and
that the high-level meeting will comprise an opening
plenary meeting and an interactive panel discussion
with the meaningful participation of children.
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 1
of the draft resolution, it is envisaged that the highlevel meeting will comprise a total of two meetings
on 20 November 2014, one in the morning and one in
the afternoon. The morning opening plenary meeting
will require interpretation and verbatim reporting
in all six languages, which will be covered by the
meetings entitlement of the General Assembly. On the
understanding that the General Assembly will not meet
in parallel, the meeting will not constitute additions to
the meetings workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management.
The interactive panel discussion in the afternoon
will require one meeting with interpretation in all six
languages, which will constitute an addition to the
meetings workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management. That would

2/2

20/05/2014

entail additional requirements in the amount of $11,500
for meeting servicing for the biennium 2014-2015.
No documentation is anticipated related to the
request contained in paragraph 1.
In summary, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.46, additional requirements
of $11,500 would arise under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
and Conference Management”, which would be met
from within the existing approved resources of the
programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/68/L.46, entitled “Highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child”.
I shall now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/68/L.46: Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.46?
Draft resolution A/68/L.46 was adopted (resolution
68/273).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 65.
The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

14-40414
