VD.

8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the people of American Samoa, to safeguard
the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the
enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures which guarantee the right of the people to own
and dispose of those natural resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue to
foster close relations and co-operation between the
people of the Territory and the neighbouring island
communities;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to American Samoa, including the dispatch of a visiting mission to the Territory
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/36.

103

Resolutlom adopted on tbe reports of the Fourth Committee

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,1 7
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all
other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the United States Virgin Islands, and reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Declaration,
Noting the active co-operation given by the administering Power, both through its participation in the work
of the Special Committee and through its willingness to
receive visiting missions to small Territories under its
administration,
Having heard the . statement of the administering
Power, 18
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the United States Virgin Islands; 19
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right' of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
17 Ibid., chaps. IV; VI, annex III; and XXVI.
18 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meet-

ing, paras. 17-21.

19 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.l), chap. XXVI.

4. Requests the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to continue to take
all necessary measures, in consultation with the freely
elected authorities and representatives of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands, to enable the people of
the Territory to exercise fully their right to selfdetermination in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration;
5. Requests the administering Power to encourage
further and meaningful discussion regarding the political
and constitutional status of the Territory and to take
such additional measures as would ensure preservation
of the identity and cultural heritage of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands;
6. Urges the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives
of the people of the United States Virgin Islands, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the
people to own and dispose of those natural resources and
to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
7. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic development of the United States Virgin
Islands are an important element in the process of selfdetermination and, to this end, calls upon the administering Power, together with the freely elected authorities
and representatives of the people of the Territory, to
take all measures necessary to achieve a viable and stable
economy in the Territory;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the
United States Virgin Islands;
9. Expresses the view that the presence of a United
States naval facility in the Territory should not impede
the progress of the people towards self-determination;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/37.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 20
20 Ibid.,

chap. X.

204

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Having heard the statements made on the subject of
Western Sahara, including the statement of the representative of the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de
Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro, 21
Bearing in mind the profound concern of the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity and the nonaligned countries regarding the decolonization of Western Sahara and the right of the people of that Territory
to self-determination,
Recalling its resolution 33/27 of 1 December 1978 on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity,
Taking note of the decision of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its sixteenth ordinary session, held at Monrovia
from 17 to 20 July 1979, 22 by which the Assembly
adopted the recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee
of the Organization of African Unity on the question of
Western Sahara,
Also taking note of the peace agreement concluded at
Algiers on 10 August 1979 between Mauritania and the
Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra
y de Rio de Oro 28 and the decision of Mauritania to
withdraw its forces from Western Sahara,2 4
Aware of the profound concern of the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity and the non-a1igned
countries at the aggravation of the situation prevailing
in Western Sahara because of the continuation and extension of the occupation of that Territory,
Recalling the part of the Political Declaration adopted
by the Sixth Conference of Heads of States or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from
3 to 9 September 1979, relating to Western Sahara, 25
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Western Sahara to self-determination and independence,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the charter of the Organization of African Unity and the
objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure the enjoyment of that right, as envisaged in the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity;
2. Takes note with satisfaction of the decision concerning Western Sahara taken by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its sixteenth ordinary session;22
3. Also takes note with satisfaction of the part of the
Political Declaration adopted by the Sixth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries relating to Western Sahara;
4. Welcomes the peace agreement concluded between Mauritania and the Frente Popular para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rfo de Oro and considers
that this agreement constitutes an important contribution
to the process of achieving peace and a definitive, just
and lasting settlement of the question of Western Sahara;
5. Deeply deplores the aggravation of the situation
resulting from the continued occupation of Western
21 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 14th meeting, paras. 50-59, and 15th meeting, paras. 3-17; and ibid.,
Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum. For the full
text, see A/C.4/34/L.4.
22 A/34/552, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.114 (XVI).
28 A/34/427-S/13503, annex I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1979.
2' See A/34/427-S/13503, annex II. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1979.
28 See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, paras. 96-98.

Sahara by Morocco and the extension of that occupation
to the territory recently evacuated by Mauritania;
6. Urges Morocco to join in the peace process and
to terminate the occupation of the Territory of Western
Sahara;
7. Recommends to that end that the Frente Popular
para la Liberaci6n de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro,
the representative of the people of Western Sahara,
should participate fully in any search for a just, lasting
and definitive political solution of the question of Western Sahara, in accordance with the resolutions and
declarations of the United Nations, the Organization of
Afri,an {Jrntv and the non-aligned countries;
8. R. quests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to continue to consider the situation in Western
Sahara as a priority question and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
9. Requests the Administrative Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity to keep the Secretary-General of the United Nations informed of the
progress achieved with regard to the implementation of
the decisions of the Organization of African Unity concerning Western Sahara;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to follow closely
the situation in Western Sahara and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
0

34/38.

Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 26
Recalling its resolutions 3432 (XXX) of 8 December
1975, 31/50 of 1 December 1976, 32/32 of 28 November 1977 and 33/36 of 13 December 1978,
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland 21 and Guatemala, 28
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of Belize, 29
Taking note of the part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, relating to Belize, in particular the statement that the Conference reiterated its
unconditional support for the Belizean people's inalienable right to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity and condemned all pressure or threats to
prevent full exercise of that right, 80
26 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. VJ, annex
III, and XXIX.
27 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 19th meeting, paras. 2-4; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
2 S Ibid., 22nd meeting, paras. 68-81; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
29 Ibid., 19th meeting, paras. 6-22.
so See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 165.
