III.

negotiations, with the assistance of qualified governmental experts, with a view to agreeing on the text
of an agreement on the prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of such weapons,
and to expedite the preparation of specific agreements
on particular types of such weapons;
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
submit a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly for consideration at its thirty-fourth
session;
3. Once again urges all States to refrain from any
action which could adversely affect the talks aimed
at working out an agreement or agreements to prevent
the emergence of new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Committee on Disarmament all documents relating
to the discussion of this item by the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types
of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons: report of the Committee on Disarmament".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/67.

Reduction of military budgets

The General Assembly,
Noting that, according to the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,
it should continue to consider what concrete steps
should be taken to facilitate the reduction of military
budgets, bearing in mind the relevant proposals and
documents of the United Nations on this question, 27
Reaffirming its conviction that there is an urgent
need for the nuclear-weapon States and other militarily
significant States to carry out reductions in their
military budgets and that this would increase the possibilities of reallocation of resources now being used
for military purposes to economic and social development, particularly for the benefit of the developing
countries,
Convinced that a reduction of military budgets
could be carried out without affecting the military
balance to the detriment of the national security of
any country,
Conscious that the attainment of the ultimate objectives will require the co-operation of nuclearweapon States and other militarily significant States,
Convinced that the systematic measurement and
reporting of military expenditure is an important first
objective in the move towards agreed and balanced
reductions in military expenditure,
Recognizing the need for the availability of a satisfactory instrument for standardized reporting on the
military expenditure of Member States,
Recognizing also the value of such an instrument
as a means of increasing confidence between States
by improving the information on military expenditure,
27 Resolution

S-10/2, para. 90.

45

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling that in its resolution 32/85 of 12 December 1977 it requested the Secretary-General to
ascertain those States which would be prepared to
participate in a pilot test of the reporting instrument
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
special session devoted to disarmament,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General28 submitted to the General Assembly at
its tenth special session in response to paragraphs 2
and 3 of resolution 32/85,
Recognizing that the work set in motion by the
General Assembly on the reduction of military budgets
has reached a decisive stage and that successive
reports of groups of experts, in particular the latest
report issued on 14 September 1977,29 have moved
the whole exercise to a position where practical steps
for testing and refining the proposed reporting instrument could now be taken,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of an ad hoe panel of experienced practitioners
in the field of military budgeting:
(a) To carry out a practical test of the proposed
reporting instrument with the voluntary co-operation
of States from different regions and representing different budgeting and accounting systems;
( b) To assess the results of the practical test;
( c) To develop recommendations for further refinement and implementation of the reporting instrument;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Panel on Military Budgeting with the assistance that may be deemed necessary;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on
the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Reduction of
military budgets".

84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

33/68.

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace:io

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace, contained in its resolution 2832
( XXVI) of 16 December 1971, and recalling also
its resolutions 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
3080 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3259 A
(XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3468 (XXX) of 11
December 1975, 31/88 of 14 December 1976, 32/86
of 12 December 1977 and S-10/2 of 30 June 1978,
Encouraged by the continued support extended to
the Declaration by the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 15 to 20 May 1978,31 and by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non2s A/S-10/6 and Corr.I and Add.I.
29 A/32/194 and Add.l.
30 See also sect. X.B.2, decision 33/418.
31 See

A/33/118.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

46

Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to 30
July 1978,82
Reaffirming its conviction that concrete action in
furtherance of the objectives of the Declaration would
be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of
international peace and security,
Deeply concerned at the intensification of great
Power military presence, conceived in the context of
great Power rivalry, leading to an increase of tension
in the area,
Considering that the continued military presence
of the great Powers in the Indian Ocean, conceived
in the context of great Power rivalry, with the danger
of a competitive escalation of such a military presence,
gives greater urgency to the need to take practical
steps for the early implementation of the Declaration
of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Considering also that the creation of a zone of
peace in the Indian Ocean requires co-operation
among the regional States to ensure conditions of
peace and security within the region, as envisaged in
the Declaration, and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the littoral and hinterland States,
Further considering that, at its tenth special session,
devoted to disarmament, it noted the proposal for
establishing the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace,
taking into account its deliberations and its relevant
resolutions, as well as the need to ensure the maintenance of peace and security in the region,33
Noting that talks were initiated between the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America regarding their military presence in the Indian
Ocean, and that the two countries have kept the
Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian Ocean informed of
the current situation concerning these talks,
Regretting, however, that the talks are suspended,
Recalling its resolution 32/86, in which it decided
that a meeting of the littoral and hinterland States
of the Indian Ocean should be convened in New York
on a suitable date,
1. Urges that the talks between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America regarding their military presence in the Indian
Ocean be resumed without delay;
2. Renews its invitation to the great Powers and
other major maritime users of the Indian Ocean that
have not so far seen their way to co-operating effectively with the Ad Hoe Committee on the Indian
Ocean to enter with the least possible delay into consultations with the Committee regarding the implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace;

3. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee34 and in particular section III concerning the
steps taken towards making the necessary preparations
for holding a meeting of the littoral and hinterland
States of the Indian Ocean;
4. Decides to convene a meeting of the littoral
and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean in New
York from 2 to 13 July 1979, as the next step
32 See A/33/206.
33 Resolution S-10/2, para.

64 (b ).

34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/33/29 and Corr.I).

towards the convening of a conference on the Indian
Ocean for the implementation of the Declaration of
the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace as contained in
General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), such
States being listed in the reports of the Ad Hoe Committee to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth,85
thirtieth,36 and thirty-third sessions,87 and decides that
other States not falling within this category, but which
have participated or have expressed their willingness
to participate in the work of the Committee, could
attend upon the invitation of the Committee;
5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee, performing the functions of a preparatory committee, will
make the necessary preparations for convening the
Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the
Indian Ocean and that the Committee will set up
informal working groups for this purpose when
necessary;
6. Requests the Meeting of the Littoral and
Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean to submit its
report to the General Assembly at the thirty-fourth
session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary provision for the Meeting, including the
essential background information, relevant documentation and summary records, and to continue to render
all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee,
including the provision of summary records;
8. Renews the general mandate of the Ad Hoe
Committee as defined in the relevant resolutions;
9. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
full report on its work.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

33/69.

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2833 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2930 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972,
3183 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3260 (XXIX)
of 9 December 1974, 3469 (XXX) of 11 December
1975, 31/190 of 21 December 1976 and 32/89 of
12 December 1977,
Reiterating its conviction that all peoples of the
world have a vital interest in the success of disarmament negotiations and that all States should be in a
position to contribute to the adoption of measures
for the achievement of this goal,
Stressing anew its belief that a world disarmament
conference, adequately prepared and convened at an
appropriate time, could promote the realization of
such an aim and that the co-operation of all nuclearweapon Powers would considerably facilitate its
attainment,
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the World Disarmament Conference,38
3 5 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 29 (Al
9029), annex I, para. 5.
3 6 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/10029),
para. 29.
37 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/33/29
and Corr.I), para. 27.
as Ibid., Supplement No. 28 (A/33/28).
