S/PV.7563

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7563rd meeting

Thursday, 19 November 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Churkin
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2015/833)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-37732 (E)
*1537732*

UNMIK

S/PV.7563

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2015/833)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/833, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: This is my first time briefing the
Council since I was appointed Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would like to begin by stressing
that the Council’s continuing support to the Mission
remains crucial as we focus on promoting stability,
political progress and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and, indeed, in the region. The report before
the Council (S/2015/833) details developments from
mid-July to mid-October, but today I would like to
draw attention to a few key trends and concerns that I
have observed since taking up my post in early October.

2/24

19/11/2015

I arrived amid renewed political turbulence in
Kosovo, and developments during the past week
have produced additional potential setbacks to the
implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue
led by the European Union (EU). I have met with the
top leadership in both Pristina and Belgrade, as well
as with our international partners and with political,
community and religious leaders on the ground. It
is clear to me that we require strong leadership from
both Pristina and Belgrade, as well as equally cohesive
actions among the international presences, if progress
is to be sustained.
Genuine progress was achieved at the EUfacilitated meeting in Brussels on 25 August, leading
to a package of agreements, including on the general
principles and main elements of the Association/
Community of Serb-majority municipalities. Leaders
in Pristina and Belgrade continue to demonstrate a farsighted commitment to putting the people’s interests
first. Regardless of shorter-term political posturing
and problems, I perceive an underlying resolve on both
sides to use the dialogue to overcome some of the most
difficult issues affecting mutual relations. The gains,
however, face continued challenges that are affecting
the full and timely implementation of the agreements,
as we have seen in the past few days.
Implementation of the terms agreed on between
the parties on 25 August in Brussels began during
this period. On 17 October, work commenced on the
revitalization on the Mitrovica bridge as part of this
implementation. On 30 October, Kosovo President
Atifete Jahjaga submitted the agreement for review by
the Constitutional Court. The Court issued a temporary
suspension of implementation, pending issuance of
its opinion within 60 days, raising concerns about the
possibility of delays. I join in urging all stakeholders
involved to ensure that the commitments agreed to are
reviewed in short order and fulfilled on schedule.
For Kosovo, a major step forward was taken on
27 October, when Prime Minister Isa Mustafa and
Minister of European Integration and Chief Negotiator
Bekim Çollaku, together with the High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Federica Mogherini, and the Commissioner
for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement
Negotiations, Johannes Hahn, signed a Stabilization
and Association Agreement. I wish to congratulate
the leadership in Pristina on this achievement. The

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

Agreement not only expresses the commitment of
Kosovo to its European path, but equally the European
commitment to Kosovo. Just as importantly, it should
open the door to increased trade and investment, as well
as improved prospects for the economic growth and
employment opportunities so sorely needed in Kosovo,
in particular for its young population. The ratification
of the Agreement by the Assembly of Kosovo
demonstrated the ability of the institutions to recognize
and capitalize on long-term strategic interests.
As I stressed at the outset, however, the current
political challenges are also very serious. On several
occasions during this period, violent tactics and
disruptive behaviour impeded the proceedings of the
Assembly of Kosovo, the institution at the core of the
democratic process. Members of the political opposition
used tear gas and other objects in the Assembly chamber,
including just two days ago when the use of pepper spray
and tear gas once again forced the Assembly to relocate
its session. Clashes between opposition supporters and
Kosovo police have also resulted in injuries to police
officers and damage to public and private property.
The opposition parties have expressed their intention
to continue trying to block sessions of the Assembly.
I have strongly deplored these violent and
unacceptable actions. Argument and debate belong
in Kosovo’s democratically elected Assembly; force
and intimidation do not. I commend the restraint
demonstrated by the Kosovo institutions in the face of
serious provocations, and I urge all parties to participate
in dialogue and allow a constructive political discourse,
which is vital to progress in Kosovo. The rule of law
must be applied equally; any persons who resort to
violence must be held to account.
Political progress or its absence directly affects
the circumstances and atmosphere on the ground in
Kosovo. Despite progress in many areas, there remain
signs of deep public frustration, along with unfortunate
political tendencies to lapse into divisive rhetoric. Our
mission and our international partners continue to
work with local communities and central authorities to
reduce tension whenever it arises. Ultimately, however,
the onus is on political leaders to take responsibility
for setting a tone that furthers reconciliation and the
normalization of relations.
During this period, Kosovo’s application to
UNESCO weighed heavily in public sentiment and
debate. However, I would say that too often public

S/PV.7563

debate and diplomatic struggles have tended to blur
the underlying issues. The protection and preservation
of cultural and religious heritage should remain the
subject of intensive communication between Belgrade
and Pristina, including through the Brussels dialogue.
We remain closely engaged with all the stakeholders to
support consensual and lasting solutions.
Reconciliation also requires enhanced efforts to
determine the fate of persons missing from the conflict;
more than 1,600 persons are still unaccounted for. The
focus should remain on the needs of the surviving
family members waiting for clarity on the fate of their
loved ones. I welcome the recent cooperation shown by
Belgrade and Pristina in the framework of the Working
Group on Missing Persons, chaired by the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
I would like also to echo the Secretary-General’s
message in the report on the importance of continued
progress in the process of the establishment of the
specialist court, as agreed between the European Union
and Kosovo.
With regard to the return to Kosovo of persons
displaced as a result of the conflict and its aftermath,
the current trend indicates that the number of returnees
in 2015 will be the lowest since the year 2000. No
more than 427 individuals had returned as of October,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). I call upon
all stakeholders to increase available resources so
that more voluntary returns to and within Kosovo
will be encouraged and sustained. The Ministry for
Communities and Returns is presently working on
essential legislation specifically to protect the rights of
displaced persons, and I urge that this law be passed as
a matter of priority.
Resilience and stability in the region are being
further tested at present amid the influx of refugees
and migrants transiting through the Western Balkans
in unprecedented numbers. According to UNHCR, as
of 5 November there had been over 650,000 arrivals in
Greece by sea since the beginning of the year, the great
majority of them transiting northwards via the Western
Balkans route. Over 210,000 people were recorded in
October alone. The influx of such a large number has
stretched capacities and resources. While Kosovo has
been less directly affected so far, the Kosovo authorities
and the international presences are working together
to prepare contingencies. UNMIK is monitoring the

15-377323/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

situation, in close coordination with UNHCR and all
partners in the region.
As we have just witnessed in the tragic events in
Paris, the phenomenon of violent extremism is a very
current and global concern, and the Western Balkans
region is no exception. This transnational issue demands
close cooperation among regional and international
stakeholders, and in this light Kosovo’s recent adoption
of a strategy for the prevention of violent extremism
and radicalization is one important element. UNMIK
continues to support and facilitate the work of Kosovo’s
institutions, within its mandate and in close coordination
with its international partners. Above all, these risks
demand improved information-sharing and cooperation
among all regional actors and their agencies.
Let me conclude my remarks by expressing my
deep appreciation to the membership of the Council for
its sustained engagement with Belgrade and Pristina,
and for its ongoing support of UNMIK. Indeed, this
commitment remains essential in order to safeguard the
political process. Our Mission will continue to cooperate
closely with all interlocutors and international partners
to promote peace and progress, as mandated by the
Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): At the outset, I would
like to most strongly condemn the recent terrorist
attacks in Paris and Beirut, the downing of the Russian
passenger plane over the Sinai and last night’s murder
in Sarajevo of two soldiers of the army of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I take this opportunity to express my
deepest condolences to the families of the victims
of those heinous crimes, which undermine the very
essence of the values that unite us all. Terrorism and
extremism perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and other terrorist organizations are a threat
that requires a global response.
On this occasion, I also express my gratitude for the
continued attention accorded the question of Kosovo
and Metohija. That is evinced by our regular quarterly
meetings, convened in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999), to discuss this topic of primary importance for
the Republic of Serbia. I am sure that the message that
we send from the Chamber to all residents of Kosovo
and Metohija is a very powerful one indeed. The

4/24

19/11/2015

contribution made by other international organizations
is also of exceptional importance. Missions, such as
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the Kosovo Force (KFOR), and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo,
carried out under the auspices of the United Nations,
are part of the international civil and security presence
in the province.
Regardless of the numerous challenges, the role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in coordinating the activities of the
international missions on the ground and stabilizing
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija is invaluable.
I especially thank its staff for the efforts that they
make daily in the quest for ways to overcome the still
deeply rooted mistrust among ethnic communities and
in creating the basic preconditions for the peaceful
coexistence of the communities and for the security and
respect of the human and civil rights of all residents of
the province. I hope that UNMIK will continue to carry
out its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999) in the
coming period. Therefore, on behalf of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and on my own behalf, I take
this opportunity to wish much success to Mr. Zahir
Tanin, the newly appointed Head of UNMIK, who is
participating in today’s meeting of the Security Council
for the first time in that capacity.
UNMIK’s presence and activities are of key
importance for the Republic of Serbia, since its United
Nations framework, which is based on resolution 1244
(1999), is a guarantee of the status neutrality of the
international presence in Kosovo and Metohija. In view
of the overall political and security situation and the
continuing dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, we
believe that UNMIK must remain actively engaged in
the province, undiminished in scope and unchanged in
mandate.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia has
demonstrated in practice its full commitment to
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union. Let
me recall that Belgrade was motivated to conclude
the Brussels Agreement by the lack of substantial
progress in the realization of the basic human rights
of the members of the Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as by
the desire to help resolve outstanding issues through a
constructive approach in the interest of stability in the
region and its integration into the European Union. We
look on the Agreement as a guarantee that a mechanism

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

will be established that will make it possible for the
Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija to lead a normal and
dignified life. In the conditions in which they live, the
Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija see the Brussels
Agreement as a commitment by the European Union
to their survival and development. The establishment
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities
would allow for the interests of the Serbian population
to be articulated and would provide an institutional
mechanism for the collective realization and protection
of their basic rights and contribute to a further and
faster normalization of relations.
I cannot but note that, like the previous reports,
the report before us (S/2015/833) recognized and
underscored the need for the establishment of the
association of Serb-majority municipalities as soon as
possible, as being crucial for the implementation of the
Brussels Agreement. The decision of the Constitutional
Court of Kosovo to suspend the agreement on the
establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities is a unique precedent involving the
flouting of an agreement reached in the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union. The complete and
committed implementation of agreements that have
been reached by all actors involved is of paramount
importance for the dialogue to evolve successfully. The
weight of Pristina’s decision, the political background
of which is not in doubt, is even greater, considering
that its announcement was made immediately after the
signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union.
As it happened, the agreement on the establishment
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities
was sent to the Constitutional Court to assess its
legality one day after the signing of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement, and the Court decided
to suspend the agreement a day after the European
Commission published its progress report on Kosovo.
It is ironic that the Commission contends in its report
that Kosovo delivered on two major commitments by
adopting constitutional amendments meant to pave
the way towards the establishment of the special
chambers and by demonstrating its commitment to
the normalization of relations with Belgrade as it
finalized agreements on energy, telecommunications,
the establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities and the bridge in Kosovska Mitrovica.
In outright contravention of what is said in the
progress report, Pristina sent a clear and unequivocal

S/PV.7563

message to all, including the Serbian community, the
European Union and the United Nations. The message
was that it does not respect the agreements it has
signed and the obligations it has assumed and does
not intend to make the life of, and the enjoyment of
the basic human rights by, the Serbs in the province
any better at all. The first key issue is the response by
the European Commission and the subsequent response
by the member States of the European Union. Equally
important is the position that the Security Council will
take in order to have Pristina abide by the prevailing
practice recognized in international law with regard
to the implementation of assumed obligations and
uphold accepted values and standards with regard
to the protection of the human and civil rights of all
residents of Kosovo and Metohija, enabling them to live
in dignity and lead a normal life.
It is with regret that I note, notwithstanding the
years-long presence of the international community,
Kosovo and Metohija continues to be devoid of the
basic conditions for an unhindered and sustainable
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Here
too, the report before us regrettably does not accord
the problem of IDPs the attention that it deserves.
I recall that Serbia continues to top the unenviable
list of European countries in terms of the number of
IDPs. During the conflict of 1999 and after the arrival
of KFOR, more than 210,000 people were forced to
leave their homes in Kosovo and Metohija, while an
additional 20,000 were displaced in the March pogrom
of 2004. Currently, more than 18,000 people are
displaced within the territory of Kosovo and Metohija,
while more than 204,000 displaced people are in
central Serbia. According to a study by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
97,000 persons have been identified as still in need,
that is, in an aggravated socioeconomic situation and
in need of help.
With respect to the IDPs, the Republic of Serbia
is strategically committed to rendering full support to
each and every person, either for sustainable return
or local integration in the place of displacement in
accordance with the intention expressed by each
individual. Yet any support that Serbia may render to
potential returnees will be insufficient if not given the
proper attention and commitment by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina. There is
a real risk, for example, that the returnees will not be
accepted or even tolerated by the receiving community,

15-377325/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

especially if the international community is not actively
engaged.
To fully understand the obstacles encountered by
the IDPs in their quest to return home to Kosovo and
Metohija, one should know that, on average, 25 per
cent of refugees and IDPs worldwide return home, the
percentage varying between a minimum of 12 per cent
and a maximum of over 50 per cent. In Kosovo and
Metohija, it stands at about a mere 1.5 per cent. That
grim reality is a reminder that the task has not been
completed and merits the attention of all forthcoming
reports of the Secretary-General. The conditions
needed for return include, among others, proper
security guarantees, freedom of movement, an effective
mechanism for the restitution of property and other
appurtenant rights, protection from discrimination,
access to institutions, documents and justice and
support for the economic independence of returnees.
The prevention of efforts to obstruct returns is needed,
along with respect for the principle of accountability on
the part of the international and local actors involved in
the process.
I therefore call on the United Nations and other
representatives of the international administration in
Kosovo and Metohija to see to it that problems that have
impeded IDP returns and have aggravated their already
difficult situation are overcome. Returnees continue to
face repeated security incidents, including attacks on
their property, which sends a strong negative message
to other Serbs and potential returnees. The situation
is not helped by the climate of impunity for crimes
committed against Serbs, as reflected in the fact that
none of the perpetrators of the murders of more than
1,000 Serbs since 1999 has been given a legally valid
sentence.
It is possible to get the false impression, because of
the practice of according a separate chapter in the report
to Northern Kosovo, that the human rights situation of
the members of the Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities south of the Ibar River is satisfactory. In
order to get a broader perspective on the situation and
because a great deal of time has elapsed since we last
had a review of the human rights situation in that part
of Kosovo and Metohija, I submit that there is a need
for an extensive review of the situation, and that the
status of the Serbs and Goranci and the members of
other non-Albanian communities who live south of the
river be included in the next report.

6/24

19/11/2015

The property rights of the Serbs continue to be
violated throughout the entire province, especially by
the sale of enterprises in Serbian communities. Such
sales snuff out the potential for communities in which
Serbs live to exist economically, jeopardize conditions
for return and undermine security. After all, in addition
to the lack of security, the absence of an effective
mechanism for the restitution of usurped property is one
of the most important factors that aggravate and limit
IDP returns. It is therefore only appropriate to draw the
attention of the Council to the additional institutional
measures taken by Pristina, such as the draft law on the
Kosovo Property Comparison and Verification Agency.
This runs counter to the 2011 Technical Agreement
on Cadastre, and its adoption would open the door to
the legalization of unlawfully confiscated property in
Kosovo and Metohija and cause irreparable damage to
the Serbian community. Mention should also be made
of the fact that the draft law does not provide for the
majority of minority MPs required to pass a law of vital
interest to their community.
In addition to making a routine roll call, as it were,
of the attacks carried out during the reporting period
on monuments that form part of the Serbian religious
and cultural heritage, Serbia calls on the international
community to step up its engagement in the process of
their physical and legal protection, especially in view of
current political developments in the province. I would
point out that these attacks have never ceased. This
is incontrovertible proof of the fact that the majority
community has never accepted the Serbian cultural
heritage as part of the common heritage and cultural
values that have been passed on to us to treasure jointly
in Kosovo and Metohija.
Accordingly, the Albanian community does not
have the legal, historical, moral or any other right to
appropriate the monuments of the Serbian cultural and
spiritual heritage that it has targeted for systematic
destruction since 1999. Albanian students in Kosovo
and Metohija learn from their textbooks that Serbian
churches and monasteries from the twelfth, thirteen and
fourteenth centuries are Albanian and that the Serbian
Nemanjic dynasty from that time is in fact the Albanian
Nimani dynasty. This is a falsification of history aimed
at erasing the Serbian identity and presence in Kosovo
and Metohija.
The talks held on the property of the Serbian
Orthodox Church and the status and protection of the
Serbian cultural heritage in Kosovo and Metohija in

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

the context of the Brussels agreement have yet to be
followed up. I take this opportunity to reiterate my call
on the international community to send a clear and
unequivocal message to the local authorities that it will
closely monitor their efforts to prevent criminal acts
directed at objects of cultural and religious heritage, as
well as their response to the commission of such acts.
In closing, let me underline once again that
Serbia is firmly committed to dialogue with the
representatives of Pristina. Conducted with the
facilitation of the European Union, the dialogue is one
of the rare successful examples of the pacific solution
of conflicts in today’s world. Within the framework
of the dialogue, exceptionally important agreements
have been reached on the improvement of the daily
living conditions of the entire population of Kosovo
and Metohija. Our dedication to this process reflects
our firm commitment to making an active contribution
to the furtherance of the political and economic
stability of the Western Balkans and the resolution
of all remaining open questions exclusively through
political and diplomatic means. With this specific goal
in mind, we have demonstrated, in the context of the
dialogue, our constructive approach and readiness to
compromise. Thus we have made a contribution to
ensuring that many complex issues in various areas,
including legislation, energy and telecommunications,
are resolved in a mutually acceptable manner in the
interest, first and foremost, of reconciliation and a
common future.
The political, social and economic conditions in
which the Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija
lives continue to be very complex. I emphasize that the
Republic of Serbia expects the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, to continue to
provide assistance on the path of confidence-building,
which, we firmly believe, is the only solid basis for
ensuring a normal life for all in Kosovo and Metohija.
I would sound a final note of caution: unilateral
attempts such as the request for Kosovo’s admission to
UNESCO are steps in the wrong direction and testify to
the flouting of the agreements reached. Another example
of this is the suspension of the agreement to establish
a community of Serbs. There can be no alternative to
dialogue as a means of resolving all outstanding issues.
It is for that reason that Serbia remains fully committed
to dialogue in Brussels as the way to resolve all issues
in dispute.

S/PV.7563

The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: It is my pleasure and honour to stand
in front of the Council today and to discuss the periodic
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/833).
Sixteen years ago, Kosovo had no voice in this
Chamber. We were witnessing the darkest moments of
our lives. We were being deported from our homes, we
were being killed, and we were being raped. Our lives
and our dignity were being targeted in the most brutal
way by the Serbian military and paramilitary forces.
Families were being separated, some forever.
Scenes of helpless people being driven away in
trains captured the world’s attention. But although
atrocities of that magnitude expose the worst of
humanity, it is in moments like these that we see the
very best that humanity has to offer.
We Kosovars are living proof of the fact that
when there is solidarity among the free nations of the
world, when the world decides to act together against
atrocities, injustice and terror, life wins out over death,
and good prevails over evil. And although we did not
have our own voice in this Chamber, the Council spoke
on our behalf. For that we are grateful.
In the immediate aftermath of the war and
devastation, the United Nations deployed the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
which found a country in ashes and helped rebuild it as
well as our lives. We had to start out again from scratch.
The Serbian forces took with them our civil registry, our
cadastral records and all documentation. It was not an
easy start. Once you are free, you realize that survival
is not the only worry and that freedom is not sufficient.
There are homes to rebuild, roads to pave, schools to
construct, laws to adopt and institutions to build. None
of it is easy, but we have managed it together, with the
help of the Council.
Today, 16 years later, Kosovo is an independent and
sovereign State recognized by a majority of the free
nations of the world. We are a constructive partner in
the region and beyond. We have gone to great lengths
to accommodate minority communities in our young
State. We have taken unprecedented affirmative action,
unlike any other minority in the region, and we are
proud of it. Kosovo has set an example to be followed.
While the political debate back home might
sometimes be fierce and filled with tension, let no
one have any doubts about our collective aspirations

15-377327/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

and commitments to Euro-Atlantic values and ideals.
I am honoured to inform the Council that Kosovo’s
dedication and hard work were rewarded with the
signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union (EU). Although that marks
just the first step in our accession process, it is a clear
act that demonstrates that our European future is
irreversible and unstoppable. It is a clear and mutual
commitment. On the one hand, Kosovo institutions
commit to continuing with the reforms at all levels,
and, on the other hand, the European Union commits to
providing a concrete road map to accession.
The Stabilization and Association Agreement will
open our markets, increase and ease the exchange of
goods and ideas, and stimulate growth and competition.
Ultimately, it will make Kosovo a better place to live.
We understand that it will be a long process, and it
will involve lots of difficult and painful reforms, but
we remain committed to it. We also expect a positive
recommendation from the European Commission on
the visa liberalization process. We have delivered on
the criteria; now the European Commission should
deliver on its promises.
While the role of the European Union has become
more important and the level of interaction between
Kosovar institutions and the European Union has
increased, we believe that the time is long overdue to
change the nature and the format of the relationship
between Kosovo and the United Nations in general
and the format of the debate in the Security Council in
particular. From now on, Kosovo will be represented
in the Chamber at the level of an Ambassador. We
also believe that there is no need to meet every three
months to repeat the same old positions and engage in a
discourse that is completely the opposite of what we are
trying to achieve through the Brussels dialogue.
We in Kosovo believe that the Chamber is being
misused and that the Council’s valuable time is being
wasted because of desperate attempts from our northern
neighbour to project a picture that does not match the
reality, to artificially inject the idea that somehow
Kosovo’s status is not settled, that our independence
is a temporary and unfinished business. I wish to be
very clear: Kosovo is a free, independent and sovereign
State, and we will never negotiate our right to exist as
an equal member of the family of the free world.
That brings me to another point, our aspiration to
join and contribute within international mechanisms.

8/24

19/11/2015

Kosovo so far has joined several important international
organizations, and we will continue to do so in the
future. The path towards that aspiration will have twists
and turns, but the Council may rest assured that in the
end we will succeed.
I would like say a few words on our unsuccessful
attempt to join UNESCO a few days ago. While
Kosovo waged a very positive and moderate campaign,
focused on our youth and our rich cultural, religious,
and historical heritage, we were faced with a very
brutal, dishonest, factually incorrect and, ultimately,
racist campaign against Kosovo. Waging that kind of
campaign against Kosovo’s membership in UNESCO
is a direct violation of the spirit of dialogue and
normalization that we in the region so desperately need.
Spending all that time on disseminating fabricated facts
and untrue stories, with the ultimate goal of preventing
our youth and our culture from being a part of the global
family, is unworthy of a country that is a candidate for
membership in the EU.
Furthermore, abusing the Serbian Orthodox
Church and instrumentalizing it for political campaigns
is unacceptable. We have witnessed a Serbia that acts
with total disregard for European values, issuing
threats and warnings against our immediate neighbours
for supporting Kosovo’s membership in UNESCO. In
contrast to our positive campaign, the top leadership
of Serbia used hate speech of an unprecedented and
unacceptable kind. They claimed that the overwhelming
majority of the citizens of Kosovo were of a lower class,
and that Kosovo was comparable to the worst extremist
and terrorist organizations. In doing so, many senior
officials became promoters of xenophobic attitudes
towards Kosovo.
But the Council may rest assured that we will not
allow our neighbour’s rhetoric and actions to deter
us from our strong commitment to cultivating peace,
dialogue and interfaith tolerance in Kosovo. The
protection and preservation of the Serbian Orthodox
Church in Kosovo is a constitutional issue, as foreseen
within the Ahtisaari plan provisions. That issue will
no longer be open for discussion, nor will it be a topic
in the Brussels dialogue. We will not negotiate with
Serbia and we will not ask for Serbia’s permission or
consent to join international organizations. For we
would expect Serbia to act in accordance with the spirit
of the normalization process. We will be working even
harder to join international mechanisms, not because of
vanity, but because it is only by being a member of the

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

global family and having a seat at the table that we can
provide more opportunities for all citizens of Kosovo,
regardless of their ethnic or religious backgrounds.
On behalf of the Government of Kosovo, I would
like to express my deepest gratitude and appreciation
to the 92 representatives of countries that supported
and voted for Kosovo’s membership in UNESCO. I
want to assure the representatives of the countries
that abstained or had doubts or suspicions that we
will provide them with reasons to support us in the
future. We also understand that, as some of them
have told us, their abstentions on our membership in
UNESCO were not related to Kosovo. Finally, we urge
the representatives of the countries that voted against
Kosovo’s membership to give us a chance to openly
discuss concerns before our application is again on the
agenda in 2017.
Kosovo’s institutions reassure the Council that
we will continue to be proactive and committed to
the inter-State dialogue in Brussels. Solely through
dialogue can we achieve sustainable peace. But we
also need to be honest and to speak in earnest on what
the normalization of relations with Serbia means. For
us in Kosovo, there is no room for ambiguity. While
we commit to implementing all the agreements we
have reached with Serbia, since they are in line with
our Constitution, we also need to see the same level of
commitment from Serbia.
Just yesterday, our Minister of Finance was unable
to visit our customs offices in the northern part of
Kosovo, despite the agreement with Serbia and despite
the fact that Serbia had promised to dismantle the
parallel structures. There is a bridge in Kosovo in the
twenty-first century that does not serve to connect
people, but to divide them, despite the agreement on
the freedom of movement with Serbia. That dualism
must end.
I also want to inform the Council that we have
adopted constitutional changes for the creation of the
special court. We take our international obligations
very seriously. Our Parliament adopted the amendments
and the legislation with a two-thirds majority vote.
Now we are at the final stage of the negotiations with
the Netherlands for the opening of the special chamber
of Kosovo in The Hague. We in Kosovo, more than
anyone else, need to close that chapter. We have always
cooperated with international justice, and we will
continue to do so.

S/PV.7563

Kosovo has proven itself as an active member of the
global coalition against terrorism. Just a few days ago,
terror in the streets of Paris reminded us that we are
fighting a borderless war. We must all stand together
and be united. Please allow me to voice the solidarity
of the people of Kosovo with France, and to reassure
the Council that we will continue to give our utmost to
fight this global threat.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to congratulate the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, on the successful
start of his work. We welcome his commitment
to assisting in strengthening stability in Kosovo
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), which remains the
fundamental document for a settlement in Kosovo. We
hope that his great experience in diplomatic affairs
will help Mr. Tanin make a significant contribution to
ensuring positive momentum in the Kosovo process.
We welcome the participation in the meeting of the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić,
and we share his views and considerations. We note
that in the statement of Ms. Vlora Çitaku, rhetoric,
unfortunately, prevailed over concrete facts. We are
also forced to note that in meetings of the Security
Council, the representative of the Pristina authorities
speaks, of course, in a personal capacity.
The Security Council and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo continue
to play a leading role in resolving the problems in
the Kosovo region. At this difficult stage, there is a
clear need to maintain a high level of United Nations
presence. UNMIK should have all the necessary
financial and human resources.
The situation in and around Kosovo remains acute.
The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, which
is carried out with European Union (EU) mediation,
is stalled. The reason for that is the suspension by the
Kosovo side of the implementation of a key agreement
on the establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities, which was reached in August. The lack
of a palpable reaction to that development on the part
of Brussels, which participated directly in elaborating
the aforementioned agreement, is puzzling. Claims of
the inability to comment on Kosovo’s legal procedures
are simply unconvincing. Such an approach could

15-377329/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

be used to sabotage any agreement. It is common
knowledge that the EU examines Serbian legislation
with a magnifying glass and even imposes certain legal
decisions on Belgrade, making Serbia’s progress in
European integration dependent on it. It is difficult to
the reconcile the stated high respect for the so-called
Constitution of Kosovo and the cavalier disregard
for Serbian law, according to which the province is
an integral part of the country. We believe that the
establishment of an association of Serb-majority
municipalities with the necessary range of powers to
defend the legitimate rights and interests of Kosovo’s
Serb community must be a priority.
It is no coincidence that the decision to slow
down the establishment of the association of Serbmajority municipalities was adopted by the Kosovars
on the day after the General Conference of UNESCO
rejected Kosovo’s application for membership in that
organization. One gets the impression that that was
simply a form of petty revenge directed at the Serbs,
who sought to defend their position. The fact that
Kosovo applied for membership to UNESCO against
the backdrop of Pristina’s categorical refusal to discuss
the protection of the Serbian cultural and spiritual
heritage in the framework of a dialogue with Belgrade
demonstrates the real level of willingness of the
Kosovar Albanians to cooperate and, in essence, their
lack of willingness to compromise.
We cannot but be concerned by the chaotic internal
political situation in the province. The so-called
Assembly is virtually paralysed. Its members regularly
settle arguments by throwing various instruments at one
another and even spraying tear gas. It is noteworthy that
the main disagreement in that regard revolves around
the agreement on the association of Serb-majority
municipalities, which the nationalist opposition has
tried to destroy from the beginning.
The key issues facing the ordinary citizens of the
province are well known. They are social and economic
issues, and they continue not to be addressed. A
dangerous development is the fact that the internal
political disagreements are spilling out onto the street.
In the last few days in Pristina there have been mass
demonstrations during which the demonstrators threw
stones, paint and Molotov cocktails at the police, and
law enforcement authorities used tear gas. As a result of
those clashes, at least 10 people were injured.
We are concerned by the lack of progress in
improving the unenviable situation of the Serb
10/24

19/11/2015

community. The disregard for Serb property rights,
primarily related to real estate, undermines the
economic foundation for their livelihood. An extremely
alarming case is the legal entanglement of Kosovo/
Albanian interests with the Orthodox monastery of
Visoki Dečani in an attempt to seize land belonging to
the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The situation surrounding the creation of a special
court to investigate the crimes committed by members
of the Kosovo Liberation Army lacks transparency.
We hope that progress will soon be made in that area.
The punishment of all those responsible, regardless of
the positions they occupy, is one of the most important
conditions for reconciliation and the restoration of
mutual trust between national communities. We hope
that that issue will be closely monitored by UNMIK
and the international community.
We would also like to express our concern with
regard to the lack of tangible results in the investigation
into the incursion of the group of fighters from Kosovo
into Macedonia in May. Attempts to downplay that case
without addressing the underlying causes may well lead
to renewed violence, the responsibility for which will
be borne by those who, owing to the political situation
prevailing at the time, decided to ignore such a serious
incident.
In conclusion, we confirm that Russia’s position
on the issue of Kosovo remains unchanged. Resolution
1244 (1999) remains fully in force as the international
legal basis for a settlement in Kosovo. We believe
that the Security Council must regularly monitor
developments in the province.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his briefing and assure him of my country’s full
support in his new role and wish him every success.
I also thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and the Ambassador of Kosovo for their statements.
I take this opportunity to express to them France’s
gratitude for the messages of solidarity of the Kosovar
and Serbian authorities following the heinous attacks
on our country on 13 November.
France welcomes and supports the political
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices
of the European Union. As the Special Representative
noted, the signing, on 25 August in Brussels, of four
bilateral agreements is a significant step forward. We
are pleased that the first concrete steps have already

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

been taken, such as the launching of the construction
work on the Mitrovica bridge.
However, it is crucial that the parties continue to
mobilize without reserve their efforts to fully implement
the agreement. We will, in that regard, be attentive to
the developments following the decision of the Kosovo
Constitutional Court to postpone until next January the
possibility of adopting the agreement on the association
of Serb-majority municipalities. In our view, that
agreement is a key mechanism that enables the Serb
population to fully embrace their Kosovar citizenship
and to stop viewing themselves, wrongly, as foreigners.
Its creation will not call into question the unitary status
of the country. Kosovo’s authorities must pursue their
efforts to reconcile with Serbia on this score, all the
while stepping up outreach to the population.
The efforts to consolidate the rule of law in Kosovo
must remain more than ever a priority. That entails, first
and foremost, unconditional respect for the functioning
of its institutions. Recent months have been marked by
a series of particularly serious incidents in the form of
attacks against members of the Government or even
physical attempts to impede the work of the Parliament,
as we saw yesterday. Such acts of violence are quite
simply unacceptable. They endanger the advances so
patiently built up by Kosovo for more than 10 years
on its path to constructing an independent, modern
and democratic State. We therefore call on all Kosovar
political actors to abstain from all forms of violence.
The consolidation of the rule of law also entails the
fight against impunity. After the Kosovo Assembly’s
adoption in August of a series of constitutional
amendments that authorized the establishment of the
specialist court to follow up allegations of war crimes
contained in the Marty report, it is important that the
specialist court be put in place as soon as possible.
The consolidation of the rule of law also ultimately
requires the fight against radicalization in all its forms.
France commends the actions taken by the Kosovar
authorities in support of the fight against violent
extremism. Their mobilization on that front is critically
important in our collective fight to combat terrorism.
We intend to pursue our bilateral coordination efforts
in that realm. I would also like to take this opportunity
to reiterate our support for the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, which is working day by day to
support the rule of law and security in Kosovo.
I should also like to recall the European position,
which recognizes all the Balkan States as a whole.

S/PV.7563

The signing on 27 October, in Strasbourg, of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement between the
European Union and Kosovo signals an important step
that confirms the European Union’s full commitment
to supporting Kosovo in its implementation of the
reforms that are an indispensable part of its pursuit of
rapprochement with Europe. The Agreement will be
an essential tool for strengthening our cooperation in a
great number of domains, particularly in the economic,
commercial and political spheres. The measures for
their implementation should be put in place at once.
Matters relating to the rule of law, justice and internal
affairs will be under particular scrutiny within that
framework.
In recent years, Serbia, for its part, has undertaken
important efforts to draw closer to Europe, whether
through internal reforms or by improving relations with
its neighbours. We encourage it to continue the full
implementation of agreements already concluded with
Pristina, and reiterate our willingness to see it accede
to the European Union as soon as possible, when the
conditions have been met.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
importance of both the Serbian and Kosovar authorities
taking the high road in sorting out their differences and
concentrating on efforts to normalize their relations,
which represents a fundamental requirement for the
stability of the region as well as the strong demand of
their respective peoples.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome Mr. Zahir Tanin, the new Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo. We would like to thank him for his briefing
on the situation in Kosovo. Our country wishes him
every success in his efforts to promote peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region. We would also like
to thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitak for their briefings.
In the political arena, we value the progress
achieved in recent months with the establishment
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities, a substantive element of the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relationsof 19 April 2013. We recognize the role of the
European Union in facilitating the high-level technical
negotiations between Pristina and Belgrade, which
are contributing to the promotion of trust between the
parties. Nonetheless, we note with concern the recent

15-3773211/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

attacks against political leaders in Kosovo. All acts that
could damage or undermine the normal functioning of
democratic institutions must be repudiated. We call on
the political leaders to refrain from using inflammatory
language and anti-democratic methods to express
their positions. In that regard, we are also extremely
concerned by the violent attacks against minority
communities and against the cultural and religious
heritage of Kosovo. It is critical to preserve and deepen
the conditions for coexistence and to avoid all acts
that could endanger relations among the different
communities. Promoting respect for minorities is a task
that everyone should respect and one with which all
should comply.
We recognize the progress made in Kosovo since
our last meeting with respect to preventing extremism
and radicalization. The adoption of the strategy of
16 September constitutes an important step in tackling
that phenomenon. However, an effective strategy
requires both recognizing and addressing the diverse
factors that contribute to extremism. We stress the
importance of continuing to work on addressing the
socioeconomic factors that exacerbate the recruitment
activities of extremist groups. Similarly, we highlight
the importance of coordination between the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime with the goal of addressing
the financing of terrorism. Finally, we recognize those
initiatives that highlight the important role of women in
the fight against violent extremism in Kosovo.
Identifying the whereabouts of the more than
1,600 people who disappeared during the conflict is
sine qua non for advancing toward truth and justice
and it is a right of family members that must be met
by the relevant authorities. In that regard, we commend
the recent agreement on the exchange of information
signed by the Commissions on Missing Persons of
Kosovo and Montenegro, and we urge the authorities in
Pristina to strengthen the efforts of the Working Group
on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances. Progress
on that matter is fundamental for closing the wounds
left by the war. The restoration of the social fabric in
Kosovo requires the return and effective inclusion of
those who were displaced by the conflict. We recognize
the regional efforts to address that issue and commend
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the crucial role it has been playing in
facilitating the voluntary return of refugees. We would
also highlight the central role of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo in strengthening the rule of law and
12/24

19/11/2015

promoting the security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo.
To conclude, I would like to stress that resolution
1244 (1991) retains its full force as the internationally
recognized basis for resolving the situation in Kosovo,
including strict respect for the principle of territorial
integrity.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to welcome Special
Representative Mr. Zahir Tanin and thank him for his
first briefing to the Security Council. Malaysia looks
forward to working closely with Ambassador Tanin
in support of the work of the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku back to New York and thank them both
for their briefings.
Malaysia is pleased with the milestone achieved
by Kosovo during the reporting period, including
the signing of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union last month. We
sincerely hope that implementation of the Agreement
will bring stability and prosperity to the people of
Kosovo through good governance, the rule of law and
socioeconomic reforms. Malaysia also welcomes the
progress made by Kosovo towards the normalization of
its relations with its neighbours, especially the package
of agreements reached by the Prime Ministers of
Serbia and Kosovo that was facilitated by the European
Union on 27 August in Brussels. We also commend the
agreement signed between Kosovo and Montenegro to
delineate their borders. We are concerned, however,
by the violent protest by violent parties opposed to the
package of agreements and the territorial delineation
agreement with Montenegro. We call on the relevant
parties to resolve their differences through dialogue and
engagement, rather than resorting to the use of violence
and intimidation to achieve their political aims.
Malaysia commends the Assembly of Kosovo
for adopting constitutional amendments and laws to
enable the establishment of the special chambers to
try cases that arise from the findings of the European
Union special investigative task force. That significant
progress reflects the political will and commitment on
the part of the leaders in Kosovo to ensure accountability
and promote closure and reconciliation.
In view of the challenges faced by the region
and the world in combating terrorism, we applaud

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

the adoption, in September, of the five-year strategy
by the Government of Kosovo for the prevention of
violent extremism and radicalization. The strategy
and its action plan reflect the Government’s strong
commitment in addressing transnational challenges to
counter violent extremism.
With regard to Kosovo’s application for membership
of UNESCO, we are encouraged by the overwhelming
support shown for Kosovo last week, despite falling
three votes short of a successful application. Malaysia
supported Kosovo’s membership of UNESCO, as it
would lead to further assistance and funding for culture
and education in Kosovo. We also believe that it could
ensure adequate international protection for religious
and cultural sites in the country. Despite the setback,
we urge the Kosovo authorities to remain steadfast in
their commitment to preserve cultural and religious
heritage sites and to engage in dialogue with the relevant
communities to address issues of mutual concern.
In conclusion, Malaysia stresses the need for all
parties in Kosovo to intensify efforts towards national
reconciliation among the various ethnicities and
religions and to ensure respect for human rights. We
will continue to support Kosovo to that end. I also join
my other colleagues in reaffirming support for UNMIK,
which continues to play a key role in promoting
security and stability in Kosovo. We also commend the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo for their immense contributions to
peace and stability in Kosovo.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Ambassador Zahir Tanin as he makes his first briefing
to the Security Council as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
I assure Mr. Tanin of our full support in his efforts, as
well as for the important role UNMIK has played, and
will continue to play in the immediate future.
We have heard the statements made by Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and
Ms. Vlora Çitaku. And we have also heard the briefing
by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. We have read the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/833), carefully and with concern. We
are concerned by the atmosphere in Kosovo — as we
have heard and read — which has clearly deteriorated

S/PV.7563

as contrasted with the situation at the beginning of
the year. That erosion is also evident in the SecretaryGeneral’s three most recent reports.
We are concerned by the unacceptable recourse to
aggressive rhetoric, threats and violence by political
stakeholders in Pristina, including parliamentarians,
without any respect for democratic norms. We are
concerned by the unjustifiable lack of implementation
of the commitments made — commitments that were
the outcome of agreements that just a few months ago
we had all celebrated unanimously here in the Council
as steps in the right direction. We are concerned by the
untimely return to unilateralism on the part of the Pristina
authorities, to the detriment of the Brussels dialogue
facilitated by the High Representative of the European
Union, which the Council has always encouraged. We
are equally concerned by the deteriorating security
situation in Kosovo, as set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, as a result of the increasing number of
acts of vandalism and violent protests led by political
and social protagonists, as well as by ongoing incidents
against non-majority communities and against cultural
and religious heritage sites associated with those
communities. And we continue to be concerned by the
lack of progress with regard to voluntary returns of
internally displaced persons and with regard to missing
persons, as well as by the continued existence of major
shortcomings in the areas of human rights and the rule
of law.
Those social and substantive issues represent key
basic principles of the European identity that Kosovo
desires to achieve. It is for that reason that they must
be the subject of committed, priority attention — above
others of a more formal nature. Spain once again calls
for the high-level dialogue between the two capitals to
be given the pride of place that the Security Council
attaches to it. There is a need to return to the path of
dialogue, good-faith negotiation and the implementation
of the commitments undertaken — in brief, the path of
reconciliation.
The agreements achieved months ago to set up an
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
and to set up a specialist court to take up cases
investigated by the Special Investigative Task Force
were steps in the right direction. Implementing them
is crucial for any eventual goal the parties may seek
to pursue. We acknowledge that they were complex
agreements that were painstaking to finalize, in which
both sides had to give something up. That is precisely

15-3773213/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

the reason that they are good agreements. However,
impeding or delaying their implementation would be
a step backwards, backsliding that would weaken the
process and erode the mutual trust that is necessary
in any dialogue process. Moreover, such decisions are
detrimental to the interests of the people and of Kosovo,
as well as to the advances towards reconciliation,
stability and progress. Spain therefore rejects such
decisions, as they have been rejected by the Council
and by the European Union.
Without prejudice to our position of principle,
which is well known and which was recently set out
at the meeting of the UNESCO General Conference,
Spain has been constructively supporting all efforts
aimed at achieving concrete results that would benefit
the entire population of Kosovo, such as the Brussels
dialogue. We are prepared to maintain that constructive
position. However, we hope that all the relevant actors
will also demonstrate the same constructive spirit and
that such an attitude will result in a clear commitment
to continue dialogue and responsible conduct that
promotes respect for the rule of law.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, we would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
on recent developments in Kosovo. We congratulate
him on his appointment as Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and assure him of our
full support. We are confident that he will bring his
wealth of experience as former Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United
Nations to bear in the performance of his duties. We
also thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku for their
statements.
Nigeria takes positive note of the continued
progress in technical talks between the parties, within
the framework of the 19 April 2013 First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. We encourage both sides
to utilize that crucial bilateral platform to address and
resolve all outstanding issues related to the Agreement.
We welcome the adoption of the legislation on the
establishment of the specialist court. It is a positive
development in the administration of justice in
Kosovo. Deliberate efforts should be made to support

14/24

19/11/2015

the activities of the court in the quest for justice and
accountability.
We are concerned, however, by the recent violent
actions by opposition groups that have disrupted
parliamentary action on the autonomy of the Serbdominated areas of Kosovo. The territorial delineation
agreement as related to promoting regional cooperation
between Kosovo and Montenegro remains a contentious
issue among some factions of the Parliament. We urge
all those concerned to express their disagreements in
an orderly, constructive and democratic manner.
The five-year strategy for the prevention of violent
extremism and radicalization is a laudable step in the
fight against terrorism. The law prohibiting individuals
from joining armed conflicts outside Kosovo is crucial
to addressing the threat of potential foreign terrorist
fighters. We commend the authorities of Kosovo for
their commitment to combating all forms of extremism.
Reconciliation remains crucial to strengthening
cohesion and laying the foundation for peace and
progress in Kosovo. The confidence-building projects
initiated by UNMIK have been appropriately designed
to achieve that objective. They are facilitating
dialogue — not only between faiths, but also between
cultures — and, in our view, are already yielding
positive results. We encourage further reconciliatory
efforts in the overall interest of peace and stability.
With regard to the issue of missing persons, we
are concerned that the non-appointment of the Chair
of the Pristina delegation is hampering the work of the
Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on Missing Persons.
As 1,670 persons are still listed as missing as a result
of the Kosovo conflict, it is important that that post be
filled without further delay.
Finally, we wish to note that the role of UNMIK
remains vital to the promotion of security and stability
in Kosovo. With the Mission’s focus on institutional
reform, as well as the right to truth, justice and
reparations, we are hopeful that reconciliation among
the different communities in Kosovo will be attained
and sustained.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku of Kosovo for their contributions to
this debate. I also thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, for his briefing.
Kosovo is a peaceful and more prosperous place
today. The Kosovo Government formed last year has
actively embarked upon wide-ranging reforms. The
progress in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
now is measured in deeds, not words. Kosovo has
strengthened its relations with the European Union
(EU). It has also made undeniable progress in the light
of the challenges faced by many countries of the region
in strengthening the rule of law and addressing the
social and economic situation.
In October, the European Union and Kosovo
signed the Stabilization and Association Agreement,
setting out a clear path for stronger relations, deeper
political dialogue and economic cooperation. It is an
opportunity for the people of Kosovo to access new
markets and boost trade and investment, provided that
the reforms take place. It is indeed up to the Kosovo
authorities to make full use of that instrument, and
we look forward to the swift entry into force of the
Agreement. Lithuania has been a consistent supporter
of Kosovo’s path towards the European Union. We are
ready to continue sharing our experience in reform,
including through the EU twinning programme.
Historic decisions require courage. We welcome
the solid steps by both sides aimed at normalizing
relations within the framework of EU-facilitated
dialogue in implementing the First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
signed in Brussels in 2013. Results have been achieved
in the areas of justice and civil protection integration.
The dialogue has also brought about agreements on
energy and telecommunication and the establishment
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities, as well as on freedom of movement and
the Mitrovica bridge. The time has come to implement
the agreements, and we encourage Serbia and Kosovo
to move forward in the normalization of their relations.
That is at the core of the European integration agenda
for both countries, and the key to regional prosperity
and stability. The future of their progress is in the
hands of the leaders of both countries. The region needs
less divisive rhetoric and more cooperation, trade and
increased connectivity.
The leaders of Kosovo have demonstrated their
ability to unite in making important decisions, as was
seen by the decision to establish the specialist court to try

S/PV.7563

cases arising from the Special Investigative Task Force.
Further efforts to pursue an inclusive political dialogue,
a culture of compromise and respect for democratic
processes are essential in moving forward with the
necessary reforms. At the same time, we encourage
the Government of Kosovo to do more in fostering
interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue. We welcome the
commitment of Kosovo to abide by UNESCO standards,
and we believe that all communities throughout Kosovo
would benefit from the protection of their culture and
heritage provided by UNESCO.
The situation on the ground remains stable, and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continue to play an
important role in contributing to security, stability and
the rule of law. Lithuania will continue its contributions
to KFOR and EULEX. However, let me also take this
opportunity to remind everyone of the need to expedite
the investigation into the killing of the EULEX staff
member, customs officer Audrius Šenavičius, two years
ago. We call for cooperation on both sides to expedite
the investigation.
The support of the international community for
a stable and prosperous Kosovo remains firm. The
international community helped to bring security and
stability to the region, and the Kosovo authorities have
demonstrated that they are able to take matters into
their own hands. Given the progress on the ground, I
wish to echo the request made by the representative of
Kosovo that reducing the frequency of Council debates
on UNMIK is long overdue.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I, too, thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and join
others in wishing him well in his new role. I also welcome
Deputy Prime Ministers Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku
to this discussion.
As mentioned, the leadership of Serbia and Kosovo
have concluded several agreements since the Council
last considered this agenda item (see S/PV.7510).
Of particular note is the agreement relating to Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo. New Zealand
welcomes that significant progress. It demonstrates
the ongoing importance of the European Union (EU)facilitated dialogue in normalizing relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that both sides will
renew their commitment and energy to that process
of normalizing relations through dialogue and will
implement that which has been agreed. Their people

15-3773215/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

need to see their leaders living up to their commitments.
Gains made need to be banked.
Disagreement and vigorous debate is part of a
healthy democracy. However, we note with concern
efforts by some political actors to physically disrupt
the workings of the Kosovo Assembly. Such actions
are irresponsible and risk undermining confidence in
a critical democratic institution. We urge all political
actors in Kosovo to refrain from such actions and fully
respect democratic principles.
The last time the Council discussed the situation
in Kosovo (see S/PV.7510), New Zealand welcomed
Kosovo’s progress towards establishing a specialist
court to address serious allegations arising from the EU
Special Investigative Task Force. We also said that, while
important first steps had been taken, there remained
much to do in order to fully establish the court. That
is still the case today. We echo the Secretary-General
in calling on all stakeholders to move expeditiously in
order to complete that process.
Engagement in the Working Group on Missing
Persons stalled during the reporting period. That is
deeply regrettable. Addressing the issue of missing
persons is an essential component of reconciliation
and is of fundamental concern to affected families. We
urge that all the necessary steps be taken to enable the
Working Group to continue its important work. Progress
on returnees to Kosovo and the careful curation of
cultural and religious sites will also be important for
reconciliation.
We welcome the adoption by the Government of
Kosovo of a five-year strategy for the prevention of
violent extremism and radicalization. The terrorist
attacks in the Middle East, Turkey and, most recently,
France underline the critical importance of addressing
violent extremism before it takes hold. We urge the
Government of Kosovo to implement its agreed action
plan.
The progress under way in Kosovo should be
taken into account when considering a more flexible
approach to how and when the Council should dedicate
its limited time and attention to this agenda item.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
and wish him every success at his new post. I welcome
the presence of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
16/24

19/11/2015

Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and thank him for his statement. China also listened
attentively to the statement made by Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, and understands the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo. Resolution
1244 (1999) is an important legal basis for a solution to
that issue. Efforts should be made, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, to find an appropriate
solution acceptable to all the parties concerned through
dialogue and negotiation.
China appreciates Serbia’s positive efforts to
identify a political solution to the question of Kosovo,
as well as the fact that the high-level political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina has produced positive
results in the energy and communication spheres. We
encourage both sides to pursue their practical and
constructive dialogue in search of a lasting solution to
the Kosovo question and to maintain peace and stability
in the Balkans and Europe as a whole.
The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable, but complicated and uncertain factors prevail.
The parties concerned should effectively protect the
legitimate rights of all communities in Kosovo, actively
promote national reconciliation, seek to resolve their
differences through dialogue, and refrain from taking
actions that could complicate or escalate the situation.
China appreciates the work done by UNMIK under
the leadership of Special Representative Tanin, and
supports UNMIK’s ongoing efforts to implement its
Security Council mandate. We hope that UNMIK, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force will strengthen their coordination
and form synergies in order to play a positive and
constructive role in seeking an appropriate solution to
the Kosovo question.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
briefing made by Mr. Tanin, whom we welcome, and
congratulate him on his new appointment. We wish him
every success in his new functions.
We would also like to thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia, and Ms. Flora Çitaku for their briefings.

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
resolution 1244 (1999) is of increasing relevance as the
international legal basis for achieving a comprehensive
settlement within the framework of a politically
negotiated solution to the question of Kosovo, taking
into account the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Serbia.
We have seen with great concern the actions taken
by opposition activists to impede the ongoing discussion
of important aspects in the process of applying the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013. Venezuela believes that
dialogue between the various Kosovar political sectors
must be encouraged in order to prevent a recurrence of
these violent events and to support efforts to complete
the 2013 Brussels Agreement.
My country supports the dialogue in Brussels
between Serbia and the local authorities of the province
of Kosovo, aimed at achieving a mutually acceptable
solution between the parties. In that context, we note
with satisfaction that progress has been achieved in
areas such as energy, telecommunications and freedom
of movement across the bridge that connects the city
of Mitrovica. The parties must continue their work
towards establishing the association/community of
Serb municipalities in northern Kosovo.
We recognize the key role being play in Kosovo
by the United Nations, especially through the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), by promoting security, stability and respect
for human rights. That work has been supplemented
by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). Given the
importance of direct dialogue between the parties,
UNMIK, KFOR and EULEX must continue, on the basis
of their respective mandates, to play a proactive and
complementary role with a view to promoting a lasting,
sustainable, fair and mutually acceptable solution to
the Kosovo question. Moreover, my country believes
that the parties should reaffirm their commitment to
achieving genuine national reconciliation based on
the promotion and respect of human rights and the
full application of relevant international standards to
prevent discrimination against displaced persons and
minorities.
We are struck by the fact that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/833) again cites a very
low number of Serb voluntary returnees who were
displaced from their homes in Kosovo. Based on strict

S/PV.7563

observance of the 2013 Brussels Agreements, continued
efforts must be made at the State and local levels to
guarantee security, ethnic and religious tolerance,
and the property and economic rights and freedom of
movement of Kosovar Serbs. That is the only way to
reverse this negative trend.
Turning to the issue of cultural and religious
heritage, the parties need to work together to protect this
heritage by establishing and effectively implementating
laws to safeguard that important legacy of the various
communities living in Kosovo. However, we are
concerned by incidents that have occurred against
non-majority communities and their cultural and
religious heritage. Those events must be investigated in
order to bring the perpetrators to justice.
We also value the fact that the Working Group
on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances has
presented its report (A/HRC/30/38/Add.1) to the Human
Rights Council with a view to shedding light on the
fate of thousands of persons who disappeared during
the conflict. We hope that regular working meetings
between the parties can be resumed as soon as possible
so that the affected families can find closure and peace.
In the framework of fighting impunity, we reiterate
our satisfaction at the approval of the measures
necessary for the establishment of a specialist court
to investigate allegations of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed during the armed conflict
in Kosovo. We urge all interested parties to continue
working to ensure that the court can begin its work
promptly. We are convinced that the application of
judicial due process in those cases will help promote
reconciliation and peace among all parties.
Moreover, we recognize the efforts of the
authorities of the province of Kosovo to strengthen
actions to combat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and put an end to the recruitment of citizens
of that province by terrorist organizations. The scourge
of terrorism, which my country strongly condemns,
is a threat to international peace and security that
requires the resolute cooperation of the international
community in the effective implementation of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly that ban financing funding, training and the
transfer of weapons to those groups. We are convinced
that, in grappling with the terrorist threat, we must also
address the conditions that provide fertile ground for
their propagation, including poverty, social exclusion,
foreign occupation and interventionism.

15-3773217/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

To conclude, once again we encourage the parties
to redouble their efforts in the quest of a peaceful,
fair and lasting political solution, in the framework of
international law, and in full compliance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the 2013 Brussels Agreement.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tahin, for his
comprehensive briefing, to congratulate him on his
appointment to his new position and to wish him every
possible success in his endeavours. Similarly, I would
like to welcome Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Çitaku, and thank
them for their statements.
We have noted the positive progress that has
been achieved in Kosovo. We welcome the untiring
efforts deployed by the Kosovo authorities to develop
institutions and enshrine the values of justice and
equality among all citizens. This has been reflected
over time in concrete successes on the ground, and
these successes have shown quite clearly that the people
of Kosovo are able to meet the challenges and make
progress on the path towards a modern and prosperous
State.
Similarly, Jordan welcomes the adoption by the
Government of Kosovo of a strategy for combating
violent extremism and radicalization. We also pay
tribute to the Government of Kosovo for its ongoing
commitment to protecting cultural and religious
diversity. There are a great many religious sites in the
country. We call on the authorities in Kosovo to bring
to justice all those who have defaced or defiled these
cultural and religious sites, once the incidents have
been duly investigated by the relevant authorities.
We call on the authorities in Kosovo to endeavour
to make progress on the issue of disappeared
individuals and internally displaced persons. We urge
the authorities in Kosovo to continue to bolster the rule
of law and transcend all obstacles to that end. In this
respect, we reaffirm the importance of the activities of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
which is making a valuable contribution by helping the
authorities in Kosovo to strengthen the rule of law and
justice.
The existence of a common vision for cooperation
and regional integration in the Balkans and the goodfaith efforts made by the countries of the region to
implement that vision will inevitably lead to economic

18/24

19/11/2015

recovery and a stabilization of the security situation
in the region. Furthermore, it is very important to
forge relationships of good-neighbourliness among
the countries on the principle of mutual respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each and
every State, without, of course, forgetting the critical
principle of non-interference in the domestic affairs of
States. All of this will strengthen social, economic and
security progress.
We therefore call on all the States in the region of
the Balkans to promote cooperation among themselves
in various fields and settle pending issues. To this end,
Jordan welcomes the progress made in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between the Republic
of Serbia and Kosovo and backs the efforts to fully
normalize relations between the two States. We would
also like to welcome the positive result between the
two countries with respect to the setting up of the First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between the two countries. We reiterate
the call of the Secretary-General to the parties to
preserve the current momentum in their relations by
implementing that agreement.
Furthermore, we wish to see all disputes settled and
all obstacles overcome on the path to implementing the
array of agreements that will have to be implemented
through agreed upon specialized channels. Jordan
supports the legitimate efforts of Kosovo to expand
international recognition of it as an independent State,
including its efforts to join various international
organizations and United Nations agencies, for
which it meets all the necessary criteria. We urge the
international community to back Kosovo’s efforts.
A strengthening of Kosovo’s international status is
an investment in peace and will lead to stability and
security in the region. It will also ensure socioeconomic
growth. Jordan again urges the members of the Security
Council to request that the reporting period for the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) be extended from three to six months
because, generally speaking, the situation in Kosovo
is stabilizing and there is palpable improvement at all
levels.
In conclusion, we wish to convey our gratitude
to the Head and staff of UNMIK and to welcome and
praise their efforts.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Special Representative Tanin back to

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

New York and to the Security Council in his new role
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I congratulate him
again on his appointment and thank him for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs Dačić
and the representative of the Government of Kosovo,
Ambassador Çitaku, back to the Council. The United
States commends both of their Governments for their
ongoing efforts to normalize relations through the
European Union-led dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade.
During this reporting period, we were encouraged
to see the Government of Kosovo reach a number
of milestones in the continued strengthening of its
institutions and in establishing constructive working
relationships with its neighbours. I would like to note a
few of them.
First, Kosovo took the very important step of
signing a Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union on 27 October in Strasbourg. This
is progress, and it is a very important step for Kosovo
on its path towards European integration.
Secondly, earlier this month, the Kosovo police
adeptly facilitated the visits of hundreds of displaced
Kosovo Serbs to pay their respects to family members
in cemeteries across Kosovo. The professionalism
demonstrated by the Kosovo police during these
events is further evidence of Kosovo’s progress as a
welcoming, tolerant and multicultural society. As the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) noted in its quarterly report,
the Kosovo police were fully in charge of security and
required no intervention on the part of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo or KFOR
during the annual Serbian festival of Saint Vitus and
the accompanying religious services at the Graçanicë/
Gracanica Monastery.
In addition, the Governments of Serbia and
Kosovo should be praised for the important agreements
reached in August on the general principles/main
elements for establishing the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities and on energy,
telecommunications and freedom of movement on the
Mitrovica bridge. It is important that both Serbia and
Kosovo reinforce their commitment to the dialogue by
implementing those hard-won agreements from August,

S/PV.7563

even as they begin to tackle new areas for future
progress that were discussed in Brussels this week.
These achievements were, naturally, significant,
but we are also encouraged by lesser-publicized
initiatives, such as the 13-14 November conference
between Kosovo’s and Serbia’s Chambers of Commerce
in Pristina. Business leaders met for two days to discuss
opportunities in the construction sector. Kosovo’s
Chamber invited its Serbian counterpart and more
than 30 Serbian business representatives to exchange
knowledge, establish contacts and explore potential
joint production with Kosovo businesses. Initiatives of
this type were unimaginable a few years ago and are
the important outcome of the steady progress towards
normalization.
There is, of course, work that remains to be done.
Speedy and comprehensive implementation of Kosovo’s
national countering-violent-extremism strategy is
critical. At the same time, Kosovo needs to continue
to pursue anti-corruption measures, including an
e-procurement law, better information-sharing about
indicted civil servants to facilitate suspensions, and
amendments to the law to ensure the suspension of
criminal political appointees. All of this will contribute
to strengthening a democratic Kosovo free from
corruption.
The ongoing situation in the Kosovo Parliament is
worrying. To say that violence, including the use of tear
gas, inside the Assembly chamber is incompatible with
a modern democratic State is a gross understatement. It
must stop. We request that the Government of Kosovo
address the situation and not tolerate any criminal
activity within its democratic institutions. The people
of Kosovo expect their elected representatives to return
to work immediately to resolve the important political,
economic and social issues facing their country, and
they deserve no less.
The Kosovo Assembly’s approval of legislation
to set up a specialist court outside the country is a
critically important step. Kosovo has enacted the right
legislation; now it must finalize a host State agreement
with the Netherlands without delay. That step will
ensure justice for crimes that may have been committed
and will build confidence in Kosovo’s commitment to
the rule of law. The United States has been a steadfast
supporter of accountability throughout the countries of
the former Yugoslavia, including through assistance to
the Special Investigative Task Force and our support

15-3773219/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

for the development of Kosovo’s judicial and rule-oflaw capacity. We will continue to support justice for
all those who became victims during or following the
Balkan wars.
Finally, I would like to commend Kosovo for
conducting a dignified UNESCO membership
campaign, and applaud the high level of support given
by so many United Nations Member States. The United
States will continue to strongly support Kosovo’s
international integration and recognition. We know and
believe that the only future for Kosovo is one that is
securely within the community of nations, including as
a constructive member of multilateral organizations.
In closing, I would like to once again emphasize
that while the United States believes that the situation
in Kosovo remains an important issue, these meetings
are unnecessarily frequent. We repeat our request that
the Security Council extend the Secretary-General’s
reporting period on UNMIK to every six months.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing, and Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador of the
Republic of Kosovo to the United States, for their
presence here today.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/833) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), which we have before us,
illustrates the progress that has been made in the
dialogue being held between Belgrade and Pristina
under the auspices of the European Union, including
in the implementation of the 19 April 2013 First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations. Chad welcomes the progress made in
the European Union-facilitated dialogue, as well as
the other agreements reached between Belgrade and
Pristina on 25 August, particularly on the general
principles establishing the association/community of
Kosovo Serb-majoritymunicipalities.
The normalization of relations and establishment
of those municipalities represent an essential stage in
the full implementation of this historic agreement. We
congratulate Prime Ministers Aleksandar Vučić and Isa
Mustafa on their outstanding leadership in advancing
the peace process, despite the numerous incidents
created by those attempting to disrupt it. Similarly,
Chad urges all leaders in Pristina and Belgrade to

20/24

19/11/2015

support this momentum by, among other things, signing
on to the speedy implementation of all the points in
the agreement. We warmly welcome the long-awaited
approval by the Kosovo Assembly of the constitutional
amendment and other laws aimed at establishing the
specialist court. The progress made in that area is proof
of Kosovo’s commitment to the fundamental principles
of justice and responsibility. We call on all the parties
involved to finalize the steps needed to fully implement
and establish the Court as soon as possible.
Chad condemns the use of violence and intimidation
by opposition parties in attempts to undermine the
Kosovo Assembly’s normal operations, including the
incidents of 8 and 15 October involving the use of tear
gas. We also condemn the physical assaults by certain
militants on Prime Minister Mustafa and other members
of his Government. Such acts are unacceptable, and
we call on all political actors to refrain from rhetoric
and actions incompatible with democratic principles
and standards. We urge them to carry out their duties
responsibly and maturely, in full respect for the
democratic process.
Regarding the country’s cultural and religious
heritage, we urge leaders to respect the point of view of
every ethnic element of Kosovo society. It is critical to
refrain from actions that violate the fundamental rights
of those communities. Concerning those who have
disappeared, the report cites a figure of 1,670 persons
listed as missing after the Kosovo conflict. We support
UNMIK in asking Pristina to appoint a Chair of the
Pristina Delegation for the Belgrade-Pristina Working
Group on Missing Persons, so that it can resume its
technical work on the issue.
With regard to the spacing of the Security Council
meetings on this subject, we believe they should be held
every six months.
In the context of the fight against terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalism, we welcome the strategy
that Kosovo has adopted.
In conclusion, we would like to congratulate
Mr. Tanin on his appointment and to assure him of our
full support.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to welcome
Mr. Zahir Tanin and congratulate him on his
appointment as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Kosovo. We thank him for his briefing on
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/833) on the

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), and we pledge Angola’s support to
the Mission in carrying out its mandate. We welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and we welcome Ambassador Vlora
Çitaku.
We reaffirm Angola’s position that resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be a suitable legal framework for
reaching a comprehensive solution in Kosovo through
dialogue and negotiations, based on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
within the framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. UNMIK continues to play a fundamental
role in Kosovo in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights and cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, as
well as in its continuing constructive engagement with
Pristina and Belgrade and all communities in Kosovo.
The Secretary-General’s report points out that the
situation in Kosovo remained generally stable during
the period under review, despite recent troubling and
totally unacceptable events involving illegitimate
pressure on the Government and Assembly of Kosovo.
We welcome the progress made in the dialogue process
between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by the
European Union, including the conclusion of agreements
on crucial issues such as energy, telecommunications,
the establishment of an association/community of
Serb municipalities in northern Kosovo and freedom
of movement in the town of Mitrovica. It is our hope
that the Parliaments in Belgrade and Pristina will
approve those agreements and that such steps will help
to improve the lives of citizens in the region. We also
hope that the First Agreement on Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations will be effectively
implemented.
However, the different interpretations by Belgrade
and Pristina of the agreement on the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which
remains a contentious issue, are a matter of concern.
We disapprove of the aggressive rhetoric and use of
violence and intimidation by some Kosovo opposition
parties with regard to the establishment of the
association/community. In that regard, we urge the full
integration and accordance of citizens’ rights to the
Serbian community of Kosovo, whose multi-ethnic and
multicultural nature must be preserved.

S/PV.7563

We take note of the continued implementation of
the Belgrade Pristina agreement on the integration
of the judiciary, and of the continued integration of
formal Serbian civil protection personnel in northern
Kosovo. We value the participation of Belgrade and
Pristina in the High-level Forum on Durable Solutions
for Displaced Persons from Kosovo, organized by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the outcome of which was a joint communiqué on their
commitment to regional cooperation in solving the
refugee and displaced persons issue.
With regard to human rights, we commend the
UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Paneland its review
of complaints of alleged human rights violations
committed between April 2005 and March 2010, and
hope that the Panel can clarify and close the remaining
outstanding cases by the end of 2015. We greatly value
the round-table meeting, organized in September by
the European Union Office and the Kosovo Centre for
Security Studies, on the role of women in countering
violent extremism in Kosovo, as well as the strategic
plan to fight violent extremism adopted by the
Government of Kosovo.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I join others in welcoming Special Representative
Tanin back to the Security Council in his new
capacity. I look forward to working with him. I also
want to welcome Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and
Ambassador Çitaku to the Council, and I thank them
for their statements.
I would like to begin by welcoming the dignified
response shown by Kosovo after its bid to join UNESCO
fell short. Kosovo’s integration into international
organizations is positive for Kosovo and for the
region, and we will continue to support it despite the
setback. We appreciate Kosovo’s strong commitment
to protecting Serbian cultural and religious heritage,
irrespective of the UNESCO result. The withdrawal of
the controversial draft law on cultural heritage was an
important signal of that.
But like others here today we understand the
concerns set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2015/833) about attacks against minorities
and religious heritage. Most of these incidents are
not ethnically motivated — they are criminal in
nature — but we still encourage Kosovo to do more to
promote social cohesion and integration. That means

15-3773221/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

reaching out to minority communities. It means more
mayors and police commissioners condemning attacks
and working together. We applaud the efforts of those
who have already done so, including in Mitrovica.
We recognize that such steps require political
leadership and courage. We have seen signs of such
political will since August, most notably in the
adoption of the constitutional amendments and laws
for the specialist court. We are pleased that Kosovo has
begun negotiations with the Netherlands and we look
forward to continued progress. Political leadership has
also been shown by Serbia. We welcome the invitation
for Kosovo’s Commission on Missing Persons to
attend the excavations in Jelovica, Serbia. It is an
encouraging sign of better cooperation in identifying
missing persons. Sadly, more progress must be made in
identifying missing persons in Kosovo, and we urge all
those with information to come forward.
We have also seen political leadership in the
four positive agreements reached in the dialogue in
August. The dialogue remains the most effective way
to normalize relations. It is vital to the future prosperity
and stability of the Western Balkans and to the wellbeing of Kosovo’s people. We encourage both sides to
continue to show leadership and to take the difficult
political decisions needed to ensure the success of the
dialogue. Both sides need to deliver the benefit of the
dialogue for all their citizens. That means implementing
the agreements, changing legislation where necessary,
and remaining genuinely committed to the process.
We are therefore concerned that the Kosovo
opposition is using violence to block the work of the
Assembly and, worse yet, that individual members of
the Government have been assaulted. We object to the
blocking of democratic processes and the opposition’s
use of violence for political ends. Reports of injuries
yesterday should be of concern to us all. The Kosovo
Assembly needs to be allowed to hold a free and open
debate on all issues affecting the country, including the
pressing need to improve the rule of law.
Let me close by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the representatives of
Serbia and Kosovo for a meeting that has been relatively
constructive in tone so far. The United Kingdom’s longstanding view that we should reduce the frequency of
such meetings continues. Though challenges remain,
the reality on the ground does not warrant such Council
attention. We are now in the third year of the dialogue

22/24

19/11/2015

facilitated by the European Union between Serbia and
Kosovo. The European Union and Kosovo have now
signed a Stabilization and Association Agreement,
which we warmly welcome and it is time to conclude
that it is Europe, and not the Council, that will bring
momentum and further progress.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Ivica Dačić has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia)(spoke in Serbian; intepretation
provided by the delegation): Mr. President, you have
noted the very constructive statements made here today.
Speaking with you and representatives of other Western
countries just before the meeting, I accepted your
suggestion about adopting a constructive approach to
this debate, but I failed to detected such constructiveness
in the statement made by the representative of the
Interim Administration in Pristina. On the contrary,
I noted an aggressive attitude towards Serbia, threats
and characterizations of our efforts as being of a racist
nature and belittling of the Council.
I do not know if members have noticed that the
representatives of Pristina to the Council have always
been at the ambassadorial level. I note, however, that
Ms. Çitaku is not Kosovo’s Ambassador or head of its
mission to the United Nations. Kosovo has no mission
to the United Nations because it is not a Member of
the United Nations. Every country is free to recognize
Kosovo and engage in bilateral relations with it, but it is
quite clear how the Organization, the Security Council
and General Assembly should decide on Kosovo’s
membership.
I would like to pose a question to countries that
unilaterally recognize the independence of Kosovo. If
they recognized the secession of just one part of their
country, would they not face a challenge similar to ours?
It is their bilateral decision to make, but I would like to
ask them not to insult Serbia or its territorial integrity.
Each country has its own dignity. I have repeatedly
warned about that. Let each country do what it will, but
a decision on the independence of Kosovo has not been
reached here. The Council adopted resolution 1244
(1999). When that is changed, Serbia will reconsider
its position.
Serbia did not carry out racist policies against
Kosovo. How can it be racist if we are speaking out

15-37732

19/11/2015

UNMIK

against the number of monasteries and churches that
have been destroyed, such as the Decani Monastery
that was built in the fourteenth century and is under
UNESCO protection and which has been defaced with
graffiti by the Islamic State, a group we are all trying to
combat together? What kind of racist policy is that? The
entire world is calling for a fight against Islamophobia.
I am calling for a fight against Christianophobia.
We did not speak against Kosovo. We are talking
about the fact that this topic was not discussed within
the context of the Brussels dialogue. Concerning their
statement that they would not talk with Serbia about their
admission into international organizations — Ms. Çitaku
does not know this because she has spent a great
deal of time in the United States — I would note that
Mr. Thaçi and I signed the Brussels agreement. It was
also in Brussels that Serbia allowed Kosovo to obtain
an international dialing code. Why did they ask for
Serbia’s agreement on this if they did not want to
discuss it? The International Telecommunication Union
would never have given Kosovo a special dialing code
had I not written to them and to the Austrian Minister
for Foreign Affairs to ask for it. That is the result of the
agreement reached in Brussels.
Kosovo did not want to reach agreement with us
concerning UNESCO because it was convinced that
it would be admitted and would obtain membership
therein, because it already had an idea of how many
countries would support it. Now it is making reference
to certain pressures. The Organization of Islamic
Cooperation exerted pressure on all its members to vote
in favour of or to abstain, and many international Powers
brought pressure to bear to support it in UNESCO, but
not everything can be done by force.
There should be a dialogue. Agreement should be
reached through dialogue; that is what we want. Kosovo
signed the Stabilization and Association Agreement
not as a State but as a territory. The representative of
Spain is here; let him tell us how Spain gave consent for
the European Commission to sign that agreement. All
members of the European Union here know this full
well, so they should not behave as if it were not true.
Kosovo believes that it is an independent country, but
in the United Nations it is not.
We will continue to participate in these highlevel meetings. Ms. Çitaku did not say a word about
the agenda item. That is why the Brussels agreement
was suspended. How is it possible that the Brussels

S/PV.7563

agreement was suspended? Which provision made
this possible? That was not envisaged anywhere; it is
impossible to do that.
Secondly, where are the returnees in Kosovo? Of
those who left after 1999, 1.5 per cent have returned.
What is happening with them? Thirdly, why has tear gas
become the main means of winning the political fight
in Kosovo? Yes, there was tear gas in the Assembly.
Fourthly, the special court was established because
of the suspicion that there was trafficking in human
organs, those of the Serbian people in Kosovo. Please
do not tell me about the crimes committed by some
other side. We agreed that there should be peace.
On our part, we are absolutely open to dialogue.
I ask only that the process of dialogue not be abused.
We want dialogue not because of the issue of Kosovo
becoming an independent State; we want dialogue in
order to find a permanent solution to the problem. That
is why I am asking Ms. Çitaku to choose her words
carefully, because if she thinks that Serbia or the
Security Council is scared by the possibility that she
will not attend Security Council meetings any more,
she lives in an entirely different world. Everyone who
loses is entitled to be angry, but please use different
kinds of arguments, if they exist.
The President: Ms. Çitaku has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Çitaku: Kosovo is a free, sovereign and
independent country; that will never change. The
sooner the representative of Serbia realizes that, the
better it will be for him and the better it will be for
Serbia. We urge him to accept reality. We call on him
to accept the facts. We call on him to read the opinion
of the International Court of Justice. After all, it was
Serbia that asked for that opinion.
We call on him not to try to change or twist
historical facts. The war in Kosovo happened in the
twenty-first century, before the eyes of the Council and
those of the world. No court, no process, no fabricated
facts can rewrite history. We have always cooperated
with international justice. We have nothing to hide, and
we are looking forward to cooperating in future. The
agreement with the Netherlands is in the pipeline; we
want that court to be established as soon as possible.
Again, we will never ask for Serbia’s permission to
exercise our right, just because we did not quite succeed

15-3773223/24

S/PV.7563

UNMIK

and were short three votes on one occasion. I assure you
that next time we will succeed.
About my status here, I am the Ambassador of the
Republic of Kosovo to the United States of America.
The Head of our Mission in New York will be arriving
soon; she is also a woman. We know that we are not

24/24

19/11/2015

yet a United Nations Member. Just because we are not
treated as such does not mean that we will not act as
such.
I apologize for having taken additional time.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

15-37732
