General Assembly--Fourleenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL
POLITICAL COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
PO(lt

1375 (XIV). Question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies
of apartheid of the Government of the Union of South Africa (17 November
1959) (item 61)..................... . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .
1404 (XIV). Question of an increase in the membership of the Security Council
and of the Economic and Social Council (25 November 1959) (items 19,
20 and 21).........................
..........................
1456 (XIV). United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (9 December 1959) (item 27). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1460 (XIV). Treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa
(10 December 1959) (item 60)
...... ..............

1375 (XIV). Question of race conflict in South
Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid of the Government of the Union of
South Africa

7
7
8
8

1404 (XIV). Question of an increase in the membership of the Security Council and of the
Economic and Social Council
The General Assembly,
Realizing that many delegations have expressed the
opinion that, in view of the considerable increase in the
membership of the United Nations in recent years, there
should be an increase in the membership of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council which
would make it possible to improve the present distribution of seats in those organs,
Recalling its resolution 1300 (XIII) of 10 December
1958, in which it recognized that, in view of the increase
in the membership of the United Nations since its
establishment, an increase in the membership of the
Economic and Social Council is desirable,
Noting that 'an increase in the membership of those
organs would necessitate the amendment of certain provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
Expressing the hope that the strong desire manifested
by a large number of Member States will help to bring
about such amendment at the earliest opportunity,
Considering that, in order to solve this problem,
ft:rther efforts must be made with a view to obtaining
the agreement of the greatest . possible number of
Member States,
1. Decides that items relating to an increase in the
membership of the Security Council and of the Economic and Social Council shall be placed on th"' provisional agenda of its fifteenth session ;
2. Declares that, if progress is not made during the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly towards the
achievement of an increase in the membership of the
Security Council and of the Economic and Social
Council, the Assembly should set up at that session a
committee to study the possibilities of arriving at an
agreement which will facilitate the amendment of the

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1248 (XIII) of 30 October
1958 · on the question of race conflict in South Africa
resulting from the policies of apartheid of the Government of the Union of South Africa,
Deeply convinced that the practice of racial discrimination and segregation is opposed to the observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,

Considering that government policies which accentuate or seek to preserve racial discrimination are prejudicial to international harmony,
Noting with concern that the policy of apartheid is
still being pursued,
1. Expresses its opposition to the continuance or
preservation of racial discrimination in any part of
the world;

2. Solemnly calls upon all Member States to bring
their policies into conformity with their obligation under
the Charter of the United Nations to promote the
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms ;
3. Expresses its deep regret and concern that the
Government of the Union of South Africa has not yet
responded to appeals of the General Assembly that it
reconsider governmental policies which impair the right
of all racial groups to enjoy the same fundamental rights
and freedoms ;
4. Appeals to all Member States to use their best
endeavours as appropriate to achieve the purposes of
the present resolution.
838th plenary meeting,
17 November 1959.
7
