22

General ASl!embly-Thirtieth SeSl!ion

3469 (XXX).

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3260 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Noting the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
World Disarmament Conference, 31
l. Reaffirms its resolution 3260 (XXIX) in its entirety;
2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the World Disarmament Conference and requests it
to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session;
3. Further requests the Ad Hoc Committee to inelude in that report an analytical study of the conclusions contained in its report to the thirtieth session,31
as well as any observations and recommendations it
may deem appropriate relating to its mandate;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty~first session the item entitled "World Disarrnament Conference".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3470 (XXX). Mid•term review of the
Disarmament Decade

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the mid-term review of the Disarmament Decade,32 submitted pursuant to its resolution 3261 A
(XXIX) of9December 1974,
Expressing deep concern at the meagre achievements of the Disarmament Decade in terms of truly
effective disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
and the detrimental effects on world peace and economy
of the continuing unproductive and wasteful arms race,
particularly the nuclear arms race,
Reaffirming the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament Decade stipulated in its resolution 2602 E
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Recalling its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it recognized that ali States have a
deep interest in disarmament negotiations,
Bearing in mind the agenda and agreed principles
of disarmament negotiations of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament,
Deeply convinced that implementation of the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament Decade in
the light of the prevailing improved international climate should be conducive to further measures in the
field of disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament,
Mindful that disarmament is among the primary objectives of the United Nations,
l. Reiterates the central interest of the United
Nations in all disarmament negotiations;
2. Reaffirms that disarmament and development
foster a climate of international understanding and cooperation;
3. Deplores the wastage of resources, which could
be used, inter afia, to increase assistance for the economic and social development of developing countries,
in expenditures on armaments, particularly nuclear
armaments;
81 Jbid.,

Supplement No. 28 (A/10028 and Corr.1).
a2 A/10294 and Add.l.

4. Calls upan Member States and the Secretary
General to intensify their efforts in support of the linl
between disarmament and development, envisaged il
General Assembly resolution 2602 E (XXIV) on tht
Disarmament Decade, so as to promote disarmamen
negotiations and to ensure that the human and ma
terial resources freed by disarmament are used to pro
mote economic and social development, particularly it
the developing countries;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to offer appro
priate assistance and information to Member State:
that may require them in pursuance of the purpose·
and objectives of the Disarmament Decade;
6. Invites the Conference of the Committee on Dis
armament to review the work done in the implementa
tion of the purposes and objectives of the Disarmamen
Decade and in this light to reappraise its tasks anc
duties, as necessary, in order to accelerate the pace o
its efforts to negotiate truly effective disarmament anc
arms limitation agreements;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda o
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Effective meas
ures to implement the purposes and objectives of thc
Disarmament Decade".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

3471 (XXX). lmplementation of the Declaratio1
on the Denuclearization of Africa

The General Assembly,
Convinced that nuclear-weapon-free zones providt
the best and easiest means whereby non-nuclear-weapor
States can, by their own initiative and effort, ensure thi
total absence of nuclear weapons from their territorie!
and enhance their mutual security,
Mindful of the fact that nuclear-weapon-free zonei
strengthen and promote the régime for the non-pro•
liferation of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of ali States to de•
velop research, production and use of nuclear energ)
for peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961. 2033 (XX) of 3 Decernber 1965 anc
3261 E' (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, which callee
upon all States to consider and respect the continent o1
Africa, including the continental African States, Mada•
gasear and other islands surrounding Africa, as r
nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Noting the solemn Declaration on the Denuclearization of A frica, 33 adopted by the Assembly of Headi
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairc
from 17 to 21 July 1964,
Noting also that the aforementioned Declaration Wfü
endorsed by the Second Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cllirc
from 5 to 1O October 1964, 34
1. Agrees that implementation of the Declaration
on the Denuclearization of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Governmen·t of the Organization of African Unity, will be a significant measure te
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
33 See Of!icial Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.
34 See A/5763.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Comrn.ittee

world, conducive to general and complete disarmament,
particularly nuclear disarmament;
2. Reaffirms its call upon all States to respect and
abide by the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa;
3. Reaffirms further its call upon all States to con;ider and respect the continent of Africa, including the
::ontinental African States, Madagascar and other
islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free
wne;
4. Reiterates its call upon ali States to refrain from
testing, manufacturing, deploying, transporting, storlng, using or threatening to use nuclear weapons on the
A.frican continent;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Organization of African
Unity towards the realization of the solemn Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, in which the African Heads of Staite and Government announced their
readiness to undertake, in an intemational treaty to be
concluded under the auspices of the United Nations,
not to manufacture or acquire control of nuclear
weapons;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "lmplementation
of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3472 (XXX). Comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in ali its
aspects
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3261 F (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, by which it decided to undertake a comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weaponfree zones in ali its aspects,
H aving considered the special report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament3~ containing
the comprehensive study of the 1uestion of nuclearweapon-free zones in all its aspects, 8
Noting the comments made by States members of
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament regarding the study,37
Convinced that the study will enhance further efforts conceming nuclear-weapon-free zones,
Recognizing that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones can contribute to the security of
members of such zones, to the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to the goals of general and complete disarmament,
Expressing the wish that the study will be of assistance to States interested in the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones,
l. Takes note of the special report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament containing the
comprehensive study of the question of nuclearweapon-free zones in ali its aspects;
81101/icial Record, of the General Auembly, Thirtieth Se•
sion, Supplement No. 27A (A/10027/Add.1).
as lbid., annex l.
87 lbid., annex II.

23

2. Expresses its appreciation to the Ad Hoc Group
of Qualified Govemmental Experts for the Study of
the Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones for the
preparation of the study;
3. Conveys its thanks to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant
intemational organizations for the assistance they have
given for the preparation of the study;
4. Commends the special report to the attention of
all Govemments, the lnternational Atomic Energy
Agency an~ other relevant international organizations;
5. Invites all Governments, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and other international organizations
concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General before
30 June 1976 such views, observations and suggestions
on the special report as they may deem appropriate;
6. Requests the Secretary-Oeneral to prepare a report based on information received under paragraph 5
above and to submit it to the General Assembly at its
thirty-first session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the reproduction of the special report as a United
Nations publication and to give it the widest possible
publicity in as many languages as is considered desirable and practicable;
8. Recommends that all Governments give a wide
distribution to the special report so as to acquaint publíe opinion with its contents, and invites relevant international organizations to use their facilities to make
the special report widely known;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Comprehensive
study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in
all its aspects".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, as set forth in the Charter of the
(!nited Nations, the Organization is based on the principie of the sovereign equality of ali its Members and
that, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter
intemational rel!lti<:ms should be govemed, among othe;
f~n~~mental pnnc1ples, by those relating to the prohib1t10n of the threat or use of force and to non-intervention,
. Bearing in mind that nucle3;I-weapon-free zones cQ[lstitute o~e of _the most eflecf:ive means for preventir,ig
the proliferation, both honzontal and vertical of
nuclear weapons and for contributing to the elit~inátion of the danger of a nuclear holocaust,
Reaffirming the principie defined in its resolution
2028 (XX) of 19 November 1965, which established
the necessity that there should be an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States,
Reaffirming also the request made in its resolution
2153 A (XXI) of 17 November 1966 to all nuclearweapon States to refrain from the use, or the threat of
use, of nuclear weapons against States which conclude ·
regional treaties in order to ensure the total absence of
nuclear weaoons in their respective territories,
