22

General ASl!embly-Thirtieth SeSl!ion

3469 (XXX).

World Disarmament Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3260 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Noting the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the
World Disarmament Conference, 31
I. Reaffirms its resolution 3260 (XXIX) in its entirety;
2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the World Disarmament Conference and requests it
to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly
at its thirty-first session;
3. Further requests the Ad Hoe Committee to include in that report an analytical study of the conclusions contained in its report to the thirtieth session,31
as well as any observations and recommendations it
may deem appropriate relating to its mandate;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty~first session the item entitled "World Disarmament Conference".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3470 (XXX). Mid-term review of the
Disarmament Decade

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the mid-term review of the Disarmament Decade,32 submitted pursuant to its resolution 3261 A
(XXIX) of9December 1974,
Expressing deep concern at the meagre achievements of the Disarmament Decade in terms of truly
effective disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
and the detrimental effects on world peace and economy
of the continuing unproductive and wasteful arms race,
particularly the nuclear arms race,
Reaffirming the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament Decade stipulated in its resolution 2602 E
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Recalling its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it recognized that all States have a
deep interest in disarmament negotiations,
Bearing in mind the agenda and agreed principles
of disarmament negotiations of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament,
Deeply convinced that implementation of the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament Decade in
the light of the prevailing improved international climate should be conducive to further measures in the
field of disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament,
Mindful that disarmament is among the primary objectives of the United Nations,
I. Reiterates the central interest of the United
Nations in all disarmament negotiations;
2. Reaffirms that disarmament and development
foster a climate of international understanding and cooperation;
3. Deplores the wastage of resources, which could
be used, inter alia, to increase assistance for the economic and social development of developing countries,
in expenditures on armaments, particularly nuclear
armaments;
81 Jbid.,

Supplement No. 28 (A/10028 and Corr.I).
a2 A/10294 and Add.I.

4. Calls upon Member States and the Secretary
General to intensify their efforts in support of the linl
between disarmament and development, envisaged ii
General Assembly resolution 2602 E (XXIV) on tht
Disarmament Decade, so as to promote disarmamen
negotiations and to ensure that the human and ma
terial resources freed by disarmament are used to pro
mote economic and social development, particularly it
the developing countries;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to offer appro
priate assistance and information to Member State:
that may require them in pursuance of the purpose·
and objectives of the Disarmament Decade;
6. Invites the Conference of the Committee on Dis
armament to review the work done in the implementa
tion of the purposes and objectives of the Disarmamen
Decade and in this light to reappraise its tasks anc
duties, as necessary, in order to accelerate the pace o
its efforts to negotiate truly effective disarmament anc
arms limitation agreements;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda o
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Effective meas
ures to implement the purposes and objectives of the
Disarmament Decade".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

3471 (XXX). Implementation of the Declaratio1
on the Denuclearization of Africa

The General Assembly,
Convinced that nuclear-weapon-free zones providt
the best and easiest means whereby non-nuclear-weapor
States can, by their own initiative and effort, ensure thi
total absence of nuclear weapons from their territorie!
and enhance their mutual security,
Mindful of the fact that nuclear-weapon-free zonei
strengthen and promote the regime for the non-pro•
liferation of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all States to de•
velop research, production and use of nuclear energ)
for peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961. 2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965 anc
3261 E' (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, which callee
upon all States to consider and respect the continent o1
Africa, including the continental African States, Mada•
gascar and other islands surrounding Africa, as r
nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Noting the solemn Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, 33 adopted by the Assembly of Headi
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Caire
from 17 to 21 July 1964,
Noting also that the aforementioned Declaration wa~
endorsed by the Second Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cllirc
from 5 to 10 October 1964, 34
1. Agrees that implementation of the Declaration
on the Denuclearization of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Governmen·t of the Organization of African Unity, will be a significant measure tc
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
33 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.
34 See A/5763.
