THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
h
MEETING:

23 MAR.CIJ 1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
.Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2420)
Ad’option of the agenda ,.......*,...

.*........*,...*...

*.....*...........

1
1

,..*......,.,,...........**........

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Dep.uty Minister for External Relations of
, Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651) . . .

1

WPV. 2420

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

2420th

MEETING

Weld in New York on Wednesday, 23 March 1983, at 4.30 pm.
Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

3. Mr. TINOCO (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): Approximately
one year ago, on 25 March 1982
[2335th meeting], the Security Council heard an impor-

President:

tant and historic statement by the Co-ordinator of the
Governing Junta of National Reconstruction, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, regarding the aggressive
activities carried out against the Sandinist People’s Revolution and the Government of National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua by the United States Administration
by
means of counter-revolutionary
bands.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2420)
1.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to
the President of Security Council (S/15651)

4. Today, almost 12 months later, the people of Nicaragua is facing a new aggressive escalation of acts by the
American Administration,
in the form now of massive
infiltration of military units and task forces of Somoza
counter-revolutionaries
from the territory of Honduras.

of the agenda

5. The international community is fully aware of, and
the mass media have widely publicized, the acts of
aggression that have been endured over the past two
years by the Sandinist Revolution. The existence and use
of counter-revolutionary
encampments in Honduran territory al1 along the border with Nicaragua has been
amply described and attested to in print as well as on
film, Nor is any one here present unaware that the activities conducted by those counter-revolutionary
elements
had until very recently been characterized by a series of
acts of military sabotage and terrorist actions taking the
form mainly of attacks on civilians, towns and military
posts all along the common border between Honduras
and Nicaragua.

The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister
for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15651)
I. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Security Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Honduras, Mexico and Panama in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda, In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. The beginning of 1982, when the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) of the United States decided to set up the
Nicaraguan Democratic Front (FDN) in order to group
together counter-revolutionary
elements, career military
personnel, members of the Somozist National Guard, as
well as other groups, and thus place them under the central leadership and direction of the CIA, marked the first
stage of the systematic and accelerated development of
counter-revolutionary
activity against the Sandinist People’s Revolution.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table. Mr. Mufioz
Ledo (Mexico) and Mr. Ozores Typaldos (Panama) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. In the first phase of that development, the so-called
Nicaraguan democratic force conducted a number of
operations under United States direction, consisting
mainly of sabotage and demolition of aircraft, incidents
such as the detonation of a terrorist bomb in the August0
CCsar Sandino International Airport at Managua, which
caused the deaths of three Nicaraguan immigration officers, and the demolition
of two bridges along the
Nicaraguan-Honduran
border.

2, The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council is meeting
today in response to the request made by the Deputy
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua to the
Security Council in his letter dated 22 March 1983 to the
President of the Security Council [s/15651].
I

to take over the regions of Wuina, Wiwili and Nueva
Segovia, in the north of Nicaragua, very near the border
with Honduras. Nevertheless, within a few days those
efforts fell apart because of the activities of the Sandinist
militias and the Sandinist People’s Army.

8. At the same time, military facilities have been set up
on Honduran territory with the co-operation of Honduran Army units. This has led to the establishment of a
real army, a sinister and reactionary one, which, with the
necessary logistic support to sustain military operations
and in general to maintain facilities for carrying out intermittent or sustained acts of war against Nicaragua, is
now beginning to act in systematic fashion.

15. This new stage, this new escalation in the history cf
aggression by the American Administration
against the
people and Government of Nicaragua, began early this
year, 1983, by means of a systematic process of concentrating counter-revolutionary
forces which had hitherto
been scattered in various camps along the border
between Nicaragua and Honduras. This concentration
occurred in two main areas. One of the points of concentration of the Somozist forces was in Honduran territory
near the Jalapa area; the other was also in Honduran
territory, in the area near Puerto Cabezas on Nicaragua’s
Atlantic coast, in the northern part of the country. And it
is precisely from this strategic troop concentration that
the CIA orders the Somozist murderers and ruffians to
infiltrate our territory en masse.

9. Between January and October 1982 an exceedingly
important role has been played by counter-revolutionary
training camps in United States territory, specifically, in
the states of Florida, Texas and California. Ignoring and
flouting its own laws and its own Neutrality Act, the
United States Administration
has been pushing ahead
with the massive training of Somozist counterrevolutionaries in various private areas in Florida and
the other aforementioned
states, arguing that because
those activities take place on private property they violate neither international nor United States law. In that
connection there are films and various illustrated and
written documents.

16. Thus, in the first few days of February this yearthat is to say, last month-the
process of massive infiltration of our national territory began with small military
units numbering approximately 2,000 men, Of these
approximately 2,000 troops coming from the area of concentration near Jalapa, in Honduran territory, a large
number remain in the mountainous region of Nicaragua,
very close to the border with Honduras, and a very small
number of these Somozist troops, organized in bands of
approximately
100 men, have been infiltrating deeper
into our national territory, reaching the area of Matagalpa, in the vicinity of Rio Blanco.

10. From July to October 1982 there began the process
of massive transfers of the personnel recently retrained in
Florida-for
there were already career soldiers in the
Somozist army-to
the counter-revolutionary
camps
located in Honduran territory along the border with Nicaragua. In the Iast three months of 1982 settlements were
installed in the region of Jinotega and Zelaya Norte,
along with a co-ordinated and systematic series of
attacks and harassment along the border in which
increasingly sophisticated weapons were used.
11. In November 1982 there was an increase in infiltrations from Honduras aimed at sabotaging Nicaraguan
agricultural production, on the one hand, and an attempt
to take Jalapa-which
is very near the Honduran
border-on
the other, a plan which met with -complete
failure because of the mobilization
of the Nicaraguan
people both economically and militarily.

17. At the same time, it is important to point out that
on the other side, in the area of Honduras adjacent to
Puerto Cabezas, counter-revolutionary
forces camped
there-and this is the second point of concentration to
which I referred-about
2,500 men, faced serious dimculties in developing their massive infiltration plans at
the same time as the forces that infiltrated the areas of
Jinotega and Nueva Segovia. That is to say, there was no
co-ordination in the introduction of the forces coming
from those two main strategic concentrations.

12. I should like to point out clearly that Nicaraguan
internal production for its main exports has, despite
these plans, reached the highest levels in the history of
the Revolution.
13. Following this complete failure of the counterrevolutionary forces, the CIA put into action the socalled Plan C, which provided for giving accelerated
logistic support in ever-increasing quantity to the
counter-revolutionary
forces and for a significant
increase in the efforts to recruit more elements for the
counter-revolutionary
forces, Then there was a restructuring of the so-called FDN under the guidance of the
self-same CIA, in which the FDN constituted its political
leadership, with a general staff and special forces.

18. The difficulty
for these counter-revolutionary
forces arose when, approximately three weeks ago, the
task force of some 300 men that was detached in order to
act as a vanguard for the entry for all those forces was
found and surrounded by forces of the Sandinist militias
and the Sandinist People’s Army, which, in advance,
inflicted a total rout on these troops. That military rout
of the counter-revolutionary
advance forces in the Nicaraguan Atlantic region played a determining role in
thwarting so far the infiltration plans of the forces
encamped in the area.

14. Hence already on the eve of 1983 the first major or
serious attempts were made at infiltration and settlement
by the first Somozist counter-revolutionary units in Nicaraguan territory, and there were attempts by those forces

19. We should like to emphasize that the total number
of men encamped on Honduran territory near the northeastern region of Nicaragua, that is, the Atlantic region,
is estimated at little more than 2,500, most of whom, as I
2

24. To be exact, we are thinking of the possibility that
the Honduran army and other forces in the region may
be pressured and encouraged to get more deeply and
directly involved in the acts of aggression against the
Sandinist Revolution. In this connection, we should like
to draw the attention of members of the Security Council
to four specific facts which strengthen these fears that are
felt not only by the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction but by other distinguished Latin American
leaders with regard to the potential dangers of such a
situation,

said earlier, are career soldiers of the genocidal Somozist
Guard and members of the elite School for Basic Infantry Training, which was a corps especially set up for
repression of the people.
20. With regard to the military activities of these Somozist forces infiltrated into our national territory, it is
important to emphasize that their work has been aimed
mainly at civilian targets. In their military activities they
have been unable to take a single town, not even the
smallest village, and their military tactical initiatives have
been completely foiled.

25. First, the fact that approximately
1,500 or more of
the members of the forces that have infiltrated the country are in the border area increases the likelihood that in
the Sandinist forces’ combat process against the reactionary elements, military units of the Honduran army may
become involved in the conflict, whether they desire it or
not. We believe that this would be a very appropriate
pretext for the enemy forces of Nicaragua to use in order
to start an accelerated escalation of the participation
of_
the Honduran
army in this counter-revolutionary
activity.

21. The United States Government, which nurtured
and nursed this dictatorship and which benefited from
the way in which it sold its country down the river for the
sake of its own economic enrichment, is today behind the
new acts of aggression and behind the suffering that the
Nicaraguan people is once more undergoing. These Somozist groups exist only to the extent that they are
financed, trained and directed by institutions of the
United States Government, which turns them into a tool
for its own policy in the region.

26. Secondly, the Honduran army is massing troops in
Honduran territory in the very area right behind the
activities of the Somozist groups in the Jalapa area.

22. At this stage we must define and state clearly how
the Nicaraguan Governing Junta of National Reconstruction and the national leadership of the Sandinist
National Liberation Front perceive the present situation:
we should like to state quite clearly that we regard
neither this counter-revolutionary
force that has infiltrated the country nor the other 2,500 men who may
infiltrate the Atlantic coast area as a threat in themselves
to the stability of revolutionary power within our country. Not only will those forces be defeated militarily
in
the near future-today
they have already been encircled
and followed by the Sandinist militias and by the Sandinist People’s Army-but
from the political standpoint
they have already been defeated, because they represent
the scum that has caused our people’s suffering. In the
opinion of the Nicaraguan Government of National
Reconstruction, the danger does not reside in these
counter-revolutionary
forces themselves, as by and large
they have remained in the mountain areas of Nicaragua,
very close to the Honduran border; on the contrary, the
danger, which is very serious, resides in the fact that these
actions of the Somozist forces in the centre and the north
of the country may represent secondary or diversionary
actions designed to facilitate the delivery of a more strategic blow to the Nicaraguan Revolution in other more
sensitive areas-economically,
politically and militarily
speaking-such as the Pacific area of Nicaragua near the
Honduran border.

28. Fourthly, in the last few hours specific events have
taken place that confirm our fears concerning the possible role of the Honduran army, I am referring to the fact
that late on 20 March, at 4.06 p.m., to be precise, Honduran troops located in Las Lomas de 10s Pastores, in Honduran territory
1.5 kilometres
south-west of Santo
Tomas de1 Nance, opened fire with rifles, 8 l-mm mortars
and 50-mm machine-guns on the Vado Ancho observation post, located two kilometres south-west of Santo
Tomas de1 Nance. At 5.35 p.m. of the same day Honduran troops once again attacked the aforementioned
observation post.

23. Here we should like to draw attention to the fact
that practically all, or most, of the forces of the Somozist
Guard are already involved in the plans of aggression in
the north of the country and the infiltration plans for the
north-east Atlantic area and that therefore any more
strategic type of military blow against our RevoIution in
the Pacific area would of necessity have to be dealt by
forces other than the Somozists.

30. The responsibility of the United States Administration for this potential danger threatening peace in Central America cannot be hidden. The political will and
determination of the main leaders of the present American Administration
in trying to defeat the Nicaraguan
revolutionary Junta and to destroy the Sandinista People’s Revolution, using all the means available to them,
cannot be denied, Suffice it to recall but a few elements

27. Thirdly, the Honduran army is also concentrating
and massing troops in the Choluteca area of Honduras,
which adjoins the most strategic and sensitive areas of
the Pacific area of Nicaragua,

29. Similarly, yesterday, at 9.00 a.m., in the Palo Verde
area, in Honduran territory west of Santo Tom&s de1
Nance, the Honduran army carried out a massive deployment of military forces in an offensive pattern only 800
metres from the border with Nicaragua. In this connection, we have already sent the corresponding note of protest to the Government of Honduras [S/15656, annex 14.

3

that illustrate this and refer to the basis and history of
this strange systematic and vehement persecution of the
Sandinista People’s Revolution. On 15 July 1980, in the
text adopted at its National Convention in Detroit, the
Republican Party, in its political platform for the elections, shamefully and unprecedentedly stated:
“We deplore the taking of Nicaragua by the Marxist
Sandinistas. We do not support any United States aid
for any Marxist Government in this hemisphere, and
we oppose the Carter Administration’s programme of
assistance to the Government of Nicaragua. Nevertheless we will support the efforts of the people of Nicaragua to establish a free and independent Government.”
31. That was the prelude, an expression of the desire
and determination of the extreme right to put an end to
the very existence of the Sandinist People’s Revolution.
From that time on, and when the Reagan Administration
took office, we saw the beginning of hostile attitudes in
all fields towards the Government of Nicaragua. One of
the first acts of foreign policy of the present American
Administration
was to cut off the remainder of the aid
for Nicaragua that had been approved by the Carter
Administration.
32. Subsequently a series of policies succeeded one
another in the economic, diplomatic and military fields,
designed to undermine the existence of the Nicaraguan
Revolution. With regard to financial and economic matters many manoeuvres were undertaken to block loans
by various international organizations, such as the InterAmerican Development Bank and the World Bank. Several actions designed to destabilize Nicaragua were
begun by the CIA. From the initial bands of paramilitary
counter-revolutionaries
who began to operate inside the
country and subsequently went to the training camps in
Florida, we have come to the present serious situation
that threatens the Central American region with the new
policy of supporting infiltration by Somozist bands into
our country.
33. Some very recent statements by various American
officials give us an idea of the manner in which the present United States Administration
deals with Central
American problems and how they shape their policy
regarding Nicaragua. In essence we can say that what
was stated in the Republican platform in July 1980 has
changed not a whit. On the contrary, the gravity of their
measures has increased.
34. In his message to the President of Panama in February of this year, President Ronald Reagan said:
“We offer regional comprehensive rapprochement in
the search for peace, democracy and development in
Central America. Unfortunately these principles are
not shared by all, nor can we commit ourselves to
trusting peaceful means alone to settle international
domestic disputes.”

On 22 February, in his statement to the War Veterans
Association, he stated:
“Central America is too close to us, and our strategic interest in the maritime routes of the Caribbean
and the Panama Canal is too great, for us not to pay
attention to reality. The spectre of Governments controlled by Marxist-Leninists in Central America hsving political and ideological loyalty to Cuba and the
Soviet Union is a direct challenge that we must &al
with.”
35. According to the Latin American service of Rcuters, on 21 February 1982, Mr. Thomas 0. Enders,
Under-Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs,
said:
“We must make it clear that if the Soviet Union and
Cuba, together or separately, intend to turn Nicara
gua into the same kind of threat as was the caseof
Cuba after the revolution, then the United States will
certainly take action to make sure that that does not
happen.”
36, On 17 February 1983 the United States newspaper,
The Miami Herald, referring to an appearance by Mr.
William
Casey, head of the CIA, before Congress,
reported as follows:
“Casey asked the Congress for funds to continue to
be provided until 1984 to finance the controversial
covert operation against Nicaragua. The role of the
United States continues to be limited to giving financial assistance and advice to anti-Sandinist forces in
Honduras for the carrying out of attacks against
Nicaragua.”
37. In the official news bulletin of the United States
Embassy in Managua of 4 March 1983-we do not know
if it is the same news bulletin issued in other Latin American countries-there
is a quotation from the speech
made by President Reagan to the members of the Commonwealth Club of San Francisco, as follows:
“The threat is more to the entire Western Hemisphere and towards the area than it is to one counlry. If
they get a foothold, and with Nicaragua already there,
and El Salvador should fall as a result of this armed
violence on the part of the guerrillas, I think Casta
Rica, Honduras, Panama, all of these would follow.”
The same United States Embassy bulletin, dated 11
March, quotes a speech made by President Reagan on 10
March to the National Association of Manufacturers as
follows:
“The nations of Central America are among our
nearest neighbours. El Salvador, for example, is nearer
to Texas than Texas is to Massachusetts. Central America is simply too close, and the strategic stakes are too
high, for us to ignore the danger of Governments seizing power there with ideological and military ties to the
Soviet Union.

“
.

.

I

in the region continue to be valid, We should like to
Point out that we have recent military information,
gathered from the counter-revolutionary
forces
assembled on Honduran territory, that in the next few
days those forces plan to move in three directions
towards the interior of the country, One route would be
towards the area of Jalapa, Nueva Segovia and Teotecacinte, in the centre of the country; in other words, it
would be reinforcement for the counter-revolutionary
forces already in that area. The second would he in the
direction of the Nicaraguan gold mines in the northeastern Part of our country, and the third would be towards
the Puerto Cabezas area near the Mosquitia region of
Nicaragua.

“Half of all the foreign trade of the United States passes
through either the Canal or the other Caribbean sea lanes
on its way to OL from our ports.
“* . I
“We’ve been slow to understand that the defence of
the Caribbean and Central America against MarxistLeninist takeover is vital to our national security in ways
we’re not accustomed to thinking about.”
38. The new situation facing the Nicaraguan Revolution as a result of the escalation of the aggression aimed
against our Government is one that the Governing Junta
of National Reconstruction is facing calmly, while taking
the necessary measures on the domestic, material, military and political levels to ensure that such plans of
aggression shall not succeed. The support of the people
of Nicaragua for such measures is enthusiastic, and the
participation of the Nicaraguan masses in militias and
reserve units is even greater than it has been in the past.
In this connection the Governing Junta of National
Reconstruction has clearly and repeatedly stated that
every measure taken against the Somozist aggression fostered by the United States is a measure to protect the
highest interests of the Nicaraguan people and to preserve the civil and public liberties that are the hallmarks
of our pluralistic process and our mixed economy. The
Governing Junta has specifically announced that this
political pluralism will be maintained despite all foreign
aggression. It has reiterated its right to strengthen our
lines of defence whenever the situation so demands and
has, finally, stated quite clearly that the defence of the
Nicaraguan Revolution and the defence of Nicaragua’s
territorial integrity will be carried out energetically, with
determination within and to the limits of our own territory. This clearly means that any internationalization
of
the conflict in the border area between Honduras and
Nicaragua will be the result of provocation and premeditated action on the part of reactionary forces at the international level acting against Nicaragua.

41. We should also like to inform you that intelligence
sources have informed us of something’of great concern
to us, namely, that in the counter-revolutionary camps in
Mocorbn, in Honduran territory in the Atlantic region;
in Trojes, in the central region of Jalapa; and in El
Paraiso, in the region nearer the Pacific, feverish activity
has been begun by the Somozist forces and their advisers
aimed at attempting to infiltrate over the next few daysaccording to latest intelligence estimates-some 4,000
more men into Nicaraguan territory.
42. Our statement in the Council is designed to appeal
to the American Administration to cease its aggressive
stance against our country, its attempts to defeat the
Revolutionary Government and destroy the Sandinist
People’s Revolution, its threatening military manoeuvres, the “secret” but widely recognized war the Reagan
Administration
is waging against our country and to
cease to create pain and suffering for our people. We
appeal to the United States to cease turning a deaf ear to
the peace initiatives that the countries of Latin America
and countries outside the region have been making. We
urge the United States to revise its policy and abandon its
course of military and bellicose solutions to the Central
American crisis; we appeal to the United States to reconsider, calmly and with the historic responsibility incumbent upon it because of its very power and strength, all
peace initiatives presented, such as those, for example, of
the Governments of Mexico and Venezueia, in an
attempt to reach a solution to the border problem
between Honduras and Nicaragua and proposals such as
the one issued from Contadora Island in January this
year’ by the Governments of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, which draws attention to the most
important main elements of the Central American crisis
with a view to finding peaceful and practical negotiated
solutions to it. We appeal to the members of the Council
and to the international community to exert their efforts
to develop in a co-ordinated manner a policy conducive
to peaceful, negotiated solutions in the Central American
region.

39. We would like to draw to the attention of members
of the Security Council the fact that already the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has, at various levelsat the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau held from 10 to I4 January 1983 at Managua, as well as at the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12
March 1983-drawn attention to the continuing acts of
aggression and offensive acts intended to destabilize the
Sandinist Revolution and has appealed for the cessation
of such acts, The heads of State or Government called
upon the United States Administration
to adopt a constructive attitude and asked the Co-ordinating Bureau Of
the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries to follow
closely and with keen attention the development of acts
of aggression against Nicaragua.

43. For its paa Nicaragua reiterates its wifhgneSS
t0
enter into a dialogue on Central American problems,
its readiness to tackle immediately the problems and differences that have arisen as a result of military actions
in the northern border area with Honduras and its open,

40. The fears expressed by the Nicaraguan Revolution
regarding a possible
internationalization
of the conflict
5

Nicaragua’s border, but rather Nicaraguans, that is
something which also affects us. However, in the view of
our Government, the present situation in Nicaragua is
related to increasing political and social tensions between
the Sandinist Government and opposition groups of a11
political
tendencies in Nicaragua, with which the
Government has not been able to agree on establishing a
pluralistic and democratic society in Nicaragua, as was
declared in the Manifesto of the Sandinist Movement
when General Somoza’s rtgime was overthrown, The
situation which has just arisen, as well as the preceding
events, must therefore be resolved exclusively by the
Nicaraguans themselves,

constructive attitude with regard to any type of peaceful
solution to the crisis in the-Central American region.
44. Finally, because it is extremely important for the
future, peace and lives of more than 20 million Central
Americans, we urge the international
community to
remain ready and alert in the face of the sinister intentions of international reactionary forces that are trying to
turn the border conflict between Nicaragua and Honduras into a large-scale aggression of a strategic nature
aimed at the Sandinist People’s Revolution.
45. The PRESIDENT:
sentative of Honduras,

The next speaker is the repreon whom I call.

51. Today, coincidentally, a full year has elapsed since
the Minister for External Relations, Mr. Edgardo Paz
Barnica, presented to the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States (OAS) a peace proposal [S/14919, annex] which, among other things, would
immediately lay the groundwork for general disarmament in the region and result in an objective and reasonable reduction in the number of foreign advisers, military
and others-who are of course extracontinental advisers
in the case of Nicaragua. As we have stated publicly, we
favour the creation of appropriate international supervisory machinery, to which Honduras is willing to submit,
to exercise control over the sensitive areas in the two
countries and deal with the destabilizing factors to which
I have referred. Let us develop procedures and set up
appropriate machinery to put an end to the arms traflic
in the region.

46.

Mr. ORTEZ COLINDRES
(Honduras) (interprelution from Spanish): We have listened with due attention
to the statement of the representative of Nicaragua, Mr.
Victor Hugo Tinoco, in which an effort was made to
involve Honduras in events relating to internal uprisings
against the Sandinist regime which-is governing his’country. My Government would like to set forth clearly its
position in that respect so as to contribute, as a Member
respectful of its international obligations, to the maintenance of peace in Central America and thereby in the
international
community. I should then like to comment
on certain other matters that have been raised and deal
briefly with the charges made against us.

47. First, Honduras, as is well known to all, is part of a
regional context comprising mainly five countries which
formed-from
1823 to 1838-the Federal Republic of
Central America. Those countries are Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua and, of course, our country. The economic and political interests of those five
States have always been intimately interrelated. As will
be recalled, until just a few years ago, there flourished in
the subregion of the American continent one of the most
important politico-economic movements-the
Common
Market of Central America-and
the fundamental
regional agreements that were part of that arrangement
are more or less still in existence.

52. I have seen a large number of enormous trucks
using our territory for the transport of armaments from
across the Nicaraguan border. Evidence of this has been
submitted to the diplomatic corps and the international
press on many occasions. That is why we wish the fundamental aspect to be maintained: that is, absolute respect
for established boundaries. With Nicaragua we have a
legally established boundary about which much has been
said-a river boundary, formed by the big Segovia River,
which runs from the Teotecacinte mountain pass all the
way to the Atlantic, and there is no dispute over that
legally delineated border. In that connection, Honduras
wishes to respect not only those boundaries but also the
traditional jurisdictional borders of all the States of the
region with a iiew to avoiding any possible threat to
peace and to establishing the parameters for a permanent
dialogue.

48. I wish to draw attention to the fact that the headquarters of a principal international body, of which I had
the honour to be President for thirteen and a half yearsthe Central American Bank for Economic Integrationis located at Tegucigalpa, where every 21 days representatives of the five Governments, including Nicaragua,
meet to negotiate credits in that international institution.
Incidentally, in all fairness it should be said that 65 per
cent of its operating budget comes from soft loans by the
people of the United States,

53. We have here the Secretary-General, who knows
that a year ago we showed a very strong desire at the
highest official levels that the Organization should spark
a permanent and serious dialogue so that we, the five
countries of Central America, where violence is now rampant, could make a step forward in the search for peace
and not just go on concealing Central America’s difficult
situation behind the smoke-screen of events.

49. Honduras, we wish to make clear, is not involved in
a bilateral dispute with Nicaragua, a sister-country; on
the contrary, in the regional context, Honduras is subject
to all the important political repercussions relating to the
situation in neighbouring States.

54. This is why we are interested in developing such
parameters through a multilateral permanent dialogue
that would make it possible, at both the internal and
international
levels, to encourage political agreernentb

50. Secondly, in actuality what we have before us is an
exclusively internal Nicaraguan problem. While it is not
Honduran troops who are fighting 10 kilometres inside
6

aimed at strengthening
system.

a democratic

and pluralistic

divisions of Russian origin-more
than two divisions, in
fact. This has, of course, produced a considerable imbalance in armaments in this region.

55. The Government of my country is one produced by
popular election. We would like to see our Nicaraguan
brothers enjoy a similar atmosphere and to speak not of
weapons but of votes cast in the coming days or years to
give legitimacy to an authority that was taken by force.

60. I will state once more that Honduras will not allow
its territory to be used for the invasion of a sister country,
nor will it permit military camps on the border. To prove
our sincerity, quite recently the Honduran Minister for
External Relations, Mr. Edgardo Paz Barnica, officially
invited the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua,
Mr. Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann, to come to the region
and inspect it personally. Helicopters and communications equipment were placed at his disposal to enable
him to inspect the frontier so that he could see for himself
that all these reports were completely groundless. But
that invitation, which was intended to put an end to the
tension and to all speculations with regard to it, was not
accepted by the Government of Nicaragua.

56. We have to be consistent with this proposal, and for
this reason Honduras is prepared to contribute to a
regional dialogue that would enable the achievement of
the objectives I have just outlined. This is why we regard
this problem most seriously and have sent invitations to
other countries of the region, with Costa Rica, which is a
democratic country, suggesting that a meeting take place
as soon as possible to seek solutions that would enable us
to consolidate peace. Four countries responded positively; only the Government of Nicaragua did not specilitally respond to that invitation to start a permanent
dialogue. Let us hope that it may now be possible to
produce a recommendation here that will enable us to
crystallize this desire for peace involving five countries of
Central America. We should certainly be very happy to
see some neighbouring democratic countries participating also in such a dialogue. We very much welcome the
initiative of the Governments of Venezuela and Mexico,
as well as the efforts of another democracy, the Dominican Republic, which has very generously offered its own
territory as a site for such a meeting.

61. My Government has today sent an official communication to the OAS Permanent Council denouncing
the affirmations made a few hours ago by the Ministry of
Defence of Nicaragua, which in their turn echoed the
forceful declarations of members of the Junta last year in
Madrid, which are definitely a threat to peace in our
region. In that regard I shall submit further evidence to
the Security Council. All these events are a threat to
peace in the region and a prelude not to an internal war
but to an international war against Honduras with all the
forces at the disposal of the other country, which far
surpass the defensive resources of any State in that
region. The Government of Honduras will invoke its
right of self-defence, should this happen, as is provided
in the Charter of the United Nations.

57. We adhere to the principle of non-intervention, and
we wish to reiterate here that the Government of Honduras is fully prepared to contribute with all the means at its
disposal towards discussing and attaining the longed-for
peace in Central America. However, we are greatly concerned at the statements by Nicaragua’s Minister for
Defence, Commander Humberto Ortega Saavedra, who
states that we are now at the brink of an international
war between Nicaragua and Honduras.

62. I say that we should not forget the fact that Honduras is prepared to participate in all meetings aimed at
establishing a durable peace, but I must point out that
both Nicaragua and Honduras are members of the OAS,
and in accordance with Article 52 of the Charter of the
United Nations it is necessary first to exhaust the
regional remedies before bringing problems affecting
peace before this world body.

58. A half hour ago my Government informed me it
had sent an official note to the OAS Permanent Council.
I can tell the Security Council that the note describes the
threatening declarations which made it necessary for our
country to mobilize its forces. The mobilization of forces
within our territory is, of course, our sovereign right. Our
Political Constitution makes it incumbent upon us to
defend the country.

63. There are no anti-Sandinist camps in our territory,
nor are we prepared to support the Nicaraguan insurgents. The good faith of Honduras can be seen in the
official invitations, which stir1 stand, extended to the
Government of Nicaragua to inspect the common frontier together whatever day and time may be designated
by the Government of Nicaragua. It will have to determine the date and time to begin this inspection. This
invitation, which we are now repeating, was not deemed
prudent or acceptable by the sister Government of
Nicaragua.

59. Power in Nicaragua derives not from votes but
from weapons. We must defend democratic power in
Honduras by peaceful or any other means. Our country
at this moment is prepared to submit to international
supervision to verify how many weapons each country
has, whether various countries have a defensive or offensive capability. We judge the armaments which now exist
in Nicaragua according to reports in the American press,
such as in The New York Times last week, according to
which the German Democratic Republic sent 100 heavy
trucks and 100 anti-aircraft batteries, We have also
learned, and we will be able to prove this, of armoured

64. Honduras has 35,000 refugees, most of whom are
Nicaraguans. It is paradoxical to note that those who
today govern Nicaragua were at one time themselves
refugees in our Honduran territory, where they found a
warm reception, kindness, understanding and a desire
that they establish a government and crystallize democ7

racy in Nicaragua. It is impossible for our armed forces
to control a border of thousands of kilometres. When
those who are at present members of the Sandinist
Government were insurgents, we could not control them
either in order thus to protect the Government they subsequently toppled, that of General Somoza. Yesterday’s
insurgents are those who govern today. All we want is for
Nicaragua to resolve its own internal problems and not
create a smoke-screen which could at this time conceal
the serious internal contradictions being experienced by
this sister country.

69. Should there be any need to clarify at higher levels
any problem that may remain in an eclectic and not very
clear situation, I am sure that the Government of Honduras would be prepared to have its Minister for External
Relations confer at the highest levels so that, with the
help of the Council, which is entrusted with the maintenance of peace, there may be a positive spark of dialogue
in the region. We cannot ignore that Central America is
involved in this context.
70. The Government of my country has asked me to
explain clearly and categorically that our problem is not
a bilateral one. Costa Rica has invited Nicaragua; so
have El Salvador and Honduras. There have been discussions; everyone has answered and reacted favourably.
May I allow myself to put a question publicly to the
Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua: are
you prepared for an immediate dialogue under the auspices of any organization in order to put an end to tensions in the region? I am putting this question publicly
because the Government of Honduras will accept here
and now any peace initiative and, at the same time, any
multilateral disarmament, provided it is agreed upon at
the regional level with proper supervision, such as that of
the United Nations.

65. The Government of Honduras does not believe in
vioIent
solutions,
and any troop mobilization-I
repeat-is
prompted solely and exclusively by the firm
will to defend our national sovereignty, which is a categorical
imperative
laid down in the Political
Constitution.
66. Finally, I wish officially to challenge-and
I have
here the telegrams-the
information
concerning the
alleged attack by Honduran troops against the Nicaraguan observation post of Vado Ancho, two kilometres
southwest of the village of Santo Tom& del Nance. The
Government
of Honduras wishes briefly to state, in
answer to the Government of Nicaragua, that at no time
has the Honduran army attacked the post of Vado
Ancho, nor any other place in Nicaraguan territory. On
the contrary, it is the border populations of Honduras
who have frequently been the victims of acts of aggression by Sandinist armed forces, as the Honduran Foreign
Ministry
has just denounced, sending copies of this
denunciation both to the Secretary-General and to the
Security Council. I repeat that the main concern of the
Honduran Government, its sole and exclusive concern in
the present circumstances, has to do with the recent statements made by Commander Humberto Ortega Saavedra
to the effect that he believed that a war against Honduras
was imminent. The armed forces of the Honduran nation
would be doing nothing more than complying with the
basic duty of its Constitution should they have to repel
foreign aggression and see to it that the sovereignty of the
Republic was respected.

71. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
Sir, may I begin, as is our custom, by congratulating you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and expressing what I think you
appreciate-the very great esteem of my Government for
the democratic traditions, in theory and in practice, for
which your country stands as an example to us all. I
desire also to express my Government’s gratitude to the
President of the Security Council for the past month, the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Oleg Troyaqovsky, for his responsible and expeditious
conduct of the office of President of the Security Council.
72. We are living through an extraordinary period. One
of the characteristics of this extraordinary period in
which we now find ourselves is a kind of proliferation of
rights. New rights unprecedented in human history are
invented and claimed, and as with all rights, outrage is
expressed when these new rights are violated. Twice this
month we have heard a new right invoked. We have
heard one country invoke the “right to aggression”, and
we have heard outrage expressed when its ‘“right to overthrow a neighbouring Government” was violated. We
have heard the same Government outraged again when
its “right to occupy a neighbouring territory” was
violated.

67. We believe that this kind of threat, coming from the
highest authorities of this sister country at a time of tension, should be replaced by prudence and moderation, if
the Government of Nicaragua really wants a return to
tranquillity
in Central America and a normalization
of
the fraternal relations that have always existed between
our peoples and Governments.

\

68. Lastly, we want to make clear that the Honduran
Government
reiterates to the Nicaraguan Government
that, with the support of the majority of American countries and those of Western Europe, peace plans have been
introduced which, unfortunately, have not been heeded
by Nicaragua. Nevertheless, the Honduran Government
continues with the same determination in the search for
peace for our suffering and bleeding Central America,
based on justice, the strengthening of the democratic system and respect for the dignity of the human person.

73. Now comes the Government of Nicaragua claiming yet a new right-the
“right of repression of its own
people”, with impunity and with immunity from any
consequences flowing therefrom. The Government
of
Nicaragua has suggested today that someone is violating
its “right to repress its people” and perhaps even its
“right actively to attempt to overthrow neighbouring
Governments and to direct revolutions from its own ter-.
ritory against its neighbours”, and it has come to
8

the international community in this international forum
appealing that we protect it against the frustration and
bitterness of its own people while it builds a harsh new
military
dictatorship to rule those people, to repress
those people, to whom it so clearly promised democracy.
That is precisely the appeal of the Nicaraguan Government to the Council today: protect Nicaragua in the free
exercise of its “right to repression”, repression at home,
aggression abroad.

tation, on June 23 1979 [S/134SI]-a
resolution that
was historic in every sense of the word: it demands the
immediate replacement of the genocidal Somoza dictatorship, which is now nearing its end, and backs the
installation of a broadly representative, democratic
government in our country, such as the one we have
formed. While saying that the solution to this problem
is exclu$vely within the jurisdiction of the people of
Nicaragua, it appeals to hemispheric solidarity to preserve our people’s right to self-determination. We are
presenting to the community of nations of the hemisphere, in connection with our plan to secure peace,
the goals that have inspired our Government ever since
it was formed. They have been set forth in our documents and political declarations and we wish to ratify
some of them here. 1) Our firm intention to establish
full observance of human rights in our country, in
accordance with the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights’ and the charter of human
rights of the OAS.3 Our observance of human rights
has already been made plain by the way in which the
Sandinist National
Liberation
Front has treated
hundreds of prisoners of war; our Government thus
invites the Inter-American
Commission on Human
Rights to visit our country as soon as we are installed
in our national territory. 2) Our wish that our installation in Nicaragua come about through peaceful and
orderly transition.
The Government of National
Reconstruction would take it as a gesture of solidarity
if the foreign ministers of the hemisphere were to visit
our country, and we hereby extend to them a fraternal
invitation to do so. 3) Our decision to embrace civil
justice in our country and to try those incriminated of
crime against the people according to the regular law.
By their heroic struggle the people have won themselves the right to let justice prevail for the first time in
half a century and will do so within the framework of
the law, without a spirit of vengeance and without
indiscriminate
reprisals. 4) Those collaborators with
the rCgime that may wish to leave the country and are
not responsible for the genocide we have suffered or
for other serious crimes that demand trial by the civil
courts may do so with all necessary guarantees which
the Government of National Reconstruction authorizes as of now; the departure of these persons may be
supervised by the Inter-American
Commission on
Human Rights and by the International Red Cross.
5) The plan to call the first free elections our country
has known in this century so that Nicaraguans can
elect their representatives to the city councils and to a
constituent assembly, and later elect the country’s
highest authorities.

74. This is a new right, which we have not heard
invoked before, but the myths by which it is accompanied are, unfortunately, already familiar. Those myths
are as follows: that Nicaragua is a democratic revolution, armed for the sole purpose of liberating the Nicaraguan people from the yoke of dictatorship;
that
Nicaragua wants to live at peace with its neighbours; and
that Nicaragua is about to be invaded by the United
States, or Honduras or someone.
75. I think these three myths, because of their crucial
role in the extraordinary arguments which are now recurrent, made by the Government of Nicaragua, deserve a
bit of examination by the Council as we consider the
proposals before us today and an appropriate response
to those.
76. First, the myth that the Sandinist military dictatorship is a democratic revolution. God knows the people of
Nicaragua
have longed for a democratic revolution.
They joined, almost unanimously, in a fight against the
heavy-handed dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza. They
joined
in that struggle because they were promised
democracy. The promises that the so-called Sandinista
Junta made to the people of Nicaragua and to the OAS
are very clear. I think those promises are interesting
today, so interesting that we should examine them. They
are expressed with special clarity in a letter addressed by
the Sandinist National Libe’ration Front (FSLN) to the
OAS dated 17 July 1979. That is the same month that the
FSLN became the Government of Nicaragua. It was on
the basis of those solemn promises, voluntarily offered to
the OAS, that the OAS and a good many others offered
their support to the FSLN in its efforts to become the
Government
of Nicaragua. I should like to read that
letter. It says:
“Mr.

Secretary-General”

--that is, the Secretary-General
American States-

of the Organization

of

“We are pleased to make available to you and to the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the member States of
the Organization a document containing our plan to
secure peace in our heroic, long-suffering country, at
the moment when the people of Nicaragua is consolidating its political and military victory over the
dictatorship.

“Mr. Secreta,ry, it is now up to the Governments of
the hemisphere to speak so that the solidarity with the
struggle of our people that was carried forward in the
name of democracy and justice can be possible in Nicaragua and become fully effective.

“First, we have developed this plan on the basis of
the resolution of the Seventeenth Meeting of Consul-

“We ask that you transmit the text pf this letter to
the Foreign Ministers of the OAS.
9

den to publish criticism. It is also forbidden to publish information
concerning what it is forbidden to
publish.

“Yours most respectfully, Governing Junta of
National Reconstruction, Violeta de Chamorro, Sergio Ramirez Mercado, Alfonso Robeio, Daniel Ortega
Saavedra, Moists Hassan.”

81. Churches in Nicaragua have been progressively
repressed, Archbishop Obando y Bravo, who had, like
the COSEP leaders, been a supporter of the revolution
and a strong opponent of the Somoza regime, was
banned from performing
mass on television. The
Catholic Church radio was closed down several times
and eventually incorporated into a system of Government control. Repeatedly clergy were subjected to reaIly
quite humiliating attacks, and the Sandinist attempt to
organize a parallel people’s church has followed unsuccessful efforts to intimidate the hierarchy of the Roman
Catholic Church of Nicaragua. A variety of Protestant
sects, including Evangelicals, Mormons,
Adventists,
Jehovah’s Witnesses and Moravians have been attacked;
their centres have been taken over by Sandinist defence
committees and their pastors have been harassed. At
least 55 Moravian churches on the Atlantic coast have
been burned.

77. It is an interesting letter. Those were presumably
serious commitments,
seriously entered into: commitments to respect for human rights; commitments to
respect for the freedom of all Nicaraguans, including
minorities; commitments to free election; commitments
to a government of civil law-a rule of law, regular civil
law. What happened to those commitments? We cannot
be indifferent to that.
78. First, let us look at the commitment
to respect
human rights, including, of course, that most basic
human, democratic right, the right to opposition, the
right to autonomous activity, which is the very basis of a
pluralist society. It is particularly sad to see what happened to those persons who joined the FSLN in establishing this Government and in making those commitments.
Take, for example, the private sector. In.October 1981,
the leaders of the Superior Council of Private Enterprise
(COSEP), the umbrella private-sector organization established to co-operate with the Sandinist revolution, were
arrested and gaoled for four months because they issued
a statement criticizing official policy. Sandinist expropriation of private enterprise raised the Government’s share
of the economy progressively, but the offence of the
leaders of COSEP was not to resist that progressive
incorporation of the economy into the Government, but
to express, presumably, criticisms of it in exercise of their
right of free speech. In November 1980, Sandinist security forces murdered the private sector leader, Jorge
Salazar, who was unarmed, in what everyone in the
world’ understood to be a transparent set-up. The
private-sector organization, COSEP, and the independent political parties at that stage withdrew from the
Council of State in protest.

82. It is very important to know that of the thousands
of Nicaraguans today living in exile in Honduras, Costa
Rica, Panama, the United States, Venezuela and all sorts
of other countries, a very large number supported,
assisted and joined the Sandinists in their opposition to
the Somoza Government. Among these dissidents is one
signatory of the letter I have read out, Alfonso Robelo,
and another, Violeta Chamorro, has long since very
quickly resigned from the Government and continues to
be engaged in the struggle to maintain some sort of voice
of freedom inside Nicaragua.
83. In addition to this systematic persecution of opposition forces the Government of Nicaragua has progressively violated its commitments
to elections and, of
course, to freedom of opposition. It has grown progressively intolerant, disillusioning a very large number of its
original leadership.

79. But it was not only the private sector that
suffered-very
quickly-the
repressive policies of the
Sandinista Government: labour unions were harassed
when they tried to resist being harnessed and incorporated into the State; their leaders were beaten and
arrested; tightly controlled government, labour and
Peasant organizations were established and promptly
lost a good many of their members.

84. On 8 April 1982, for example, after nine months
underground, former FSLN Commander Eden Pastora,
the famous Commander Zero, denounced the Sandinist
regime’s ties to Cuba and the Soviet Union and announced
that his own exile organisation would challenge the
FSLN’s control of Nicaragua, These are the people we are
today hearing described as Samozists, I think. These socalled Samozists were in a very large number of cases
democrats determined precisciy to free Nicaragua from
any kind of dictatorial control and to establish democratic
government in that society, and they have quite naturally
been dismayed as their goals have receded ever further into
the future as Nicaragua’s Government has become progressively an even more repressive military dictatorship
headed by some nine military commanders who today
govern the country with an iron grip.

80. The independent press, whose rights were promised
solemnly by the FSLN on assuming office, was quickly
repressed, with the electronic media incorporated into a
tight vise of Government control, and all organs of the
newspapers, except for a single independent voice, La
J'rensa, which for years was the opposition to the Somoza Government, were co-ordinated, as it were, by the
Government. Since then La Prensa has repeatedly been
shut down and is heavily censored. Governmentcontrolled newspapers and media published news stipulated by the Ministry of the Interior. La Prensa is subject
to prior censorship; frequently it is forbidden to publish
interviews and news, and it is always virtually forbid-

85. There is, I think, no better expression of the spirit of
intolerance with which Nicaragua is governed today than
the threat of Comandante Humberto Ortega Saavedra
when he asserted that the opposition would be hanged
from lampposts outside of Managua.
10

Those who did not flee have been herded by the Nicaraguan Government into internment camps where they are
overcrowded and underoccupied, and disease is rampant.

86, The promise of elections receded ever further, and
finally it was announced that elections would be held in
1985, or not before 1985, and that the discussion of candidates for those elections would be banned until some
time in 1984 and punishable by imprisonment-not
under ordinary civil law at all, but under a special martial
law that accompanied the state of siege.

92. Actually, the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua has himself said that it may be just to level some
criticism against the first phase, as he called it, of the
resettlement of the Miskito Indians in the north of the
country. The resettlement was not carried out with as
much force as has sometimes been claimed, said the Nicaraguan minister, but nonetheless the mistake was that it
happened too quickly; greater attention should have been
paid to explaining the necessity for resettlement to the
Miskitos. No consent was sought from the Miskitos; no
explanations were offered, The Miskitos were simply
forced to abandon their homes.

87. The repression against the Catholic Church continued apace, I think its spirit was most clearly expressed
in the response to the visit of the Pope. Pope John Paul II
has of course been dismayed by the efforts of the Nicaraguan Government to establish a kind of puppet popular
church. That has also dismayed Catholics throughout
the region and I suppose indeed throughout the world.
88. In preparation for the Pope’s visit an effort was
made to delay papal communications
and finally to
diminish the crowds permitted to hear the Papal Mass.
The British magazine The Economist, in its edition of 12
March 1983, noted that the Sandinists

93. The charges that Nicaragua has made against the
United States are no more persuasive than the commitments it made to the OAS. The Government of Nicaragua
has repeatedly asserted the hostility to it of the Government of the United States. We might almost say that it
suffers from an obsession concerning the hostility of the
Government of the United States towards the Government of Nicaragua. That obsession, as has frequently been
noted, is expressed in its national anthem, in which it
refers to us as nothing more nor less than ‘Yhe enemies of
mankind”.

“packed a Papal Mass in Managua with their supporters, who heckled the visitor. He was spirited out
of Managua to the provinces in order to keep him
from appearing too often alongside Managua’s antiSandinist Archbishop Obando y Bravo. The Pope
tried his own brand of passive resistance: the picture
showing him with arms folded and bowed in disapproval as Commander Ortega delivered his tirade
could not be kept from the front pages.”
However, most ordinary Nicaraguans
contact with the Pope.

94. Nicaragua’s Government has charged repeatedly
that the United States supported the Government of
Anastasio Somoza and offered implacable opposition to
its rise. The facts are that the United States Government,
which provided no economic or military aid to the Somoza rCgime during its struggIe for survival, acted immediately to assist the Nicaraguan revolutionar) Government on its accession to power. From 19 July 1979, when
the FSLN triumphed, to 30 September 1979, the United
States provided a total of $24.6 million in emergency
relief and recovery assistance. This emergency assistance
consisted of emergency food and medical supplies, often
shipped by air, assistance in housing reconstruction and
a grant of grain to provide for emergency food supplies.
From July 1979 through January 1981 approximately
$118 million in direct United States assistance was provided to the new Government of Nicaragua. In addition
to bilateral aid the United States actively supported all
loans to Nicaragua by multilateral lending institutions,
helping them to receive from the Inter-American Development Bank $262 million in loans from mid-1979 to the
end of 1980, an amount almost double what the Somoza
Government had received in the preceding 20 years.

were kept from

89. Perhaps the clearest expression of the attitude of the
official Sandinist Government regarding the Pope’s visit
was made in a radio broadcast from, of course, a
Government radio station, in which one of the reporters
said:
“Despite the fame ascribed to Vatican diplomacy,
the Pope engaged in political aggression, delivering a
speech that was really political aggression as well as
aggression against the people. This is why the people
responded as they did.”
90. The Nicaraguan Government
has repressed so
many sectors of its own population that it hardly seems
fair to single out just one, yet it remains true that the
harshness with which they have treated the indigenous
peoples of the Atlantic Coast, the Miskito, Suma and
Rama Indians, cannot go uncommented upon in any
group seriously concerned about the nature of a Government of Nicaragua.

95. During the first year and a half of its life, the Sandinist Government of Nicaragua received more economic
aid from the United States than from any other country.
It is absolutely false to suggest that the Government of
the United States attempted in fact to oppose and damage
the Government of Nicaragua in its efforts to liberate
the people of Nicaragua from a semi-military dictatorship, the rCgime of Somoza. It is also, absolutely false .to
suggest that it was the Reagan Administration
which ter-

91. The Miskito Indians were forcibly driven from their
ancestral homes, their churches burned, their villages
burned and in a good many cases their children forcibly
separated from them. Thousands fled to Honduras,
where they today live in refugee camps-deep
inside
Honduras, by the way, and not on that border anymore.
11

minated aid to Nicaragua. It was in fact in the last months
of the Carter Administration
that the decision to cease
United States aid to Nicaragua wasmade, and it was made
because the Government of Nicaragua was repeatedly and
sYstematicalIy found to be violating its agreement not to
co-operate with or support terrorism or violence in other
countries or to intervene in the internal affairs of other
countries. It was also violating its commitments to establish democracy and freedom for its own peoples.

99. We assured the Government of Nicaragua at that
time that we had absolutely no intention of engaging in a
large-scale military invasion of its country. The facts are,
of course, as we pointed out then, that Nicaragua is the
country in Central America which is involved in a major
effort to destabilize other Governments. The efforts of
the Government of Nicaragua to destabilize the Government of El Salvador are so clear that they cannot any
longer be denied even by the Government of Nicaragua,
which, for many months-indeed,
we might say yearssteadfast in the face of ever-greater evidence, denied the
truth of this assertion. The Government of Nicaragua
has sought to destabilize the Government of El Salvador
by sending large and continuing shipments of arms into
that country, over 200 tons in 1981. By providing training and support to El Salvador’s guerrillas and directing
guerrilla military actions in El Salvador from command
and control centres inside Nicaragua, Nicaragua has so
repeatedly violated Honduran sovereignty and territory
with covert shipment of arms over its borders that it is
literally the case that one loses count of the instances.
Nicaragua has also engaged in the effort to foment guerrilla forces inside Honduras and has stocked arms inside
Honduras. Some 10 tons of explosives and small arms,
and thousands of rounds of ammunition, sophisticated
communications equipment, uniforms, propaganda and
trucks and cars for transporting arms had been uncovered in safe houses in Honduras by the end of 1982,

96. The Government of Nicaragua claims that it is a
peace-loving
State surrounded bv threatening neighbours. The facts, again, are very different. The facts are
that the Government of Nicaragua has since its accession
to power concentrated on building a military machine,
unequailed
now or ever, in Central America. A rapid
arms buildup was undertaken immediately after the Sandinists came to power, which arms buildup threatens the
security of its neighbours. With a population of 2.7 million people, Nicaragua now has active-duty forces that
number approximately
25,000, at least twice the size of
Somoza’s National Guard, with another 50,000 reservists
and militia. To accommodate and train this force, large
numbers of military garrisons have been built and enormous quantities of arms have been imported from the
Soviet bloc. Some 2,000 Cuban military and internalsecurity advisers are in Nicaragua; several hundred Nicaraguans are training or have completed training in Cuba
and other Eastern European countries. Sophisticated
weapons, including Soviet-made T-55 tanks, amphibious
ferries, helicopters and transport aircraft, have been
added to Nicaragua’s arsenal, giving Nicaragua a military
establishment which obviously far exceeds its own defence
needs and far exceeds any military force ever seen in Central America.

100. Nicaragua has also systematically violated the
rights of Costa Rica by attempts to deny it use of the San
Juan River. It has violated Costa Rica’s borders and
made arrogant threats that attempt to deny Costa Rica
the right to the development of its own territory.
101. Nicaragua has not been interested in confirming
the facts about the activities or intentions of its neighbours. The Nicaraguan
Government,
for example,
rejected an invitation from the United States and Honduras to observe the joint military exercises held in the
region. On 18 February 1983 the Honduran Government
invited the Sandinist Minister for External Relations [see
S/1.5613] to inspect exile camps allegedly located in
southern Honduras, and on 23 February the Sandinist
rtgime rejected the offer.

97. In contrast, Costa Rica has no standing army, and
Honduras, which has a million more people than Nicaragua, has total forces of about 17,500.
98. Nicaragua charges that the United States, aided by
Honduras, is now intervening in its internal affairs and
threatening
the peace of the region. This assertion has
been heard here, of course, before: it was indeed about a
year ago-1 believe on 25 March 1982 [2335th meeting]that we heard the complaint of Mr. Daniel Ortega
Saavedra that the United States was about to launch ‘&an
imminent
large-scale military intervention against his
country”. In his letter requesting a meeting of the Security
Council [S/14913] he wrote of an

102. In fact, the Nicaraguan Government has recently
become quite open about its own approach to its neighbours. Radio Venceremos, broadcasting from Managua,
recently said, “Our war is and will continue to be
national, but we view our plans in the framework of a
regional conflict to which there are interests of the people
of Central America, the Caribbean and Latin America.”
They asserted in that same programme that “The rebels
throughout the area have imported arms through all the
routes we could. We have used all of CentraI America
and other countries for those purposes.” The Wmhington
Post commented that the broadcast appeared to support
charges made by the Reagan Administration
that the
insurgency found in other Central American countries
was encouraged, armed and participated in obviously by
the Government of Nicaragua.

“ever-increasing
danger of a large-scale military intervention by the armed forces of the United States
[w/zich] constitutes a grave threat to the independence
and sovereignty of the Central American countries and
to international
peace and security”.
At that time, he spoke of the interventionist strategy of the
Government
of’ the United States and he said that his
Government
had clear evidence of the United States intention to attack Nicaragua directly and to intervene directly
in El Salvador.
I2

103, The Government of Nicaragua has repeatedly
declined to participate in efforts of its neighboursincluding the United States, let me say, but certainly not
only or principally us-to find peaceful solutions to the
conflicts which plague the area.
f04. On 4 October 1982, in San Jose, there was articulated the so-called Final Act4 in which the democratic
States of the region, for the first time, set forth conditions
they regarded as essential to achieve peace in Central
America. Those conditions, endorsed by the democratic
States of the region and, I may add, by the United States
as well, provide, we believe, a standing invitation and a
solution, a plan, for the resolution of the problems and
insecurity that afflict the region.
105. Those conditions include an end to foreign support to terrorists and subversive elements working for the
violent overthrow of other countries, that is, all countries
would forgo violent or subversive activities inside any
other country; an absolute end to arms trafficking-all
arms trafficking from outside the area would cease; a ban
on the importation of heavy weapons and limitation of
all armaments and forces to those required for defence
would apply to all Governments; the withdrawal of all
foreign military and security advisers and troops under
fully verifiable and reciprocal conditions-all
countries
would withdraw all foreign advisers and troops; absolute
respect for the principle of non-intervention
and the
peaceful solution of disputes-all countries would agree
not to intervene in the affairs of other countries and to
resolve their disputes without recourse to force; respect
for .human rights, including fundamental freedoms, such
as freedom of speech, assembly, religion and the right to
organize political parties, labour unions and other organizations; and the establishment of democratic, representative and participatory institutions through free and
regular elections in an atmosphere of political reconciliation within each State.

was tragically short in the case of Nicaragua. The longsuffering Nicaraguan people saw their hopes for freedom
and human rights gradually suffocated by yet another
form of tyranny, To a people well versed in forms of
despotism, the new developments after the triumph of
Sandinism were ominously familiar.
109. The emerging pattern was easily recognizable: a
few self-appointed individuals, lacking popular support,
resorted to armed violence to maintain themselves in
power. Instead of popular support, the new Government
increasingly relied on military means; instead of consultation, it relied on coercion; instead of respecting human
rights, it chose to trample them; instead of allowing for
the free play of the political forces of the society, it systematically sought to destroy them. Is it any wonder,
then, that the Nicaraguan people, versed as they are in
recognizing tyrants, would increasingly turn against
those whom they originally believed to be their liberators? Is there any surprise in the fact that the Nicaraguans, thirsty for real freedom, are now once more ready
to fight for it as they did in the past? I believe not.
110. Somocismo and Sandinismo turn out not to be
unlike each other. They are both military dictatorships
denying the Nicaraguan people their human rights and
human freedoms, their political rights and political freedoms. The fact is that the right to repression which is
sought here today by the Government of Nicaragua cannot be granted by anybody. The right to repression is not
a human right or a political right.
111. The violation of territorial integrity and sovereignty, the right to intervene in the internal affairs of
others, cannot be granted by this body to the Government of Nicaragua or any other Government. It violates
the Charter of the United Nations. It violates the commitments of this body to all its members.
112. There were references by the representative of Nicaragua to the political will of the United States Government. There were references also to the will of the
Nicaraguan people to be free and independent, I should
like to say that the political will of the present United
States Government is no different from the political will
of the people of Nicaragua to be free and independent.

106. One of the most striking facts about the San Jose
declaration and the principles set forth therein as the
basis for peaceful resolution of all the problems of the
region is their resemblance to the commitments made by
the FSLN at the moment of its accession to power-the
commitments made in its letter to the OAS. In proposing
to the Government of Nicaragua that it join with other
countries of the region in the affirmation of those principles, one proposes only that it join in the reaffirmation of
the principles with which it announced its own arrival in
power.

113. An appeal was made by the representative of the
Government of Nicaragua that the United States put an
end to its efforts at support for internal disturbances
inside Nicaragua. I should like to make an appeal to the
Government of Nicaragua to put an end to its repression
of its own people, to put an end to its destabilization of
its neighbours, to affirm instead its political will for freedom as promised to the people of Nicaragua, as promised to the fellow members of the OAS and as, indeed,
claimed by the Government of Nicaragua before this
body. We appeal to the Government of Nicaragua to be
true to its own promises to provide its own people those
human rights, those freedoms, that fundamental respect
and opportunity for peace and prosperity which it promised and which we all hope so fervently it will find.

107. That distinguished Englishman John Stuart Mill
believed that a people’s quest for liberty is an irrepressible drive: it may be put down once, twice, repeatedly, but
never permanently. The recent political history of Nicaragua clearly illustrates the truth in John Stuart Mill’s
vision.
10X. Having valiantly fought to overthrow a despotic
military
dictatorship,
the Nicaraguans momentarily
breathed the exhilarating air of freedom. This triumph of
freedom over tyranny, of the people over its oppressors,
13

lem of clear-cut policies and attitudes against the Nicaraguan Revolution by the United States Administration,
and any political regional solution obviously must take
these two elements into account.

114. I should like, in closing, to affirm the political will
of the Government of the United States to join with
other members of this hemisphere, or this body, or to
stand aside while other members of this hemisphereand of Central America, specifically-work
out solutions
which provide for precisely those guarantees promised by
the Sandinist Government to its people: respect for
human rights, respect for good-neighbourliness,
respect
for the right of peoples to choose their own governments
through competitive and free elections.

121. The representative of Honduras referred aIso to
the fact that his country is greatly prepared to seek a
solution through dialogue. He said that Nicaragua was
never willing to engage in dialogue. He said that he
wanted to avail himself of this opportunity so that something specific and concrete might emerge from this forum
that would begin the process of discussion of the problems confronting our bilateral relations. I shall therefore
put a concrete proposal to the representative of Honduras for transmittal to his Government. We propose to
him that the proposal of peace and negotiation presented
by the Governments of Mexico and Venezuela in October of last year-which
was rejected by his Government-be taken up again and that the process of discussion
between our two countries may thus begin.

115. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Nicaragua, who has asked to speak in exercise of his
right of reply.
116. Mr. TINQCO
(Nicaragua) (interpretation from
Spalzish): The delegation of Nicaragua does not wish to
tax unduly the time or patience of the Council, and therefore we shall refer briefly only to certain elements which
we deem fundamental, so that representatives may have
a more accurate understanding of what has really happened and is happening with respect to acts of aggression
against the Nicaraguan Revolution.

122. I should like to remind the representative of Honduras that in October last year the Presidents of Mexico
and Venezuela offered to President Suazo Cdrdova of
Honduras and to Commander Ortega Saavedra, Coordinator of the Governing Junta of Nicaragua, to
meet-all
four together-on
13 October at Caracas to
discuss the problems. I should also like to recall that that
meeting was rejected by the President of Honduras, who
said that he had a meeting with Honduran businessmen
in the port of Tela, in Honduras.

117. With regard to some of the observations made by
the representative of Honduras, I wish merely to make a
few brief comments. I should like to draw to the Council’s attention the coincidence between the way Honduras
views the activities of the Somoza counter-revolutionary
bands-presenting
them as an internal matter, a civil
war-and the same way of viewing the matter that we
have heard from the representative of the United States. I
submit this to the Council merely as food for thought.
11X. The representative of Honduras pointed out that
there is a probIem of arms in Nicaragua, that there has to
be international supervision and control of armaments,
and so forth. He has attempted to present Nicaragua as
arming itself unduly and threatening its neighbours. We
shouId like to draw the attention of the Coundil to the
fact that that on numerous occasions the Government of
Nicaragua has stressed the fact that the attitudes of
aggression against Nicaragua and the problem of fomenting the counter-revoIution
against the Sandinist revolutionary process does not come only from our neighbours
in Central America. The determining, fundamental factor
of destabilization in Central America is precisely the role
played by the present United States Administration,
on the
basis of the parameters which were expressed on 15 July
1980 in the Republican Party’s platform.
119. We should like to emphasize that Nicaragua is
developing a policy that is eminently one of defence, that
the development of its lines of defence is in keeping with
the nature of the regional and extraregional threat hovering over Nicaragua. One cannot think that this statement
is unfounded if one recalls all the many inventories of
facts, declarations, activities, attacks and acts of aggression over the last few months against Nicaragua.

123. The truth is that, behind what could be considered
as the confusion of peace proposals within the interests
at play in the region, there has been a systematic attitude
on the part of the Honduran Government and the United
States Government to ignore and reject the specific proposals designed to deal with the specific problems in the
present situation in Central America. Let us look at the
precise facts.
124. What happened when the initiative of the Mexican
and Venezuelan Governments was taken for a meeting of
the four Presidents, including those of Nicaragua and
Honduras? Immediately
afterwards another move was
begun for parallel negotiations, with the statement that
there was nothing bilateral to negotiate, as was said by
the representative of Honduras, that the talks must deal
with the general problems of Central America, the Central American crisis, and that we shoulr$all get together.
But there was nothing about talks on the specific and real
problems affecting the region.
125. Recently we had the initiative of the Colombian,
Mexican, Panamanian and Venezuelan Governments’
that was also designed to deal with specific problemsthe crisis in El Salvador and the problem of relations
between Honduras and Nicaragua-and
once again
there were moves to set up collateral machinery to dilute
these concrete efforts that serious and responsible
Governments of the Latin American region and been
making.

120, The problem therefore is not merely one of the
animosity of some neighbours in the area. It is the prob14

126. I repeat: the Government of Nicaragua is ready; it
invites the Government of Honduras to take up once
again the proposal of the Mexican and Venezuelan
Governments, unless it continues to believe that there are
no bilateral problems and that we must speak in
generaIities.
127.

With regard, to the alleged exagerated arms buildwe do not deny that our country is
arming itself, in keeping with the threats surrounding it.
These defensive measures are being presented as threats
to neighbouring
countries, and the representative of
Honduras has pointed out, inter aliu, that 100 or 1,000
anti-aircraft batteries have been set up in Nicaragua. I do
not know whether this information is accurate, but I
should like to ask him: what is the fear of these antiaircraft batteries? Does Honduras ponder invading the
Nicaraguan skies with its air force? Is it thinking of usini
the 10 military runways in Honduras, the 38 fighter aircraft and the 39 transport aircraft and the 50 tactical
training support aircraft it possesses-the most powerful
air force in Central America? We repeat that the Nicaraguan Revolution is developing its defences in an eminently defensive manner-and
I beg to be excused for
being redundant-in
order to ensure the independence
and territorial integrity of our country and the very existence of our Revolution.

say where we would go but, rather, when we get to Tegucigalpa both delegations would take a helicopter and then go
and search precisely for traces of those camps. This note
was written and signed by the Acting Minister of Nicaragua. I regret that the representative of Honduras has no
information and that his Minister has not sent it to him,
just as the representative of (the United States was not
aware of it either.

up in Nicaragua,

128. With respect to another point that has so often
been repeated by the representative of the Government
of Honduras, as well as the representative of the United
States Government, with regard to the invitation which
Minister Paz Barnica sent to Minister D’Escoto Brockmann to come to Honduras and see if there were training
camps, I should like to recall the following. Firstly, the
invitation
was sent to Minister D’Escoto Brockmann
knowing full well that he was on official travel in Canada
and proceeding from there to the New Delhi meeting;
but, in any case, that is of little importance. Secondly, an
“invitation”
was casually issued to Nicaragua to go and
look at the training camps in Honduras at the same time
that there was begun a process of massive infiltration of
counter-revolutionary
forces against Nicaragua. Thirdly,
I should like to inform the representative of Honduras
that it is not certain-or that there is no informationthat the Government of Nicaragua has not replied to the
Honduran proposal.

130. With reference to some of the comments made by
the representative of the United States I shall be somewhat
more brief. I note the coincidentally identical points of
view expressed by the representatives of the United States
and Honduras on how to interpret the offensive or aggressive phenomenon
now being suffered by Honduras.
Regrettably, the representative of the United States
devoted 80 per cent of her statement to lecturing on moral
issues and democracy in trying to demonstrate that there
was not democracy, but a repressive rigime, in Nicaragua.
13 1, First of all, I should like to point out that my delegation would be pleased if this exhaustive analysis on human
rights and the internal situation in Nicaragua could some
day be made by the representative of the United States on
$ome countries friendly to that country, perhaps Chile or
South Africa. However, what is serious is not that an
attempt was made to paint my country as a land of repression where there is no democracy. What is dangerous is
that this has a logic which could be tragic, if it is not
already, In a few words the representative of the United
States first tried to demonstrate that there was no democracy in Nicaragua, secondly, did not bother to refute or
demonstrate that there was no aggression against Nicaragua and, thirdly, in conclusion, said that for her country it
was not a problem of aggression when it was’the caseof a
country which, according to its political and moral canons,
was not democratic.
132. We wish to point out this very dangerous logic
because we believe that it is in keeping with the lack of
depth with respect to the affirmations and indications that
the Nicaraguan delegation has provided, Nothing wassaid
about whether or not there were camps in Florida and that
there are still camps in Florida; nothing was said about
whether or not $20 million has been given-at least, that is
what is known publicly-to
assist the counter-revolution;
no concern was shown as to clarification of the nature of
the statements which I quoted in my statement.

129. The Government of Nicaragua gave an official
written answer-signed by the Acting Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, Mrs. Nora Astorga-in
the
following terms: first, it was recalled that Minister D’Escoto Brockmann was away from Nicaragua; secondly, it
was pointed out that we felt that military observation
work was not really the proper function of diplomatic
personnel, and we proposed that a military delegation of
Nicaragua could get together with a delegation from
Honduras to determine where these camps were or had
been located, the camps of the guards who at that time
had been infiltrating across the border between Honduras and Nicaragua. We should also like to point out,
because there must be no doubts, that we prefer not to

133. Finally, I should like to point out that onceagain we
are bearing the argument that Nicaragua, in denouncing
and citing all these specific facts, is obsessed by one thing,
as the United States representative said: that the Nicaraguans are paranoid, that the United States is a meek lamb
and that it is neither implementing nor financing any plan
against: the Nicaraguan Government; that there was no
invasion of my country by United States troops in 1856;
neither was there an invasion of my country by United
States troops in 1909, nor was there a third invasion of my
country by United States troops in 1913 and there was no
fourth invasion of my country by United States troops in
15

1927, an invasion that was resisted by August0 CCsar
Sandino and from whose resistance the Sandinist People’s Revolution took its values and principles.
134. These are some of the problems and points that
the delegation of Nicaragua wanted to raise, for the sake
of clarity.
135. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of
Honduras has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply. I call on him.
136. Mr.
QRTEZ
COLINDRES
[Honduras)
(interprefalion from Spanish): We are pleased indeed that
we are already speaking of peace and not solely of
arming ourselves to defend that peace.
137. The Government of Honduras has issued many
invitations to the Government of Nicaragua for a
dialogue. The representative of Nicaragua himself was
a Deputy Minister when the Government of Honduras, through its Minister for External Relations, Mr. Paz
Barnica, requested the initiation of dialogue and the
ending of the starus quo that had developed. Honduras,
since Nicaragua was not going to come to our territory,
was prepared to go to Nicaragua. On that day, I
informed the Council [S/1548fl that Minister D’Escoto
Brockmann had said that he had a trip planned and was
therefore unable to receive our Minister. That trip, as it
happened, was not a trip to Canada, but to the funeral of
Comrade Brezhnev. However, with the characteristic
talent of Nicaragua, its representative here held talks at
presidential level. Our Minister arrived in Nicaragua and
made a statement which differed from the point of view
of Nicaragua.
138. Nicaragua has a problem: it is constantly charging
that counter-revolutionary
troops or forces are coming
out of Honduras, Honduras asserts that this is not so.
Therefore we are engaged in one of those games that in
international law is called political ping-pong: one side
says yes and the other no. It is easy to speak of accepting
proposals, as he himself said-and here I use his wordsto discuss “bilateral problems” and not to speak in
“generalities”. No, the Government of Honduras did not
want to discuss bilateral problems in a limited fashion.
139. It is not true, I affirm it-and
I can send the
Council the President of the Republic’s written replythat the Mexican and Venezuelan initiative has been
rejected. The President of the Republic of Honduras had
a very solemn commitment on the day of the visit. One
hundred Honduran businessmen had been kidnapped in
San Pedro Sula-not in Tela, the city mentioned by the
Nicaraguan representative-and
were being held there
on the very day that the outgoing President of Mexico
had set as a date for a meeting. One hundred, whose
businesses represented 83 per cent of Honduras’ gross
national product, had been kidnapped by guerrillas. We
have proof that Nica.raguan guerrillas took part in that
event. Consequently, it would have been most difficult
for us to have failed to attend a demonstration of 300,000

people that had been convened to welcome the President and express solidarity with him, and the sorrow
of a nation at the kidnapping-including
the Chairman
of the Central Bank of Honduras, the Minister of the
Economy and the Minister of Finance-and
we regret
that the date could not be changed for the sake of
conciliation.
140. The problem differs in the following way.
Nicaragua considers that the problem is limited to the
border between Honduras and Nicaragua. As I ventured
to say in my preliminary statement, we believe that this is
a regional problem. Arms go from Nicaragua to El
Salvador. That is clear.
141. There are other implications too at this time; in
fact there are accusations that Commander Zero, who
was the hero of the Sandinist revolution, is coming in
from the southern front of Costa Rica. Moreover, the
interests of a sister country, Guatemala, are involved,
142. We have not wished to turn ourselves practically
into a guardian, a police watch-dog for Nicaraguan
interests on the border between Honduras and Nicaragua. We want the five countries involved in the conflict to sit down together. We have channels of communication and basic interests, and we are happy to
know that countries of great prestige, such as Mexico
and Venezuela, are taking an interest. Therefore the
balance is very easy: let us not discuss merely bilateral
problems, since we do not want to circumscribe our role to
that of being a watch-dog for the interests of the Sandinist
Government. Let us talk about the interests of the whole
region, without an agenda, without limitations, because
we must talk about real things at this time, not minor
border incidents. On the contrary, we want to talk about
arms; we want to talk about how many airplanes we are
going to request, when the MiGs are going to arrive; we
want to avoid having to buy Phantoms. We need to
know exactly which and what amounts of arms are
considered offensive and defensive. We want to talk
about international
supervision,
whereby serious
countries commit
themselves to guaranteeing
that
supervision. We want to talk about the departure of the
1,000 men from a country in the Caribbean who are now
advisers, so that the 55 technicians that they want to send
to El Salvador may leave. All these problems have
regional implications.
143. I have no doubt that my country’s Government-I
am anticipating its saying so-will agree. I do not need
consultations. I am sorry, I am not being pedantic; I am
expressing a democratic conviction. We are quite willing
at any time to sit down in a meeting-not
a meeting
limited to bilateral matters, but one involving the five
countries of the region that are concerned and high-level
observers, among which it would give us great pleasure
to see sister countries like Mexico and Venezuela. That is
one basic point.
_.
144. Another fundamental aspect which we see here is
the following. I do not know why at all times attempts

16

a
are made to create the impression that we have an
understanding
of some kind with the United States in
this respect. That is not the case. I wonder which two
countries among those that are speaking here are aligned.
Are we aligned with the United States, or is Nicaragua
aligned with an extra-continental Power? When we speak
of alignment, the bilateral problem seems to be a very
small one indeed.

means on the international
port aircraft.

148. Therefore, to be specific, we should like to say that I
we are prepared to begin unlimited regional dialogue in
which we would deal with the departure of foreign technicians, arms limitation and the international control of
borders, because all this costs money. When we had a
conflict with El Salvador, it cost 3 million pesos every
three months to have international observers from the
OAS. With ten observers of that kind the entire tax
reform of my country would go out the window. A single
jet consumes about $300,000 worth of fuel just flying
from one city to another. We cannot lose sight of this
reality.

145, We need a body such as the United Nations, such
as the Security Council-serious
people, such as those
sent to Lebanon or other troubled areas-to guarantee a
serious regional pact. I have specific instructions. The
Honduran
Government
would accept any regional
dialogue with the participation of these five countries
and other peripheral countries which could be accepted
but which I shall not specify now.

149. We have an independent policy. The United States
Government has not imposed anything upon us, nor is it
pushing us to have airports. We have asked for
international
assistance for airports because our
Government cannot invest its resources to the extent of
$30 million, and it is logical that we should look for that
money wherever we can, Ours is the only country in
Latin America that does not have an international
airport. I say that with sadness. In an era when you can
leave any part of the world--Japan, for example-and
within 12 hours can land anywhere you desire, the
airport of our capital, Tegucigalpa, is a menace. We pray
to God every time we fly into or out of it. Anyone who
knows Central America can understand that. Individuals
have great difficulty in getting insurance because of the
major risks involved in landing. We are the only country
that does not have a railroad in its capital, and we do not
have an inter-American
highway. We have enormous
mountains; we are the Central American Switzerland:
the Switzerland of the guerrillas. We have guerrillas from
Nicaragua, from El Salvador and Guatemala. Well, what
can we do, being the country we are? Close the doors to
them? Could we be so inhuman as to expel those 35,000
men struggling for freedom? Had we done SO, you would
not be in power in Nicaragua.

146. We are not aligned with the Government of the
United States. I want most sincerely to say that the entire
campaign to make it seem that Honduras is a puppet is
false in its entirety. Yes, we have bilateral and regional
agreements; they are for purposes of defence. This is one
of the fundamental reasons why we have accepted $30
lnillion
in assistance to expand our airports. How, I
would ask, can the Honduran Government stop 60
Soviet-made tanks? We do not have as large an army as
YOU do, and of necessity we must look for alternatives.
One of the fundamental things we want to do and discuss
is arms limitation and international supervision of an
agreement
to that end, a commitment
whereby all
countries-autonomously,
without being puppets of
Russia or the United States-agree to stop bringing
weapons into Central America. Money is in too short
supply to be wasted on weapons. Bear in mind that tax
reform in my country has generated $30 million, which
could be spent on a single airplane when our people are
suffering from poverty, when one is always thinking of
regional attacks, Let us once and for all reach a regional
agreement.

The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.

147. Therefore, I should like to say that our offer
stands. We think the Secretary-General, one of the
world’s most moral men, and the Security Council could
avail themselves of this opportunity to establish this
dialogue free of limitations to deal with the substance of
the matter. For us it is not a matter of watching over a
border. We did not do that for Somoza and we are not
going to do it for the Sandinists. We do not have people
for that. Our aircraft are not for surveillance of all those
who are fighting on their own territory. We cannot
intervene with 2,000 soldiers, so they say, who would
leave our borders because we do not have aircraft to
carry them. We have not even been able to obtain the

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

markets to purchase trans-

NOTES

I See A/38/66, annex.
2 General Assembty resolution 217 A (III).
3American
Convention
on Human Rights, “Pact af San JOSE? Costa
Rica”, OAS Treaties Series No. 36 (Washington, D.C., Organization of

America States, 1970).
4 Final Act of the Meeting of Foreign Ministers of the countries
interested in the promotion of democracy in Central America and the
Caribbean. For the text, see Jack W. Hopkins, ed., Lalin America and
Caribbean
Confemporary
Record (New York and London, Holmes &
Meier, 1984), vol. II, 1982-1983, pp. 867-873.

00400

60205-July

1990-2,050

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Soles Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT. SE PROCURER LE.5 PUBLICATIONS
DES NATIONS UNTES
L&s publications des Nations Unies sont en ventc dans les librairies et les agenccs d&ositaires
du monde entier. Informcz-vous auprh de votre libraire ou adressez-vous .4 : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genhe.
KAK

klOJIYYI4Tb

M3AAHMR

OWAHM3A~MM

Mmamfm
Opram3aumr
O6aenrIHeHHbrx
HamB
N aI’eHTCTBaX
Bo Bcex ptiO~aX
Mrlpa.
HaBoneTe
Mara3nHe
mu nmmTe
no wpecy:
Opra~H3uwi
npomm
H3nawB,
I-&o-hoprc
IIIIH XCeHeea.

OITbEAMHEHHbIX

HALJI?fi

MO)HHO KyllHTb
B KHHWHblX
btara3max
CnpamH
06 H~R~IIHIIX
B DameM KSWKHOM
OGaenwiemblx
Haqi&,
CeKuria
no

COMO CONSEGUIR PIJBLICAClONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNJDAS
Las publicaciones de JasNaciones Unidaa estin en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras en
tcdas panes de1 mundo. Consuke a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nucva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

602OS-July

1990--2.03-I
