A/62/PV.120

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

120th plenary meeting
Friday, 5 September 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/62/898)
Draft resolution (A/62/L.48)
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like at the outset to extend my thanks
to the President of the Assembly for holding this
important meeting. My delegation would like to thank
Mr. Gert Rosenthal, the Permanent Representative of
Guatemala, for his efforts to facilitate negotiations on
reaching a consensus on the draft resolution that will
be adopted at the end of this meeting. My delegation
would also like to align itself with the statements made
by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and by the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait on behalf of the
Arab Group.
I would like to emphasize the principles position
of my country, which condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, whatever its source and
whoever its perpetrators, be they individuals, groups or
States. Since 1986, the Syrian Arab Republic has been
a consistent pioneer in calling for the holding of an
international conference to agree on a definition of

terrorism. Such a definition would distinguish between
terrorism and the right of peoples to self-determination
and the struggle to achieve their independence, in order
to preserve and safeguard the norms of international
law from politicization and to protect just causes from
any attempt to misinterpret and undermine them on the
pretext of combating terrorism.
In the fight against terrorism, we have always
striven to find a solid basis for genuine cooperation
among all States within the framework of the
resolutions of international legitimacy. We must
prevent counter-terrorism efforts from being exploited
for particular political gains, at the expense of just
causes. Syria supports the consensus adoption of
comprehensive, clear and unequivocal concepts in a
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy that cannot be
easily utilized to serve dubious motives and agendas or
to violate the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, in a manner that has nothing to do
with combating terrorism.
Syria supports sincere international efforts to
combat terrorism and to address its root causes. We
emphasize the need to implement the measures set out
in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy to address the conditions and factors
conducive to the spread of terrorism. I wish to reiterate
that the Strategy does not obviate the need for a clear
legal definition of terrorism that takes into account all
aspects of that condemnable act and distinguishes it
from the legitimate right of peoples to resist occupation
and liberate their lands. Therefore, we call for the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-49881 (E)

*0849881*

A/62/PV.120

conclusion of negotiations on the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism.
Syria believes that, if the Strategy is to be
successful, it must tackle the root causes of terrorism,
among the most important of which is foreign
occupation. Unfortunately, the Strategy does not
contain any clear measures or implementable language
to put an end to occupation. It fails to clearly define
State terrorism and refers only briefly to that very
important concept, whereas addressing terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, including State terrorism,
is a prerequisite for any global counter-terrorism
strategy.
We believe that it is counterproductive to try to
combat terrorism by using excessive force. Today,
because of the use of excessive force and violence,
terrorism has spread to areas where it was not found
before. That is making the world less secure with every
passing day — a reality that is felt most keenly in our
region. While we call upon all States to cooperate in
the fight against terrorism, we warn against the use of
counter-terrorism as a pretext for exploiting the rights
of peoples and for sowing hatred among religions,
cultures and civilizations, rather than promoting
dialogue among them for the benefit of all humanity.
In that context, I should like to emphasize that we
reject all attempts to link terrorism to any particular
religion, ethnic group, culture, language or nationality.
The fight against international terrorism must be
carried out in full conformity with the Charter and with
the relevant provisions of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
My delegation wishes to stress that the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy must be implemented in a
comprehensive and non-selective manner. In that
context, we should like to emphasize that the Strategy
adopted as resolution 60/288 is a vital and active
document that must be implemented in all its aspects as
well as periodically reviewed and updated. My
delegation would like to emphasize the central role of
the General Assembly in the fight against terrorism. In
that connection, we wish to recall that the Strategy is
owned by all Member States and therefore that all of
them must participate in all decisions concerning its
full implementation.
My delegation believes that the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force should continue
to work within the mandate entrusted to it by the

2

General Assembly and undertake its tasks after
consulting with Member States and accepting their
guidelines for its work. In that connection, my
delegation believes that any meeting, event or activity
concerning the Global Strategy should be carried out
only after transparent discussions with all Member
States within the framework of the United Nations.
That would ensure the comprehensive implementation
of all four pillars of the Strategy and would prevent
politicization and partiality in such implementation.
With regard to the Secretary-General’s planned
symposium on the victims of terrorism, my country
expresses its deep sympathy for the victims of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including
the victims of State terrorism as well as those who
have become victims of counter-terrorism measures
that violate human rights or international humanitarian
law. My delegation had hoped that preparations for the
symposium would be carried out in a transparent,
consensual and unhurried manner in order to achieve
consensus, so that it would not undermine the noble
principle of assisting the victims of terrorism from the
humanitarian perspective.
When the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was
adopted in 2006, Syria joined the consensus, despite
the critical comments made by my delegation and
many others during the discussions. Those comments
did not find their way into the document, which finally
attracted a consensus because many participants were
committed to the principle of consensus. Syria joined
the international consensus because of its principled
support for all counter-terrorism efforts and its
understanding that any strategy would be an important
tool in facilitating cooperation among States on such
efforts.
Syria supports the draft resolution to be adopted
at the end of this meeting. After participating actively
in the initial discussions, we were very keen to ensure
that the draft resolution would be more comprehensive
and profound so that it would fully meet the concerns
of many delegations, including my own, in particular
with regard to the need to address the root causes of
terrorism, including the illegitimate use of force,
aggression and foreign occupation, the denial of the
right of peoples to self-determination and the lack of
social and economic justice.
Mr. Khaleel (Maldives): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation’s appreciation to the

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

President for convening this meeting of the General
Assembly to review the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Let me
also join previous speakers in congratulating
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala on the
exemplary manner in which he facilitated the
negotiations on the draft resolution (A/62/L.48) before
us today. My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Terrorism has always haunted the human race in
one form or another, yet never before have we
witnessed such organized, frequent and lethal acts of
terrorism, threatening international peace and security.
The threat of terrorism is no longer restricted to certain
countries or regions of the world. Acts of terrorism are
affecting us all, irrespective of our physical size,
economic strength, political power or military might.
Thus, fighting the menace in all its forms and
manifestations is the collective responsibility of the
entire international community.
Today, a large part of the United Nations
membership comprises small States, which often do
not have the resources or the means to defend
themselves from the new and emerging threats,
including the many and varied forms of terrorism and
the activities of organized crime. Some of today’s
terrorist organizations and organized transnational
crime syndicates have at their disposal far greater
resources and means than some of the small sovereign
States Members of the United Nations.
As the members of this Assembly are well aware,
two decades ago a group of armed terrorists from a
neighbouring country launched an attack on the
Maldives with the aim of invading and converting it
into a terrorist safe haven and staging ground for
terrorist activities against their own country. Ever since
that fatal incident, which we quelled with the help of
our good friend and ally, India, the Maldives has
continued to advocate the need for effective
multilateral cooperation to support small States in
protecting their sovereignty and territorial integrity —
an arrangement that could respond with urgency and
commitment, without any bias, regardless of the
strategic location, economic significance or political
importance of the State.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy gives us much hope in that regard. The four

08-49881

pillars on which the Strategy is based and their
universal acceptance constitute its strength. We are
happy that the Strategy pays considerable attention to
capacity-building and the creation of an enabling
environment conducive to preventing and fighting
against that menace.
The Maldives has consistently supported
significant international measures aimed at combating
international terrorism. We sincerely believe that acts
of terrorism committed to instil fear and terror by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purpose cannot
be justified or condoned under any circumstances.
The Maldives is now a party to almost all major
international conventions and protocols forming the
international anti-terrorism regime. We are also a party
to the Regional Convention on Suppression of
Terrorism of the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) and its Additional Protocol. We
believe that closer cooperation at the regional level is
necessary in order to set up effective security
arrangements and legal frameworks that complement
our efforts at the international level. We hope that the
SAARC Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters, adopted at the SAARC summit
recently held in Colombo, will complement our efforts
for greater regional cooperation in the fight against
terrorism in South Asia.
Given their meagre human and financial
resources, for many small States like the Maldives,
combating the increased activities of international
terrorism has been an uphill battle. Fulfilling the
numerous obligations under the various Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions has not
been an easy task. At present, therefore, we are
working with our neighbours and friendly countries, as
well as concerned regional and international
organizations, in strengthening our institutional
capacity to ensure that our obligations under the
various international and regional conventions and
protocols are implemented and incorporated into our
domestic laws.
In particular, I am happy to note the cooperation
and guidance that we are receiving from the experts of
the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We are now in the process of
submitting the necessary reports under Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

3

A/62/PV.120

We must remember that international terrorists
are the enemies of international peace and security. The
sole purpose of those non-State actors is to disrupt the
harmonious operation of the international system.
Those enemies of peace have no regard for religious
creed, nor do they concern themselves with the safety
of innocent people in the selfish pursuit of their
agendas.
Fighting this global aberration requires our
unwavering commitment, unity and cooperation.
Identifying and addressing the root causes of terrorism
will be critical in that fight. On behalf of my country, I
assure the Assembly of our resolve to do our part in
that joint effort to fight that international scourge.
Mr. Olago Owuor (Kenya): My delegation joins
others in thanking the President of the Assembly for
convening this meeting on an important subject that is
dear to the hearts of many Kenyans. We also wish to
thank him for his opening remarks and the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (A/62/898)
outlining the activities of the Organization in
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. At the outset, we associate
ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Guinea on behalf of the African
Group.
International terrorism remains one of the most
serious threats to global peace and stability. It
undermines the values enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations with respect to human rights, the rule
of law, the protection of civilians, tolerance among
peoples and nations, and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. Experience shows that terrorism knows no
frontiers. It does not discriminate on the basis of
religion, nationality, colour or sex. It makes no
distinction between developed and developing
countries. In a nutshell, no one and no country is
immune from acts of terrorism.
We appreciate the efforts made by States
Members at the national, regional and international
levels to combat terrorism. We reiterate our support for
the four pillars that form the basis of the Strategy for
fighting terrorism and the work of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to
coordinate system-wide efforts to implement the
Strategy. The Task Force has been useful in providing
technical assistance to Member States in their quests to
combat terrorism. However, it needs to be strengthened

4

to be more efficient in its functioning. We therefore
support its institutionalization and urge adequate
resource allocation for it to function properly.
It is generally understood that however powerful
or good a strategy may be, if it is not regularly
reviewed and updated it may not yield good results. In
view of that, and due to the importance Kenya attaches
to this issue, we welcome this high-level meeting to
review the implementation of the Strategy. We believe
that the time is ripe for States to update the Strategy
with regard to the outstanding gaps and elements in
order to respond to changes.
In that regard, we urge States to marshal the
necessary political goodwill in order to achieve an
agreement on the definition of terrorism. There is also
a need to strengthen inter-agency cooperation at both
the national and the international levels, to raise
awareness of the Strategy beyond the United Nations
environment and line ministries at the national level.
Kenya has in the past suffered the devastating
effects of three separate incidences of terrorist attacks.
We have been a victim of that terrible crime against
humanity. We remain in the forefront of efforts to
support the international initiatives that seek a global
solution to the menace. To that end, we have acceded
to all international counter-terrorism conventions. We
urge States that have not become parties to the legal
counter-terrorism instruments to strive to do so.
We recognize that capacity-building is a core
element of the global counter-terrorism effort. In that
regard, we have, at the national level, put in place a
number of judicial and administrative measures and
structures to enhance our capacity to prevent the
perpetration of terrorist acts within our territory. Those
include the establishment of a national counterterrorism centre to coordinate and analyse all
information related to potential terrorist threats. The
centre draws personnel from agencies and departments
that are involved in combating terrorism and related
crimes. In addition, there is a special anti-terrorism
police unit to investigate and apprehend persons
associated with terrorist activities. A suppression of
terrorism bill is in the process of being republished in
order to take on board views resulting from
consultations with stakeholders, including civil society.
The bill provides for clear investigative, preventive and
prosecutorial mechanisms for dealing with individuals
and organizations suspected to be involved in terrorist

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

activities. Draft legislation on money-laundering to
provide for the freezing of funds and other financial
assets and confiscation of property of persons or
organizations associated with terrorist activities is
pending conclusion of debate in Parliament. A special
unit to prosecute terrorism and money-laundering cases
and to deal with forfeiture of assets emanating from
terrorist activities has been set up within the Attorney
General’s office.
On the regional front, a number of regional
initiatives to foster cooperation between law
enforcement and intelligence machinery are in place.
East African security chiefs have met regularly to
strategize on how to combat serious cross-border
crimes, including armed robbery and terrorism. In fact,
one such meeting just concluded in Addis Ababa.
Emphasis has been placed on training and enhancing
capacities, in addition to sharing information and best
practices. Emphasis has also been placed on
coordinating efforts to arrest known terrorists and other
fugitives from the law.
In addition, widespread public education
campaigns have been initiated to create awareness of
the dangers of terrorism among the general populace.
Despite those efforts, the region would still benefit
from more support to step up its capacity to combat
terrorism.
We recognize the role of the Assembly and the
Security Council in the fight against terrorism. Security
Council resolutions on counter-terrorism complement
the legal regimes on the fight against terrorism and
should be implemented, but they should be adopted
through a fair process. We commend States for their
cooperation with the Council and urge them to
collaborate with the United Nations system.
We commend the Secretary-General for his
planned initiative of convening a symposium on
supporting victims of terrorism, which will be held on
9 September here at United Nations Headquarters. The
symposium will provide an opportunity to share
experiences in supporting victims of terrorism. We
support the planned initiative and call for more
commitment to and solidarity with the victims.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its
commitment to the ideals of the Strategy and looks
forward to continuing to work with Member States and
other stakeholders to realize our collective objectives.

08-49881

Mr. Punkrasin (Thailand): On behalf of my
Government, I would like to commend the President’s
efforts in promoting the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and in
convening this meeting to review the implementation
process. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on the activities
of the United Nations system in implementing the
Strategy and to extend our sincere gratitude to
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala and his team
for their valuable contribution to facilitating the draft
outcome document for this agenda item.
The landmark adoption of the Strategy in 2006
provided us with a comprehensive framework for a
coherent international response to terrorism. While the
global fight against terrorism should be undertaken
mainly within the multilateral sphere of the United
Nations in accordance with relevant international law,
such as the United Nations Charter and human rights
law, the primary responsibility for implementing the
Strategy lies with each Member State. Driven by that
conviction, Thailand has committed and will remain
committed to adopting and utilizing every means
possible, at all levels, in order to achieve the aim of
eradicating terrorism.
In that connection, allow me to take this
opportunity to briefly share with the Assembly our
contribution and the measures we have taken to
implement the four pillars of the Strategy. A more
detailed account of Thailand’s contribution is attached
to the written version of my statement, which is being
distributed here today.
With regard to measures addressing the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, it is
our belief that socio-economic development is a vital
factor in preventing the spread of radicalization and
terrorism. Thailand is a strong supporter of the process
that promotes interfaith dialogue and moderate
religious leaders to counter the forces of radicalization.
Special emphasis is given to exchanges and networkbuilding among religious leaders, scholars and
specialists. Our policy targets the media and education,
particularly religious schools. The Ministry of
Education works with religious leaders to ensure that
school curriculums present ideas that are not prone to
radicalization.
Under the heading of measures to prevent and
combat terrorism, Thailand is proud of its steady

5

A/62/PV.120

efforts towards becoming party to 9 out of the 13
United Nations anti-terrorism conventions and
protocols, 3 of which we ratified or acceded to in 2007.
Thailand also ratified the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Convention on Counter-Terrorism in
February 2008.
In June 2007, our Prime Minister approved a
regulation on the control of man-portable air defence
systems, in line with the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation declaration made in Bangkok in 2003. The
regulation imposes stricter controls on the possession
of such systems and closer monitoring of their sale,
transport and import-export and of the possibility that
such weapons could fall into the hands of criminals and
terrorist groups.
As a result of globalization, terrorists can now
travel and mobilize their resources from one country to
another more easily than ever. In an attempt to address
those problems and to curb the risk of terrorist acts,
Thailand has intensified its border and transport
security and established many administrative and
legislative instruments. Examples of such measures
include the placing of the Personal Identification
Secure Comparison and Evaluation System at major
airports and border checkpoints. The National
Assembly adopted an amended penal code in July 2007
that stipulates as criminal offences the making, forgery,
distribution, sale and possession of illegal passports
and other travel documents. The penalties for those
offences have also been increased.
Moreover, in terms of financial regulations and
assets freezing, our Anti-Money Laundering Act was
amended in 2007 to broaden the scope of a definition
of assets related to criminal offences to include
terrorist financing.
Also important, Thailand promulgated the new
Extradition Act B.E. 2551 (2008) on 30 January 2008
to expedite the process of extradition by stipulating
certain conditions in which the extradition request can
be made directly to Thailand’s central authority, the
Office of the Attorney General, bypassing diplomatic
channels.
With regard to measures building the State’s
capacity to counter terrorism, Thailand attaches
importance to international cooperation on capacitybuilding for the competent agencies that are
responsible for counter-terrorism-related work. Thai
officials regularly attend and participate in workshops,

6

meetings and conferences at the bilateral, regional and
multilateral levels. The topics of such workshops
include international terrorism, law enforcement,
counter-radicalization,
internet
abuse,
weapons
smuggling, dual-use goods and explosives, winning the
hearts and minds of the people and emergency response
mechanisms.
Last but not least, in terms of defending human
rights while combating terrorism, Thailand upholds its
obligations under related international instruments on
human rights, such as the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights; the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination; and the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment.
Turning to the content of the Strategy itself,
Thailand is of the view that the Strategy is a living
document that can be modified in parts to better reflect
the latest situation and trends in terrorism and counterterrorism actions. There should be an institutionalized
review mechanism for the Strategy to keep it relevant
and to keep Member States’ information up to date
regarding the implementation of the Strategy
worldwide. We would support a regularized two-tothree-year review.
Thailand argues for more transparency in the
process of data-collection by United Nations bodies.
Member States should be informed of what the United
Nations intends to do with the information that they
provide upon its request. At times, there could be
misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the
information that the United Nations receives. That
could become the basis for incorrect or inaccurate
analysis, which could then lead to problems between
Member States and the United Nations.
We
think
that
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force should play a greater role
in coordinating information among all United Nations
agencies to minimize reporting fatigue on the part of
Member States. Furthermore, the coordinating feature
of the Task Force should perhaps extend to expert
groups established under the mandate of various
Security Council resolutions on terrorism, such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
under resolution 1373 (2001), and the Monitoring
Team, under resolution 1267 (1999). If the Task Force

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

is to be more meaningful, it should have a more
focused and clearly spelled-out mandate; if it is to be
more effective, more resources should be made
available. Thailand therefore argues for more funding
for the Task Force, but that should be based on its
measurable outputs and contributions.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation
wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/62/898), which reviews the activities of the United
Nations system in implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Indonesia would
also like to extend its sincere appreciation to
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala for his
strenuous efforts in facilitating the Strategy review
consultations. It is our hope that the draft resolution
emanating from those consultations will be adopted
very soon by consensus.
Before I continue, my delegation would like to
align itself with the statement delivered yesterday by
the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
Indonesia made a not-insignificant contribution to
the adoption and launching of the Strategy two years
ago. As a nation that had suffered immensely at the
hands of terrorists, we were deeply convinced that a
mechanism of this nature was critical to the response of
the international community to the scourge of
terrorism. That is why we welcome this review debate.
The coming together of Member States to agree on the
Strategy gives us encouragement that the menace will
be overcome. We believe that we need to explore every
type of cooperation at various levels to implement the
Strategy and its plan of action to the fullest extent.
In the past two years, Indonesia has taken a
variety of initiatives at the domestic level in the
implementation of the Strategy. For instance, we
enacted a counter-terrorism law to provide the legal
basis for the investigation, prosecution and punishment
of acts of terrorism, including their financing.
In addition, we have upgraded our counterterrorism measures and the capabilities of local law
enforcement bodies, including the ability of the police
to intervene in terrorism-related incidents. Over 410
suspects have been arrested since the Bali terrorist
bombing in October 2002. More significantly, of that
number, 269 have been convicted, while the remaining
cases are still before the judiciary.

08-49881

Furthermore, we have embarked on bilateral,
regional and multilateral measures, as required by the
Strategy. That is because we believe that no stone
should be left unturned to ensure that the course of
action we have embarked on is successful. The
challenge before us is to implement the comprehensive
measures outlined in the four pillars of the Strategy.
Indonesia has no intention of doing less.
At the bilateral level, Indonesia has concluded
counter-terrorism cooperation agreements with several
countries, particularly neighbours such as Australia,
Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines and Singapore.
At the regional level, Indonesia spearheaded
cooperation in law enforcement, border control and the
enactment of legislative frameworks for counterterrorism. The Bali Counter-Terrorism Process, for
instance, has established strong bonds of collaboration
among legal and law enforcement practitioners in the
region. The Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation, which was set up by Indonesia and
Australia, has provided structured training for law
enforcement officers in the region. The contribution of
Indonesia is also evident in the regional efforts to bring
about the conclusion of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Convention on Counter-Terrorism. That
Convention has provided a framework for regional
cooperation to counter, prevent and suppress terrorism,
and for deepening cooperation among law enforcement
agencies and relevant authorities of the parties. In
addition, Indonesia has also sponsored and participated
in a number of initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue
among civilizations bilaterally, regionally and
multilaterally.
At the multilateral level, Indonesia has, inter alia,
shown unwavering commitment to promoting the
effective implementation, legitimacy and credibility of
the sanctions regime under resolution 1267 (1999). We
are fully committed to the joint efforts to improve its
procedures in order to facilitate its implementation at
the national level by Member States. Moreover,
Indonesia has been very active in promoting the effort
to improve fair and clear procedures to protect the
rights of individuals affected by the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. Indonesia highlights the importance of
ensuring the protection of the individual’s rights to be
informed and to be heard and the right to review by a
fairer and more effective mechanism.

7

A/62/PV.120

Those efforts against terrorism, it must be
stressed, can only be successfully carried out if the
measures agreed upon within the Strategy are
consistently implemented in a balanced and
comprehensive manner.
My delegation believes that those multifaceted,
integrated and coordinated measures should be fully
undertaken by all stakeholders. Together, they will
address the conditions that are conducive to the spread
of terrorism, prevent and combat terrorism, build
States’ capacities to prevent and combat terrorism and
thereby strengthen the role of the United Nations
system and ensure respect for human rights for all and
the rule of law as the fundamental basis for the fight
against terrorism.
It has always been the view of Indonesia that only
such an all-embracing approach can help us combat
terrorism effectively. Beyond that, we must underline
the need to reject the association of terrorism with
particular religions,
civilizations,
cultures
or
ethnicities. Terrorism is a human challenge that
respects no national borders or peoples. Only together
can we, all of us, combat it successfully.

appreciate our role in preventing the menace in the
future.
Mr. Palihakkara (Sri Lanka): I thank you, sir,
for convening this plenary meeting to consider the
important agenda item 118, “The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”, and action on
draft resolution A/62/L.48. This is indeed an
opportunity for the first review of the Strategy. I would
also like to thank the President of the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General for their opening
remarks. Our thanks go as well to the facilitator,
Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala, for his untiring
efforts towards making agreement on the outcome
document possible.
This meeting takes place against the backdrop of
the increasing frequency and intensity of acts of
terrorism that are threatening peace and security all
over the world. Our deliberations and consideration of
the draft resolution today are therefore timely.

While the delegation of Indonesia looks forward
to a consistent, transparent, comprehensive and
balanced implementation of the Strategy, we also look
forward to negotiating a comprehensive and balanced
convention that respects the principles of international
law and humanitarian law, as well as national
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

It has been two years since we adopted the
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which provides an
internationally agreed approach to countering
terrorism. It also provides a framework for taking
individual as well as collective initiatives aimed at
addressing the menace while maintaining respect for
the well-established norms of the rule of law and
human rights. The Strategy acknowledges that the
problem of terrorism is seriously undermining the
foundations of democracy, the rule of law and public
order.

The Indonesian delegation welcomes the draft
resolution on the review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, contained in document
A/62/L.48, which strongly condemns acts of terrorism
and reaffirms the multifaceted cooperation against that
international threat.

Even if the Strategy may not represent the best
interests of all, it is nevertheless a set of guidelines that
has been arrived at by consensus, thereby
accommodating different strands of views, concerns
and interests. In that sense, it enjoys the respect of all
States that are committed to implementing it.

Finally, we would also like to commend the
initiative of the Secretary-General to organize a
symposium on supporting victims of terrorism by
inviting victims, civil society and experts together here
on 9 September. For Indonesia, that initiative is an
important reminder to all of us not only of the heinous
nature of terrorism but also of the challenge to care for
its victims and not to leave them to face the future
alone. We believe that the symposium will offer us
many lessons, as experienced by the victims and
eyewitnesses of inhuman acts, and help us to

The threat to global peace and security posed by
terrorism has serious consequences for humankind as
never before. It causes economic and political
instability in States. It destroys the traditional ethos on
which States and societies are founded. It also seeks to
destabilize societies, subvert established order and —
most importantly — deny people their basic rights and
freedoms.

8

Terrorism has assumed international dimensions,
as we all know, through its destructive networks of
violence, fund-raising, smuggling of illicit arms,

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

including possible mass destruction capabilities, and
other forms of transnational crimes. It was aptly
described by a former Secretary-General as a
supranational subversive threat to peace and security
within and among States. A succession of Security
Council resolutions has reaffirmed the danger.
Democracies have become especially vulnerable
to the scourge of terrorism today. The basic guarantees
of fundamental rights and freedoms, as well as the
political space available to different actors in a
democracy, are increasingly exploited by elements that
are bent on achieving their political ends by violent
and terrorist means. Addressing the General Assembly
at its sixty-second session, the President of Sri Lanka
stated:
“Even as we are gathered here, State
sovereignty, civil society and the rule of law are
increasingly being threatened by terrorism and
other illegal and illicit activities in many
countries. We need to be vigilant about these
activities.” (A/62/PV.5, p. 2)
The President made those remarks as he urged the
United Nations to expedite the process of finalizing a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
It is time that we made extra efforts to conclude that
draft convention. Sri Lanka, as the Chair of the Ad Hoc
Committee on that subject, would certainly redouble its
efforts, with the cooperation of all Member States, to
make progress in that important endeavour. Our
deliberations here, we hope, will send a strong message
of support for that task. We are pleased, therefore, that
the draft resolution calls upon Member States to make
every effort to conclude the convention.
The President’s remarks also arose in the context
of some misconceptions to classify acts of terrorism
into tolerable and intolerable categories. “Terrorism
anywhere is terrorism. There is nothing good in
terrorism”, (ibid.) the President said. My delegation is
glad that this perspective has been recognized in
operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution A/62/L.48.
In implementing the Strategy, we need to call for
the greater cooperation of all States and, of course,
other actors to make it clear to terrorist groups that
there will be no space for terrorism to flourish. The
United Nations is well placed to lead that concerted
global campaign against terrorism as an entity
promoting respect for the rule of law and enjoying the
legitimacy and confidence of the global community.

08-49881

Such a concerted global campaign, supported by
national and regional measures, will go a long way
towards evolving comprehensive practical approaches
to strengthening global peace and security, as well as
institutions of democracy and governance.
While system-wide coherence is an issue which
concerns all aspects of the Organization’s work,
especially the different mechanisms and organs of the
United Nations, it needs to be emphasized that
coherence is also critical to our efforts to make United
Nations action to combat terrorism more effective. We
are told that the Strategy is being internalized by
different United Nations organs, departments and
divisions. It is imperative that this process be further
strengthened by relating it to the processes of the
Security Council, especially in the context of
implementation of Council resolutions such as
resolution 1373 (2001).
The ongoing interaction between the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, as well
as other programmes and agencies, should be
encouraged and intensified with a view to synergizing
United Nations action and responses to the challenges
of terrorism. They have a vital role in building capacity
among vulnerable States to implement the Strategy,
both individually and collectively. However, to be
effective, the Task Force should encompass a broader
base of the General Assembly membership.
In advocating strong measures against terrorism,
Sri Lanka shares the view that terrorism cannot, and
should not, be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group, and that those attributions
cannot be used to justify terrorism or counter-terrorism
measures. While terrorism should be confronted
directly, from whatever quarter it may emanate, for this
scourge to be eradicated all States should refrain from
extending political, diplomatic, moral or material
support to terrorists.
Sri Lanka supports the draft resolution and hopes
that all Member States will work together to implement
and add value to the Strategy, consistent with our
national and international treaty obligations, in order to
combat terrorism at all levels.
Mr. Neritani (Albania): At the outset, I should
like to join colleagues in expressing Albania’s
appreciation to the President of the Assembly for
organizing and chairing this important meeting, and to

9

A/62/PV.120

the facilitator, Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala,
for all his efforts and the results achieved.
Albania allies itself with the statement delivered
by France on behalf of the European Union. I would
like to add few brief remarks on implementation at the
national level.
Terrorism continues to be one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. Criminal
and unjustifiable in all circumstances, it is a threat to
all States and peoples. It knows no borders. It is a
global threat that requires a global and comprehensive
response. The United Nations continues to have a
unique role to play in the global fight against terrorism.
We appreciate its efforts to support implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, both through its
individual departments, specialized agencies, funds and
programmes and through the Counter-Terrorism Task
Force, which may need further support.
Albania has positioned itself in the forefront of
countries fighting terrorism. Albania has ratified most
of the United Nations counter-terrorism conventions
and protocols and therefore has taken all necessary
steps to adopt the domestic legislation. At the same
time, we are doing our best to implement all relevant
resolutions related to international terrorism.
Preventive measures are being taken in the fields of
legislation, border control and finance.
Concerning the first pillar, I wish to emphasize
the very important efforts undertaken in several areas.
These include intercultural and interreligious dialogue,
in a country with special historical values of
coexistence and extremely good relations between
three different religions; utmost efforts to lower the
social impact of important and necessary reforms;
increasing human rights standards; and playing a very
constructive and mature role in addressing regional
challenges with a modern and forward-looking
approach.
On the legislative front, to strengthen the fight
against terrorism-related activities, some recent
amendments to the criminal code are intended to
tackle, where applicable, fund-raising, the recruitment
and training of persons engaged in terrorism-related
activities or the financing of terrorism, the incitement
of propaganda for terrorism-related purposes, and
training in the illegal use or production of weapons and
dangerous substances.

10

Another important law, adopted in 2008, is the
Law on the Prevention of Money Laundering and
Financing of Terrorism. In cooperation with
international experts, the State police has prepared and
introduced a draft document, the National Strategy
against Terrorism. The necessary adequate institutional
structuring and framework have been established to
cope with the challenging reality and generally
acceptable higher standards.
Albania continues to cooperate extensively with
its regional and global counterparts. That has had a
tremendous positive impact on our joint obligations
and efforts. Cooperation and coordination with other
specialized agencies and/or bodies in the regional and
global spectrums will continue in the future. The
regular exchange of best practices and especially the
assistance offered to our relevant agencies are highly
appreciated and valued important components in our
joint engagement.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our firm
commitment to cooperating with the regional and
international factors in the fight against terrorism and,
hence, in the successful implementation of the United
Nations Strategy.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): Even
at this late date, at the outset I would like to express
our deep sorrow and extend our profound condolences
to the people and Government of Zambia on the
passing away of His Excellency Levy Patrick
Mwanawasa last month. We also extend our sympathies
to the bereaved family. President Mwanawasa will be
remembered for his commitment and promotion of
democratic governance in Zambia and Africa and as an
ardent supporter of African integration, the United
Nations and multilateralism.
On behalf of my delegation and on my own
behalf, let me express our heartfelt appreciation to the
President of the Assembly for hosting and steering this
meeting. The United Republic of Tanzania is confident
that, under his leadership, this meeting will result in a
consensus outcome and a very forward-looking
document that will advance the cause of combating
international terrorism.
Tanzania reaffirms its commitment and readiness
to implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and its four pillars. We commend
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Task Force of the
Secretariat for advancing the thinking on the challenges

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

of terrorism and implementation of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy by Member States. The Task Force
needs to be strengthened and institutionalized.
This contemporary threat to international peace
and security, targeting innocent civilians, demands
conventional as well as unconventional responses,
which we must develop under the leadership of the
United Nations. Indeed, terrorism threatens the values
of our civilizations, which underlie our common
humanity. Thus the need for collective and coordinated
global efforts against terrorism under the leadership of
the United Nations cannot be overemphasized.
Tanzania has made modest but significant strides
in preventing and countering terrorism. We have
instituted legislation in the national statute that
criminalizes and punishes terrorism and related crimes.
Corresponding administrative measures have also been
put in place to complement those legal measures and to
implement the counter-terrorism act. We have also
established community policing structures to promote
awareness and heighten vigilance among our population.
The details of the measures undertaken by the Government
of Tanzania will feature in the national implementation
report, to be submitted to the Secretariat soon.
Despite all the measures undertaken to date at the
national level, the global nature of the threat and its
evolving unpredictable manifestation in our region and
beyond have overstretched the national resources for
deployment against it. A national strategy can be
successful only if it is linked to regional strategies and
to a larger global strategy.
In the same vein, the legislation that Tanzania has
produced needs to be complemented by similar
instruments developed by other Member States,
especially those in our neighbourhood. Such measures
could ensure that terrorists do not find safe havens in
countries that have not yet criminalized terrorism. We
are mindful of the need to respect and safeguard human
rights in implementing our national counter-terrorism
strategy as well as our regional strategies. It is
imperative that human rights be respected by all
countries in the pursuit of security and in addressing
the challenges emanating from terrorism.
Another area that requires United Nations and
global cooperation against terrorism is the
re-establishment of States under stress that have weak
institutions and weak governmental authority. In such
States, a security vacuum exists in which terrorists can

08-49881

hide and plan terrorist actions. Given the restrictions of
international law and logistical and other constraints, it
is not possible to apprehend terrorists through standard
police work. It is therefore essential to help States in
such situations to establish political authority and State
structures with which adjacent States and the
international community can cooperate to combat
terrorism and related crimes. In such endeavours,
information exchange is vital to combat terrorism and
develop collective strategies.
In the light of those issues, the United Republic
of Tanzania wishes to propose that, with regard to
States experiencing political stress and recurring
conflicts, counter-terrorism efforts to assist those States
should always be carried out within the framework of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
but with their consent. We further propose that actions
in that regard include assistance to neighbouring States
in dealing appropriately with mixed flows of civilians
across international borders, giving protection to those
who deserve it while screening out those elements that
pose security risks owing to suspected criminal and
terrorist activity.
Finally, I should point out that, in post-conflict
situations, the issue of security sector reform, including
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants, should be adequately financed at the
national and subregional levels to prevent
ex-combatants from being subjected to recruitment by
terrorist networks. The role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in advising States on post-conflict
strategies and in mobilizing resources for rebuilding
war-torn societies and building new institutions is
critical to pre-empt terrorist recruitment, especially
among unemployed young people in the volatile
environment of the post-conflict situation, where there
are multitudes, armies of unemployed young people who
are vulnerable to terrorist propaganda and recruitment.
Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this meeting. My delegation appreciates the
efforts of Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala in
facilitating the negotiations on the draft resolution on
the first review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the

11

A/62/PV.120

Organization of the Islamic Conference group and fully
supports the principled positions that that group has
consistently taken on the issue of terrorism.
The adoption by consensus of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on 8 September
2006 indicated the resolve of the international
community to tackle terrorism in an inclusive and
integrated manner. The Islamic Republic of Iran joined
the consensus as a demonstration of its firm
commitment to the collective fight against terrorism,
despite its reservations concerning a number of issues.
We believed, for example, that the Strategy fell short of
sufficiently addressing the root causes of terrorism as
well as situations that might be abused in order to
nurture terrorist violence. It has been crystal-clear that
the unlawful use of force, aggression and foreign
occupation provide the most fertile ground for
fostering and fuelling mass violence and acts of
terrorism. The Strategy also failed to tackle the
problem of State terrorism. Nonetheless, as a living
document, it could be improved, and its deficiencies
should be rectified by examining and updating it.
The Strategy is based on the categorical
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomsoever, wherever
and for whatever purposes. The Strategy’s call for the
elimination of conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism is a realistic approach to addressing that
multifaceted phenomenon. It is imperative to note that
terrorism cannot be eliminated if the environment that
breeds terrorism — including foreign occupation,
injustice and exclusion — is allowed to thrive. The
task now before us is to implement all four pillars of
the Strategy in a consistent and balanced manner.
A consensual legal definition of terrorism would
contribute greatly to the successful implementation of
the Strategy. In that regard, we reiterate the importance
of General Assembly resolution 46/51, which reaffirms
“the inalienable right to self-determination and
independence of all peoples living under colonial
and racist regimes and other forms of alien
domination and foreign occupation, and
upholding the legitimacy of their struggle, in
particular the struggle of national liberation
movements, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the Declaration on
Principles of International Law”.

12

Undoubtedly,
the
responsibility
for
the
implementation of the Strategy lies with the Member
States. The Task Force is entrusted with coordinating
the efforts of United Nations bodies and agencies,
which are mandated to have a counter-terrorism
component with a view to developing Member States’
capacity and promoting the overall effectiveness of
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts. We stress that
the Task Force, in carrying out all its activities, should
be bound by the mandate given to it by the General
Assembly. In that regard, the Task Force should
address the concerns expressed by many countries on
various occasions regarding the criteria used for the
establishment of working groups as well as the use of
politically loaded notions, which were intentionally
avoided in the Strategy.
The Islamic Republic of Iran unequivocally and
categorically condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As a vivid victim of terrorism, we
firmly believe that the killing of innocent civilians,
whatever the motivation behind it, is a criminal and
abhorrent act. We also believe that State terrorism is
the gravest, most dangerous and most destructive form
of terrorism.
We are concerned by the increase in terrorist acts
in our surrounding regions, mainly brought about or
triggered by the ongoing conflicts imposed by
non-regional powers. That situation has provided a
feeding ground for terrorist groups and elements to
survive and escalate their terrorist activities. Iran has
consistently warned against the continued presence and
activities of certain terrorist groups in some of its
neighbouring countries under the protection of foreign
forces.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has spared no effort
in fighting terrorism. We stand ready to cooperate with
other countries, especially our neighbours, and with the
relevant United Nations bodies. Iran has been keen to
improve its overall capacity to combat terrorism and
crime. In that context, a comprehensive bill against
terrorism has been drafted. The bill is under
consideration by the relevant bodies for submission to
Parliament. Moreover, the Anti-Money-Laundering
Act, which has been in force since early 2008, provides
a necessary and sufficient legal tool to prevent and
fight the laundering of the proceeds of any crime. We
have also benefited from the technical assistance of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in fighting terrorism and crime. In 2007, a workshop

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

on preventing and combating terrorism was
co-organized by the UNODC and the Iranian judiciary.
A number of initiatives have been taken at the
bilateral and regional levels, particularly among the
members of the Economic Cooperation Organization,
to promote cooperation against terrorism and
transnational organized crime, especially drug
trafficking, given the fact that drug trafficking has been
used as a main financial source by some terrorist
groups in the region.
More than 80 per cent of Afghanistan’s opium is
trafficked across Iran’s border, much of it in transit to
Europe. For decades, Iran has been at the forefront of a
full-scale war against transnational drug mafiosi. More
than 4,000 Iranian law enforcement personnel have lost
their lives and billions of dollars have been spent to
suppress drug traffickers, and to interdict opium
shipments. According to UNODC’s 2008 World Drug
Report, more than 80 per cent of world opium seizures
in 2006 were in Iran. We urge the international
community to pay more serious attention to that issue.
We have shouldered a great burden, largely without
receiving the minimum assistance from the
international community, but we should make it clear
that no country can tackle the scourge single-handedly.
In our efforts to uproot terrorism, due attention
should also be paid to all ways and means that may be
used by terrorist groups and elements to pursue their
dangerous activities. In that context, we share the
concern that terrorist groups may increasingly use the
Internet for pursuing their criminal activities, including
for identifying potential targets, given the easy access
to images and exact maps of infrastructure facilities, as
well as State facilities and other places of public use.
Terrorism is a despicable crime that should be
rejected in its entirety. Selectivity and double standards
in dealing with terrorist groups are real impediments to
the elimination of terrorism. Likewise, linking
terrorism with any religion, nationality or culture must
be rejected and stopped. Such an unwise approach
towards terrorism will only lead to distrust, hatred and
division among nations. It is imperative to redouble our
collective efforts to promote dialogue and tolerance
among civilizations and cultures and to contest
suspicion towards and defamation of religions.
In conclusion, we should not give in to terrorists
by sacrificing our high principles, including the rule of
law, through resort to arbitrary persecution and

08-49881

unlawful and/or excessive countermeasures. The rule
of law, at both the national and international levels, and
respect for basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as international humanitarian law,
must be our guiding principles in fighting terrorism.
The fact that the Strategy has appropriately made
human rights the fundamental basis of the fight against
terrorism indicates the high importance of complying
with international law, in particular human rights law,
while countering terrorism.
However, the systematic abuse of counterterrorism measures in recent years — such as the
practice of detaining terrorist suspects in secret
detention, which deprives them of their basic right to
appear before a competent court and violates their right
to a fair trial and due process of law; the widespread
use of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment or punishment in the name of fighting
terrorism; and improper transfers of terrorist suspects,
including so-called renditions — has caused serious
concern in the international community. Those are but
a few manifestations of an alarming trend that has
overshadowed the international campaign against
terrorism.
Mr. Ayoob (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the presidency for convening the first
review meeting of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. My delegation congratulates
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, Permanent Representative
of Guatemala to the United Nations, on his excellent
work to reach consensus for the adoption of the draft
resolution entitled “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy” (A/62/L.48).
At this juncture, I would like to associate myself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Pakistan yesterday on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Afghanistan, as a main victim and front-line
fighter against terrorism, strongly condemns all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as a clear violation
against the fundamental rights of humankind and as an
attack against freedom, democracy, progress and
civilization. We deeply believe that terrorism can never
be justified, irrespective of its motivations, objectives,
forms and manifestations.
Afghanistan supports the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which united all 192
Member States behind their common goal to undertake

13

A/62/PV.120

a set of concrete measures to address terrorism in all its
aspects. In that regard, my delegation would like to
reiterate its support for the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 5l/210 of 17 December 1996 to finalize the
text of and conclude a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.
Seven years ago, when the Taliban and Al-Qaida
terrorist networks and foreign military forces occupied
and ruled my country and Afghanistan became a safe
haven for international terrorism, our country posed a
serious threat to global and regional peace, stability
and
security.
Through
unprecedented
united
international action against terrorism and the firm
determination of the Afghan people, terrorism was
defeated in Afghanistan and a new chapter was opened
in the history of my country.
Although, with the continued assistance of our
friends in the international community, we have made
tremendous progress in the past seven years, it is
undeniable that the world, our region and Afghanistan
in particular continue to suffer from the results of
terrorist attacks. Unfortunately, terrorists continue to
commit their crimes, and the war against international
terrorism continues. The new reality is not only that
Afghanistan is no longer a safe haven for international
terrorism but also that it is an active front-line fighter
and a committed member of the international
community in the war against terrorism. Terrorist
networks are increasingly recruiting and training
terrorists and exporting them to Afghanistan. They are
responsible for the deaths of thousands of innocent
civilians and for the burning and destruction of
schools, health clinics and hospitals. They are trying to
deprive our population of its fundamental rights.
Bearing in mind that the Counter-Terrorism
Strategy must be implemented in all its aspects, in the
case of Afghanistan my delegation believes that the
Strategy’s capacity-building pillar is an essential
element in the global endeavour to help needy
countries in their efforts to implement all of the
Strategy’s pillars and to combat terrorism.
Afghanistan has established an inter-ministerial
working group under the chairmanship of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs to coordinate the implementation of
the Strategy and other international conventions and
protocols, including General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions relating to international terrorism.

14

In order to strengthen the capacity of that institution to
implement the Counter-Terrorism Strategy in an
integrated manner, the inter-ministerial working group
needs legal and technical assistance from the United
Nations and other relevant international organizations.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Counter-Terrorism Branch of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and other United
Nations agencies for providing technical, legal and
logistical assistance to the relevant ministries and
counter-terrorism bodies in Afghanistan. We request
that UNODC, UNDP and other international
organizations assist the inter-ministerial working group
to build the necessary capacity and to contribute to the
implementation of the Strategy.
Afghanistan has joined all existing international
conventions and protocols against terrorism and has
strongly committed itself to the implementation of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
relating to international terrorism. In that regard, we
have instituted several counter-terrorism and antinarcotics legislative, administrative and security
measures. These include the establishment of
Afghanistan’s financial transaction and report analysis
centre as a new anti-money-laundering unit within the
Central Bank of Afghanistan; the adoption of laws to
combat the financing of terrorism and to combat
terrorist crime; the ratification of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption; the establishment of
the National Peace Consolidation Commission of
Afghanistan; and the establishment of the council of
scholars and religious leaders to affirm that terrorism is
anti-peace and anti-Islamic.
Afghanistan is currently working closely with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
Council resolution 1267 (1999) and other bodies
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions to
strengthen the effectiveness of the United Nations
sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
Afghanistan recently provided its report to the
secretariat of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to Council resolution 1540 (2004).
For the past two years, Afghanistan has provided the
1267 Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
with updated information and proposals on new listings
and de-listings and on the freezing of bank accounts of
members of the Taliban and Al-Qaida. Cognizant of the
fact that money derived from narcotics is a source of

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

financing for terrorists, Afghanistan is considering
providing the 1267 Committee with a list of drug
smugglers.
We would like to request that Member States that
have not yet done so become parties to the existing
international conventions and protocols against
terrorism and to fulfil their obligations with regard to
the implementation of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions relating to international terrorism,
in particular vis-à-vis the 1267 Committee, on
sanctions against the Taliban and Al-Qaida.
In conclusion, terrorism is a serious global threat
to international peace and security. Serious and sincere
global actions are required to combat that menace. As
His Excellency Mr. Hâmid Karzai, President of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, said in his speech to
the summit meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, held in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, on
28 August 2008:
“We call for the strengthening of international
unity to realize the comprehensive strategy of the
war against terrorism. That strategy will not be
successful unless the international community
acts seriously to destroy the political and military
sources of terrorism and the entities that produce
and nurture terrorists.”
Mr. Soler Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this meeting. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/62/898) on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as
to acknowledge the efforts of Ambassador Rosenthal of
Guatemala in facilitating the preparation of the draft
resolution we will adopt today. In addition to informing
the Assembly about the measures adopted by my
country to implement the Strategy, I should like to take
this opportunity to make some general comments about
the implementation of the Strategy.
We believe that the adoption of the Strategy, in
2006, was a milestone in the international community’s
efforts to eradicate terrorism. The Strategy’s success, in
contrast to other efforts in that field, is due to the
comprehensive manner adopted in addressing one of
the greatest contemporary threats to international peace
and security. The Strategy is an exceedingly ambitious
undertaking that requires tremendous effort by Member
States and the agencies, funds and programmes of the

08-49881

United Nations and civil society alike. However, given
the absence of predictable funding from the
Organization’s regular budget, it is clear that the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force’s
implementation of the Strategy is limited.
We note that the Task Force, which is ably led by
Mr. Robert Orr, has been able to support Member
States in developing legal instruments to prevent and
combat terrorism. We also note that information
regarding the resources available to combat terrorism
has been systematized. Member States that have
requested it have also had their capacity to combat
terrorism evaluated. Among the successes of the Task
Force is the establishment of nine working groups
focused on various areas in which the United Nations
could provide added value. Despite the criticism that
has been levelled against their functioning, we believe
that this initiative aims at implementing the Strategy in
a balanced way within the limited resources available.
The President took the Chair.
The outcome of the work of the groups will allow
us to identify best practices and existing gaps in the
implementation of some of the provisions of resolution
60/288 and to determine the most effective
mechanisms to disseminate the best practices and to
bridge the gaps.
We also welcome the work of the Task Force,
particularly in its dedication to ensuring the rule of law
in the implementation of the Strategy and to the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. We stress that respect for
human rights is an essential principle of the United
Nations Charter and should therefore be practised by
all its constituent bodies in all their actions.
The provision of the draft resolution before the
Assembly that requests the institutionalization of the
Task Force and governs its interactions with Member
States is an important step towards the more effective
implementation of the Strategy and meeting the needs
of Member States. Nevertheless, we recognize that we
must be realistic and that it is impossible for the Task
Force to fully implement the mandate entrusted to it in
the Strategy if it is not provided with sufficient
resourcing through the regular budget. The next time
we examine that issue, Members must consider
concrete measures to resolve the situation. Otherwise,
we will have to accept that only those provisions that
are in the interest of donors can be implemented.

15

A/62/PV.120

In conclusion, we want to express our hope that,
during the sixty-third session to begin later this month,
the Ad Hoc Committee will make progress in its
negotiations with a view to adopting a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. That would be
the next milestone towards which the United Nations
could make headway.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): I welcome this opportunity to express my
delegation’s satisfaction for the initiative of convening
of today’s debate to consider the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, demonstrating the
importance the General Assembly attaches to the
follow-up, implementation and updating of the
Strategy.
We express our deep gratitude to Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal for his efficient coordination of the
negotiations on draft resolution A/62/L.48 to be
adopted shortly. This meeting also reflects the need for
the international community to join in a multilateral
response to the threat against the collective and
individual peace and security through this universal
body with its greatest political legitimacy to meet that
challenge head-on in the twenty-first century.
My country reaffirms its outright condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of who perpetrates it and for what purpose.
Similarly, El Salvador reaffirms the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars,
which represent an ongoing basis for a more effective
approach to all issues related to international terrorism.
In that context, we thank the Secretary-General
for his report contained in document A/62/898, which
highlights the efforts that the United Nations as a
whole is making to implement the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, with particular reference to the
practical recommendations and strategies contained
therein, which constitute a solid basis for elaborating a
plan of action for the next few years. El Salvador feels
it is important to bolster the role of the United Nations
in the implementation of the Strategy, especially with
regard to cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and assistance to countries in capacitybuilding.
It is appropriate that, two years after the launch of
the Global Strategy, the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force has come to represent a
concrete step towards fulfilling the objectives of the

16

Strategy, as called for in paragraph 3 (b) of resolution
60/288. El Salvador also recognizes the importance of
promoting and protecting human rights and the
fundamental freedoms of all while combating all forms
and manifestations of terrorism in the context of a
strengthened rule of law.
Against that backdrop, my country supports the
draft resolution contained in document A/62/L.48 and
entitled “The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy” because it reflects the political consensus
that the Member States have reached in terms of the
follow-up, implementation and updating of the Strategy.
All of that is enshrined in the general objective to
create a global counter-terrorism mechanism.
At the national level, the El Salvador Government
has decided to breathe new life into its interinstitutional group against terrorism in order to give
stronger
direction
to
the
prevention
and
implementation of measures in line with the pillars of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Similarly, our
country is currently implementing a master plan for
civic security that includes areas for intervention in
police matters, criminal prosecution, legislation, civil
society participation, the prison system, deterrence, the
justice system, prevention, rehabilitation and
international cooperation.
Our national civil police has designed and is
implementing Plan SARISSA, the objective of which is
to develop a strategy to reduce crime rates, improve the
perception of safety and provide effective and
accessible police services. As for security and national
defence, the armed forces of El Salvador have antiterrorism contingency plans that enable it to respond to
any threat of that nature. In so doing, it can provide for
the security of its citizens. Those plans have been made
in accordance with the National Defence Law.
As for domestic capacity-building, allow me to
note that, in March and April, with the assistance of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Organization of American States Inter-American
Committee Against Terrorism, a workshop was
convened to consider terrorism prevention, counterterrorism, the financing of terrorism, the legal
framework
and
instruments
for
international
cooperation. At the subregional level, the presidents of
Central America and Mexico, in December 2007 in
Guatemala City, adopted a security strategy for Central
America and Mexico, which includes the fight against

08-49881

A/62/PV.120

organized crime, drug trafficking, gangs, illegal arms
trafficking, terrorism and corruption.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
political will of the Government of El Salvador to
continue to implement and provide effective follow-up
to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which is an essential component of the
strengthening of national, regional and international
actions to prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
Mr. Saleh (Lebanon): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for holding the first biennial review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statements made by the representative of Kuwait on
behalf of the Group of Arab States and by the
representative of Pakistan on behalf of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. We would also like to express
our appreciation to Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of
Guatemala for the efforts he made during the Strategy
review consultations, which helped Member States to
reach consensus on the draft resolution before us.
My delegation would like to reaffirm its strong
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and its support for all efforts to eradicate
that scourge. Lebanon remains deeply committed to the
international efforts to counter terrorism and believes
that the fight against that scourge requires concerted
efforts among all Member States. In that regard,
cooperation at the regional and international levels is a
key element for the success of that fight.
Lebanon has ratified 11 out of the 13 United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions and is in the
process of ratifying the remaining ones.
My delegation would like to reaffirm its support
for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and to call for its implementation in a holistic
and integrated manner, with equal emphasis on its four
pillars. We would like to stress the need to maintain the
Strategy as a living document open to examination and
updating on a regular basis and to emphasize the
centrality of the role of the General Assembly in
combating terrorism, since it is the only United Nations
organ that enjoys universal membership.
We believe that the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy should address the root

08-49881

causes of terrorism, including the unlawful use of
force; that it should contain a definition of terrorism;
that it should condemn State terrorism in the strongest
terms; and that it should strongly differentiate between
terrorism and the legitimate right of peoples to resist
foreign occupation. In fact, General Assembly resolution
46/51 stresses the need for such differentiation.
Furthermore, that distinction is duly recognized
in international law, international humanitarian law and
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. It is a
very important distinction, because one of the basic
aspects of terrorism is that it is an indiscriminate act of
violence. In our response, however, we should not be
indiscriminate.
My delegation would like to emphasize that
terrorism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnic group, nationality or civilization. Here, we
would like to express our support for the proposal of
the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, that an international
centre to combat international terrorism be established
under the aegis of the United Nations.
My delegation believes that the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy lies first and foremost in the hands of Member
States and that the relevant United Nations entities
should play a supportive but not substitutive role. In
that respect, it should be noted that the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force was established
under the capacity-building section of the Strategy and
was intended to ensure overall coordination and
coherence of the counter-terrorism efforts of the United
Nations system and to provide assistance to Member
States. My delegation would like to stress the
importance of the ownership and leadership of Member
States with regard to the implementation of the Strategy.
Accordingly, we support the institutionalization of the
Task Force within the Secretariat, pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 60/288.
We believe that the responses of Member States
to terrorism should always be governed by the logic of
rights. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance that all
of us always comply with our obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, human rights law, refugee law and
international humanitarian law, in the formulation and
implementation of our counter-terrorism measures.

17

A/62/PV.120

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
Before we proceed to the consideration of draft
resolution A/62/L.48, I would like to inform the
Assembly that operative paragraph 14 has been slightly
revised and now reads as follows:
“Decides to include in the provisional
agenda of its sixty-fourth session an item entitled
‘The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy’ in order to undertake in two years an
examination of the report of the SecretaryGeneral requested in paragraph 13 above, as well
as the implementation of the Strategy on the part
of Member States and to consider updating it to
respond to changes”.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/62/L.48, as orally revised. In that connection, I now
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/62/L.48, entitled “The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”, I wish to place on
record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
By operative paragraphs 11 and 12 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would
“[Urge] the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements to carry out the
institutionalization of the Task Force, in accordance
with resolution 60/288, in order to ensure overall
coordination and coherence in the counterterrorism efforts of the United Nations system”,

18

and
“[Decide] to interact with the Task Force on
a regular basis, in order to receive briefings and
reports on its current and future work, assess the
work being undertaken on the Strategy
implementation efforts, including the work of the
Task Force, and offer policy guidance”.
With regard to the institutionalization of the Task
Force, it is the intention of the Secretary-General to
continue to address the staffing requirements of the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force
secretariat from within existing resources. Concerning
the interaction with the Task Force, in keeping with the
pattern of previous years, the Secretariat would provide
regular briefings and reports on the activities of the
Task Force as necessary, when requested.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.48, there would be no financial
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2008-2009.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/62/L.48, as orally revised.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/62/L.48 as orally
revised?
Draft resolution A/62/L.48, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 62/272).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 118?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

08-49881
