UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/41
30 July 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3805th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 July 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Liberia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the successful holding of presidential
and legislative elections in Liberia on 19 July 1997. The Council notes
with satisfaction the letter from the Secretary-General to the President of
the Security Council (S/1997/581) and the declaration in the Joint
Certification Statement by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) that
the electoral process was free, fair and credible, and that the outcome of
the elections reflects the will of the Liberian voters.
"The Security Council calls upon all parties to abide by the results
of the elections and to cooperate in the formation of a new government.
The Council also calls upon the new government to protect the democratic
system and to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms under the rule
of law.
"The Security Council congratulates the people of Liberia on the
courage and determination they have shown in proceeding with the elections
under difficult circumstances. The Council commends all international
personnel, especially those of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) and the Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) of ECOWAS, who
contributed to the successful holding of elections.
"The Security Council welcomes the goodwill and cooperation
demonstrated by the parties in the electoral process, which provides a
strong foundation for the people of Liberia to achieve a durable peace, the
re-establishment of constitutional government, and a return to the rule of
law. The Council expresses the hope that the successful holding of
elections will encourage refugees to exercise their right of return and
calls upon the new government to fulfil its obligations under international
law regarding returning refugees.

97-20674 (E)

300797

/...

S/PRST/1997/41
English
Page 2

"The Security Council notes that the successful holding of elections
represents a critical step towards economic development. The Council urges
the international community to continue to provide support and assistance
to Liberia through this period of reconstruction.
"The Security Council further notes that the successful conclusion of
the electoral process marks the fulfilment of a key element of the UNOMIL
mandate.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
