S/2017/467

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 May 2017
Original: English

Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by
ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da ’esh) 1 and associated
individuals and groups, and emphasized the importance of cutting off its access to
funds and preventing it from planning and facilitating attacks. In paragraph 97 , the
Council requested that I provide an initial strategic -level report on the threat,
followed by updates every four months.
2.
The present report is the fifth such report (see S/2016/92, S/2016/501,
S/2016/830 and S/2017/97) and was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities of the Security Council Com mittee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and in close collaboration with the Counte rTerrorism Implementation Task Force, the United Nations Counter -Terrorism Centre
and other United Nations entities and international organizations.
3.
Security Council resolution 2253 (2015), adopted at a Council meeting held at
the level of ministers of finance, reinforced the existing international counter financing of terrorism framework by calling on Member States to move vigorously
and decisively to cut off the flow of funds and other financial assets and economic
resources to ISIL. The present report focuses on current sources of terrorism
financing and the evolution in financing methods; the measures put in place by
Member States to deny funds to ISIL and its affiliates and disrupt terrorist networks;
and the efforts of the United Nations and its partners to strengthen States’ capacities
in that regard. The report also addresses measures and initiatives — including
prosecution and rehabilitation strategies — developed to address the threat posed by
__________________
1

17-08837 (E)

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).

050617

*1708837*

S/2017/467

foreign terrorist fighters (see Council resolution 2178 (2014)) who return from
conflict zones, whether to their respective States of origin or to other States.

II. Development of the threat since January 2016 (S/2016/92)
A.

Core of ISIL in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
4.
Since January 2016, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has remained
under continuous military pressure and experienced several setbacks in the Syrian
Arab Republic and in Iraq. The group continues to resist, however, in particular in
Mosul, Iraq, and currently retains its hold over Raqqah, Syrian Arab Republic.
Owing to the complicated military situation, the group reorganized its military
structure, diverting decision-making responsibility downwards to local commanders
(see S/2017/35, para. 16). In a further reaction to its setbacks in the conflict zone,
the group continues to enable and inspire a range of attacks outside the conflict
zone. The death of Abou Mohamed al Adnani (QDi.325) and the loss of th e city of
Manbij, Syrian Arab Republic, which served as the group ’s headquarters for
propaganda and external attack planning, forced the group to reorganize (see
S/2017/35, para. 18). ISIL has used improvised explosive devices since its
inception; however, despite the sustained military pressure, the group was able to
develop capacities to assemble such devices on an industrial scale and to use
significant numbers of commercially available drones in a variety of ways: for
propaganda, reconnaissance, to direct indirect fire and for aerial attacks. 2
5.
The number of ISIL fighters has significantly decreased in the past 16 months
to between 12,000 and 20,000 (see S/2017/35, para. 14). In parallel, the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters from many regions to Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
has slowed. However, returnees and the relocation of fighters from the conflict
zones to other regions now present a considerable threat to international security
(see S/2017/35, para. 3).
6.
The threat from ISIL has been exacerbated by its sophisticated use of the
Internet and social media to disseminate online messages to a wide inte rnational
audience. Since 2014, ISIL has used its online publications to reach potential
foreign terrorist fighters and social media to directly engage individuals,
encouraging them to join its ranks. It has also targeted specific skill -sets and
tailored its message to different linguistic groups using foreign terrorist fighters
primarily based in Syria and Iraq to reach out to individuals in their countries of
origin in their own language. Once engaged in dialogue, ISIL recruiters and enablers
quickly shifted their communications onto a wide range of encrypted applications,
complicating efforts in home countries to monitor and investigate such contacts. 3 In
the past 16 months, the volume of propaganda has declined, while the earlier
overarching message intended to convey an impression of “State building” has
shifted towards seeking to demonstrate successes in its military engagements (see
S/2017/35, para. 17). Despite this decline in output, much of the propaganda will
persist as supporters outside the conflict zones collect and redistribute it.

__________________
2

Information provided by a Member State. The Monitoring Team had already warned of the use of
drones by ISIL in 2014 (see S/2014/815, para. 49).
3
Information provided by a Member State.
2/17

17-08837

S/2017/467

B.

ISIL finances
7.
ISIL is at a pivotal moment in terms of its finances. The group has suffered a
reversal of fortune since my first report (S/2016/92). Although its financial situation
has steadily declined over the past 16 months, ISIL continues to rely chiefly on the
same two revenue streams, hydrocarbons and extortion/taxation, which it has
depended on since its declaration of the so-called “Caliphate”. ISIL still manages
income of tens of millions of dollars per month. 4
8.
Given this reliance on territorially derived sources of income, as ISIL
continues to lose territory, and in particular population centres, its sourc es of
income will continue to decline. To date, ISIL does not appear to have developed
new sources of income that could compensate for the continuing loss of its two
main revenue streams. However, it does not necessarily need to offset the large
losses; for as ISIL loses population centres and its forces continue to dwindle, it will
also have substantially fewer costs. Thus ISIL may be able to stretch further any
funds that it retains or obtains going forward.
9.
In my first report, I indicated that ISIL had made as much as $500 million
from oil and oil products in 2015 (see S/2016/92, para. 17). At the time of my
previous report, according to an estimate by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, that income had decreased by approximately 50 per cent (see S/2017/97,
para. 6), in large part owing to military operations targeting oil -related infrastructure.
ISIL has tried to offset the decrease in hydrocarbon revenues by increasing the “tax”
burden upon the population still under its control (see S/2016/629, para. 14), and
this effort continues. 5 However, there is a limit on how much ISIL can squeeze out
of a war economy, and, over the course of my previous reports, I have highlighted
the effects of the continued financial decline of ISIL, such as significant reductions
and delays in fighters’ salaries, internal corruption and theft, and a decrease in the
already minimal services that ISIL was providing (see S/2016/501, para. 9,
S/2016/830, paras. 4-5, and S/2017/97, paras. 5-6). ISIL has continued to face cash
shortages and has been using its remaining funds to buy weapons. 6 Furthermore,
some ISIL fighters have had to secure “side” jobs given the decrease in, delay, or
lack of a salary. 7
10. In addition to the aforementioned resources, ISIL has drawn income from
antiquities smuggling, 8 agricultural products, sale of electricity, exploitation of
mineral resources such as phosphates and sulfuric acid, external donations,
kidnapping for ransom and human trafficking (see S/2017/35 footnote 16). 9
11. Furthermore, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
carefully documented instances of the selling, gifting and trading of women and
children among fighters, which has served as an important recruitment strategy (see
S/2016/1090).
12. Despite the financial setbacks to the core of ISIL, according to several
Member States ISIL has continued funding its affiliates, many of which have fe w

__________________
4

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
6
Information provided by a Member State.
7
Information provided by a Member State.
8
The Monitoring Team continues to receive reports from Member States and international
organizations concerning seizures and criminal investigations of the trade in antiquities il legally
removed from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic (see S/2017/35, para. 67).
9
For example, ISIL has been able to derive income from its symbiotic relationships with criminal
organizations and human traffickers and smugglers in Libya, whereby the criminals pay ISIL for
safe passage (information provided by a Member State).
5

17-08837

3/17

S/2017/467

internal sources of income and are therefore dependent on the core. However,
increasingly the core has started urging its affiliates to be more self -sufficient and
proactive in developing internal revenue streams. 10
13. Given these developments, the focus of the international community will need
to turn to countering the financing of “ISIL 2.0”. It is expected that ISIL will
continue to use extortion and criminal activity as a funding tactic even if it no
longer controls territory, as that has been its modus operandi in its prior iterations as
Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115). 11 Member States have indicated that ISIL is likely to
depend more on kidnapping for ransom, especially as journalists and aid workers
return to liberated regions. ISIL may increase its reliance on external donations to
secure further funding. 12 Perhaps, more importantly, according to Member States,
ISIL has planned for the “day after” with investments, within the conflict zone as
well as the wider region, which can serve as a source of fundin g as other resources
dry up. Yet another Member State has reported that ISIL has transferred funds to
areas where no affiliates are present and assessed that this is part of an organized
plan for the future.
14. Money services businesses, including exchange houses, continue to be a
preferred method for ISIL and its supporters to move funds across borders. 13
Exchange houses in Iraq and in the Syrian Arab Republic have been used on behalf
of ISIL, 14 but the problem transcends these two countries, as recent arr ests in the
wider region demonstrate. 15 Money couriers are also a key method for ISIL to move
funds; and a transfer of funds will in certain cases involve both professional couriers
and money service businesses at different junctures. 16
15. The access of foreign terrorist fighters to their home bank accounts, even after
they have travelled to the conflict zone, remains a problem, with fighters or
facilitators withdrawing funds using automatic teller machines near the conflict
zone and providing them to ISIL (see S/2017/35, paras. 11-12; S/2017/97, para. 8).
Although the use of bitcoin by ISIL operatives is not yet widespread, a few cases of
ISIL supporters using this payment system have been reported. 17
16. Finally, as I mentioned previously (see S/2016/501, para. 9), liquidity within
the conflict zones has been restricted by Member State action and because the “war
economy” has its limits. As Member States consider efforts to counter the financing
of “ISIL 2.0”, a key concern is how to allow reconstruction and stabilization funds to
flow into liberated areas, including by reconnecting international financial structures,
without also enabling ISIL remnants to abuse these structures and exploit this new
liquidity, including through extortion and the formation of front companies.

III. Evolving global threat posed by ISIL
17. Since declaring its intent to attack the United States of America and Europe in
September 2014, 18 ISIL has conducted a wide range of attacks, using a variety of
__________________
10

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
12
Currently, however, a consensus does not exist among Member States as to whether external
donations will play a significant part in the future income of ISIL.
13
Information provided by a Member State.
14
Information provided by a Member State.
15
Information provided by a Member State.
16
Information provided by a Member State.
17
Information provided by a Member State.
18
Video message by Adnani, see for example: Imran Khan, “ISIL’s war just went global”,
Aljazeera, 5 November 2014.
11

4/17

17-08837

S/2017/467

methodologies depending on the ability of ISIL to project a threat directly from the
conflict zones. In November 2015 and March 2016 the complex m ulti-target attacks
conducted in Paris and Brussels were directed and facilitated by personnel
specifically sent to Europe from the core of ISIL. Since that time, efforts of
European Member States and Turkey aiming at inhibiting travel of foreign terrorist
fighters to the conflict zones (see S/2017/35, para. 8) have made it increasingly
difficult for ISIL to mount directed attacks.
18. Nonetheless, ISIL has used its propaganda and communication to encourage
ISIL supporters in Europe to mount attacks in their countries of residence,
highlighting successful methodologies and designs for improvised explosive
devices. This has led to multiple attacks, including in Belgium, France, Germany,
the Russian Federation, Sweden, Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland. Some were carried out by returnees, while others were
conducted by individuals who had not travelled to the conflict zones.
19. These attacks have generally been unsophisticated in nature, nevertheless
causing multiple casualties, such as in Nice, Berlin, London, Stockholm, Saint
Petersburg and the latest attack in Manchester, for which the group publicly claimed
responsibility in a communiqué distributed via social media on 23 May 2 017. Often
these attacks have initially been reported as conducted by inspired “lone actors”.
However subsequent investigations demonstrate that the perpetrators often received
support or resources from facilitators (see S/2017/35, para. 7) and, in a number of
cases, were in direct contact with ISIL enablers online using encrypted applications
before and even during the attacks. 19 Law enforcement agencies of most European
countries have also detected and disrupted attack plots, including in countries not
previously regarded as among ISIL priority targets. 20 While a number of European
Member States have reported that they expect only small numbers of those
remaining in the conflict zones to return to their countries of origin (see S/2071/35,
para. 10), those who do return would be hardened fighters and represent a
significant threat.
20. North Africa has seen resilience by ISIL affiliated groups, who pose a serious
threat. Member State assesses that the presence of ISIL in the region is also intended
to secure a perpetuation of ISIL as a reaction to the continuous pressure in Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic. While ISIL in Libya has been weakened after losing a
significant portion of the territory it controlled, its threat persists in Libya and in
neighbouring countries. As indicated in the Monitoring Team’s nineteenth report,
acts such as the suicide attack in Benghazi on 18 December 2016, which resulted in
the death of several soldiers, show that the group maintains operational capabilities
(see S/2017/35, para. 36). Member States reported that the leadership of ISIL within
Libya has relocated to the south and south-west of the country. ISIL fighters have
also been dispersed in different parts of the country and througho ut the region, thus
disseminating the threat. According to a Member State, Abu Bakr al -Baghdadi 21
instructed supporters and sympathizers to travel to Libya instead of the Syrian Arab
Republic or Iraq.
21. In Algeria, the ISIL affiliate Jund Al-Khilafah in Algeria (JAK-A) (QDe.151),
has been under continuous pressure from security forces in several regions of the
country. 22 Since its proclamation in 2014, by a splinter faction of the Organization
of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) (QDe.014), JAK -A has claimed
__________________
19

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
21
Listed as Ibrahim Awwad Ibrahim Ali al-Badri al-Samarrai (QDi.299).
22
Lamina Chikhi, “Algeria clears Islamic State-tied militants east of capital: sources”, Reuters,
24 August 2016.
20

17-08837

5/17

S/2017/467

responsibility for several attacks. One Member State reported coordination and
direct communication between JAK-A and ISIL leadership in the Syrian Arab
Republic and Iraq.
22. In West Africa, the expansion of ISIL is currently challenged by establ ished
Al-Qaida affiliates. Currently, the Organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM) (QDe.014), Ansar Eddine (QDe.135) and Al Mourabitoun (QDe.141)
remain the stronger forces in the region, in particular since their claim of the recent
merger under the new banner of the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims.
Nevertheless, a splinter group of Al Mourabitoun, the “Islamic State in the Greater
Sahara”, under the leadership of Adnan Abu al-Walid al-Sahrawi, was recognized by
the core of ISIL in the fall of 2016. 23 This splinter group has since committed
several attacks. In particular, it claimed two attacks in Burkina Faso, against a
customs office in Markoye in September and security forces in Intangom on
12 October 2016 (see S/2017/35, para. 43). The group has also been reported to be
responsible for recent attacks in the Niger. 24
23. In Nigeria, a faction of Boko Haram (QDe.138) pledged allegiance to
Al Baghdadi and proclaimed the “Islamic State West Africa Province”. 25 This
faction claimed several suicide attacks in Nigeria and has been involved in deadly
clashes with security forces since 2015. On April 29, 2017, a communiqué announced
that it had killed 15 soldiers in northeast Nigeria. 26 Member States reported an
increase in trafficking, in particular weapons and related material, as well as
increased capacity of ISIL to recruit in the region. Member States also highlighted
that the group is able to attract West African returnees from Iraq and the Sy rian Arab
Republic. One Member State reported that members of the Al Mourabitoun splinter
group, loyal to ISIL travelled to Libya and coordinated with ISIL in Sirte before
returning to Mali.
24. Emerging ISIL affiliates operating in Puntland and parts of Southern Somalia
complicate the terrorist threat posed by Al-Qaida’s affiliate, Al-Shabaab (SOe.001)
in East Africa. Member States highlighted that, although these ISIL affiliates have
their bases within the territory of Somalia, their threat transcends in to the
neighbouring States where they seek to recruit, establish bases and conduct attacks.
25. In 2015, when ISIL established its presence in Somalia, it faced resistance
from Al-Shabaab. This led to the execution of more than 30 ISIL sympathizers and
leaders (see S/2017/35, para. 49). As a result, ISIL members began operating in
covert cells to avoid detection. However, measures put in place by Member States
helped to disrupt their movement by dismantling an I SIL network of facilitators and
recruiters. 27 These efforts contributed to the slow growth and even reduction of ISIL
members in Somalia. By the end of 2016, ISIL outreach had become more public
and aggressive as its operatives had begun to express their opinions openly. 28 On
8 February 2017 ISIL claimed responsibility for an attack on a hotel in Boosaaso, 29
the economic hub of Puntland.
26. According to several Member States, ISIL plans to enhance its presence in
Somalia by taking over the existing Al-Shabaab networks and attracting more
__________________
23

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
25
Information provided by a Member State.
26
“Breaking: killing 15 apostates from the Nigerian Army in clashes in the Yobe area”,
Communiqué issued by “Islamic State West Africa Province” on Telegram, 29 April 2017.
27
Information provided by a Member State.
28
Information provided by a Member State.
29
“Somalia: ISIL claims responsibility for attack on Village Hotel in Bosaso” , Garowe Online,
8 February 2017.
24

6/17

17-08837

S/2017/467

fighters, including those unable to travel to conflict zones and those relocating from
the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq and Libya. ISIL in Somalia is reliant
on external funding, mainly from supporters outside S omalia and the ISIL affiliate
in Yemen. 30
27. After ISIL failed to build on its early success in Yemen, operating with fewer
than 500 fighters from different regions (see S/2017/35, para. 32), ISIL in Yemen
continues to conduct deadly, extensive, multi-pronged attacks targeting government
forces and Houthis. 31 However, the group is still at risk of splitting into subgroups,
in particular as it continues to lack tribal support to provide a safe -haven among the
Yemeni community. 32 Funds provided by the core of ISIL have continued to reach
ISIL in Yemen. 33 ISIL is also attempting to expand through individual cells in the
wider Arabian Peninsula and has conducted a range of attacks. 34 Nevertheless, the
core called on its sympathizers in the region to remain in their countries to carry out
terrorist attacks there. 35
28. During 2016, ISIL in Afghanistan tried to establish itself in a number of areas.
However, as a fighting force they have been severely downgraded by Afghan a nd
international military operations in close cooperation with international air
support. 36 Currently, the group has a significant presence only in three districts of
Nangarhar Province along the border with Pakistan. Estimates of ISIL strength in
Afghanistan vary, with interlocutors indicating 2,000 and 4,000 fighters, although
this figure is reported to have reduced as a result of recent operations by Afghan and
international forces. ISIL in Afghanistan continues to be well equipped and funded,
with some of this funding provided by the core of ISIL. 37
29. In recent months, the core of ISIL has instructed the group to push towards the
north of Afghanistan, yet despite their recruitment efforts in the north over the past
three years, the group has not managed to establish a viable fighting force. 38
Nonetheless these efforts are a concern for countries neighbouring Afghanistan to
the north. According to Member States, the attacks of ISIL in Afghanistan in
neighbouring Pakistan seem in some instances to be “outso urced” to other groups,
including Lashkar i Jhangvi (LJ) (QDe.096), who initially claimed responsibility for
the October 2016 attack on the police training college in Quetta and Jamaat -ulAhrar, a Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) (QDe.132) splinter group, which
conducted an attack on the Lal Shahbaz Qalandar Sufi shrine in southern Pakistan
on 16 February 2017. Both attacks were subsequently claimed by ISIL.
30. The threat level has intensified in South-East Asia, with ISIL increasingly
directing its attention, including its propaganda, at the region (see S/2017/35,
para. 59). With the rise of ISIL, groups in the region have been revitalized, new
groups have proliferated, established groups have splintered and pre -existing groups
have rebranded themselves as ISIL affiliates. 39 The attack in Jakarta on 14 January
2016 was a turning point in the region as it was perpetrated by Jamaah Ansharut
Daulah militants financed by an Indonesian fighting with ISIL in Syria. 40 While
__________________
30

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
32
Information provided by a Member State.
33
Information provided by a Member State.
34
Information provided by a Member State.
35
Information provided by a Member State.
36
Information provided by a Member State.
37
Information provided by a Member State.
38
Information provided by a Member State.
39
Information provided by a Member State.
40
Information provided by a Member State. JAD is an umbrella group comprised of ISIL followers
in Indonesia.
31

17-08837

7/17

S/2017/467

security forces were able to foil numerous attacks, more ISIL -related attacks
followed in the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia (see S/2017/35, para. 60).
31. A long-standing leader of the Abu Sayyaf Group (QDe.001), Isnilon Totoni
Hapilon (QDi.204), 41 has been anointed the ISIL “emir” in the Philippines (see
S/2017/35 para. 59). Southern Philippines is at risk of becoming a hub for foreign
terrorist fighters from the region and from further afield. 42 In Indonesia, the death of
Abu Wardah, also known as Santoso, in 2016 has diminished the threat from
Mujahidin Indonesian Timur (QDe.150), but the overall threat in Indonesia persists,
in particular from ISIL sympathizers and groups such as JAD, led by imprisoned
extremist cleric Aman Abdurrahman, as well from the hundreds of former Jemaah
Islamiyah (QDe.092) cadres that have been, or are due to be, released from prison
(see S/2017/35, para. 60; S/2016/629, para. 50; S/2016/830, para. 22).
32. Further complicating the threat picture in the region are foreign terrorist
fighters from South-East Asia based in the Syrian Arab Republic or Iraq who are
funding and enabling attacks in their home countries. Returnees to the region are a
significant concern to Member States, as they could increase the military
capabilities of local networks. Relocators from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic,
foreign terrorist fighters who are not nationals of South -East Asian States, are
another source of concern, as they are likely unknown to the local authorities (see
S/2017/35, paras. 60, 62-63).

IV. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
33. The United Nations, Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations continue to strengthen existing and develop new tools to
address the rapidly evolving threat posed by ISIL, including the threat posed by
returning foreign terrorist fighters. Over recent months, the Security Council has
adopted resolutions on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks
(S/RES/2341 (2017)); the destruction, looting and smuggling of cultural heritage
sites and artefacts, as well as their illicit trade and trafficking carried out by terrorist
groups or in a context of armed conflict (S/RES/2347 (2017)); and the terrorist
threat in the Lake Chad Basin region (S/RES/2349 (2017)). In its resolution 2341
(2017), the Council called on States to consider developing or fur ther improving
their strategies for reducing risks to critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks. In
its resolution 2347 (2017), the Council requests States to take appropriate steps to
prevent and counter the illicit trade and trafficking in cultural property and other
items of archaeological, historical, cultural, rare scientific and religious importance
originating from a context of armed conflict, notably from terrorist groups,
including by prohibiting cross-border trade in such illicit items. In its resolution
2349 (2017), the Council calls for the implementation of a range of measures aimed
at strengthening security, protection, and human rights in the Lake Chad Basin,
including addressing the conditions that can be conducive to terrorism; ensuring that
the perpetrators of acts of violence are held accountable and brought to justice; and
developing and implementing disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies.

__________________
41
42

8/17

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
17-08837

S/2017/467

A.

Terrorism financing: the impact of resolution 2253 (2015)

1.

Criminalization of terrorism financing
34. In my second report pursuant to Security Council resolution 2253 (2015)
(S/2016/501), I noted that States were making substantial progress in implementing
the counter-financing of terrorism requirements of the relevant Council resolutions,
but continued to face challenges in that regard. It should be recalled that Council
resolution 2253 (2015) broadens the scope of the offence of the financing of
terrorism. Accordingly, in October 2016, the Financial Action Task Force revised
the interpretive note to its recommendation on the criminalization of terrorism
financing to include financing the travel of foreign terrorist fighters. The Financial
Action Task Force also revised the related glossary in order to include language that
clearly referred to “funds and other assets”, as well to the concept of economic
resources (e.g., oil and related materials) in accordance with resolutions 2161
(2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). According to information gathered by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate from a number of Financial
Action Task Force-style regional bodies since December 2015, 20 States in Europe
and the Caucasus have taken steps to introduce legal measures specifically aimed at
reinforcing their respective counter-financing of terrorism systems. Four States in
Central Asia have enacted laws to strengthen laws and regulatio ns governing the
proceeds of terrorism financing. More than half the States in West Africa —
including four States of the West Africa Monetary Union — have revised their
terrorism-financing legislation, but only one has criminalized the financing of
foreign terrorist fighter travel and another has incorporated a related provision into
its counter-terrorism legislation. Four States in the Caribbean, three States in
Eastern and Southern Africa and three States in the Middle East and North Africa
region have enacted additional terrorism-financing legislation.
35. The efforts of the Council, the Financial Action Task Force and the Financial
Action Task Force-style regional bodies to promote the implementation of its
provisions have helped strengthen the counter-financing of terrorism frameworks.
Since December 2015, the International Monetary Fund has provided assistance on
counter-financing of terrorism to 37 States, 13 of which are in the Middle East and
North Africa region including a Middle East and North Africa counter-financing of
terrorism-focused project. The World Bank initiated in April 2017 an anti -moneylaundering/counter-financing of terrorism training programme for a number of
States in the Middle East and Eastern Africa regions, which aims inter al ia to
strengthen the capacity to investigate and successfully prosecute financing of
terrorism offences, enhance regional cooperation in counter -financing of terrorism
and train trainers. In 2016, within the framework of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
launched a capacity-building initiative for West African States, in particularly States
of the Sahel, to detect terrorism financing and to collect and manage financial
intelligence for the purposes of investigation and prosecution. However, legislation
is of limited value if it is not effectively implemented. Globally, few terrorism financing cases are brought to Court. In many instances, individuals and entities are
prosecuted for other charges, including public provocation to commit a terrorist act.

2.

Measures to freeze the assets of those supporting terrorist organizations or
individual terrorists
36. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2253 (2015) on the listing of
any individual or entity associated with ISIL, 11 associated individuals have been
listed, and among them 8 are listed as financiers/financial facilitators. In its
nineteenth report (S/2017/35), the Monitoring Team recommended further efforts to

17-08837

9/17

S/2017/467

encourage States to propose listings targeting financial institutions knowingly
conducting transactions on behalf of ISIL. According to the Counter -Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, a large number of States have upgraded their
national mechanisms to address the asset-freezing requirements of the relevant
Council resolutions, including resolution 1373 (2001). For instance, six States in the
Middle East and North Africa region have introduced revised asset-freezing
requirements.
37. In some regions, including West Africa, States continue to suffer from
weaknesses in their legislative and operational frameworks for the implementation
of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001). Assistance providers have introduced
initiatives aimed to encourage designation and cooperation among States in this
regard. In November 2016, the Eurasian Group on Combating Money -Laundering
and the Financing of Terrorism adopted guidelines for cooperation among its member
States in the implementation of terrorist-asset-freezing mechanisms. In April 2016,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate launched a database of
authorities responsible for issuing third-party terrorist-asset-freezing requests,
which currently includes information on 85 States. In September 2016, the Financial
Action Task Force issued a handbook designed to strengthen the implementation of
asset-freezing mechanisms developed under resolution 1373 (2001).
3.

Increased integration of financial intelligence into counter-terrorism work
38. Security Council resolution 2253 (2015) calls on States to engage with
financial institutions and the private sector and share information on terrorism financing risks. In this regard, it is essential to pro tect the international financial
system from abuse and to provide the private sector with the tools to monitor
transactions, detect any unusual activity and prevent funds from being made
available to individuals or entities associated with ISIL. This will become
increasingly important as liberated areas re-establish their links to international
financial institutions. In my second report pursuant to resolution 2253, I noted the
piloting of public-private terrorism-financing information-sharing platforms. I am
pleased to note that these platforms have been adopted by an increasing number of
States, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region, and would call on Member States to
consider linking them.
39. States continue to strengthen links among their respective financial
intelligence units and reporting entities. Through its ongoing dialogue with Member
States, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has been able to
identify several good practices in this area. One European State recently introduce d
legislation enabling its financial intelligence unit to provide reporting entities with
the names of individuals and entities considered to pose a terrorism -financing risk,
prior to the submission of a suspicious transaction report. The collection of fin ancial
intelligence is key to the identification of the financial patterns of foreign terrorist
fighters, the monitoring of individuals and the identification of possible terrorist
networks, ISIL facilitators and supporters. Europol hosts FIU.net, a decent ralized
computer network that connects all 28 European Union financial intelligence units
and facilitates the sharing of suspicious transaction reports. UNODC provides
financial-disruption training and courses for counter-financing of terrorism
investigators in Afghanistan, Mali, Somalia and other States in North Africa, Central
Asia and the Indian Ocean region.
40. Financial intelligence has become more systematically integrated into counter terrorism work. In one Asian State, the financial intelligence u nit and the national
counter-terrorism agency recently signed a memorandum of understanding to
formalize their partnership in this area. The financial intelligence unit of one
European State recently joined an existing joint task force for the investigatio n of

10/17

17-08837

S/2017/467

specific threats, such as social welfare fraud committed by national foreign terrorist
fighters. Other information-sharing models include the establishment of centres for
the sharing and analysis of information by all financial agencies — including
customs, as well as immigration — in order to build financial profiles of foreign
terrorist fighters and determine financial patterns, for the benefit of the private
sector. The Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force has
established an Operational Experts Forum on Terrorist Financing targeted at
financial intelligence units, law enforcement, and security/intelligence agencies in
order to share information on terrorism-financing risks, methods and trends and
exchange experience and expertise in identifying, preventing and disrupting terrorism
financing.
4.

Raising and moving funds
41. Money-services businesses, including those providing informal value -transfer
systems (e.g., hawala), are vulnerable to abuse. Because money continues to flow
from ISIL-controlled territory to affiliates or to be banked in safer locations, close
monitoring of informal money-remitters activity and cross-border transportation of
cash and other bearer negotiable instruments remains an essential component of an
effective counter-financing of terrorism strategy. Since December 2015, three States
in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus and three States in Central Asia have taken
concrete steps to strengthen measures relating to money-remitters and cash couriers.
In West Africa, remitters and cash services continue to be highly vulnerable to
terrorism financing. Even though cash-declaration systems are in place in most West
African States, particularly for outgoing flows, large movements of illicit cash
persist, including along the trafficking routes of the Sahel. The Counter -Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate has identified a similar vulnerability in East Africa.
42. Cross-border movement of cash and bearer negotiable instruments is a
significant risk in all States in South-East Asia. The region’s Financial Intelligence
Consultative Group has initiated an in-depth study of cross-border cash movements
to support stronger monitoring and disruption at critical border points. The Group
will also conduct a regional intelligence assessment to better understand cross border movement practices and how they are used for terrorism financing. There is a
need to further develop such arrangements, especially in regions that rely heavily on
cash transactions. UNODC provides training on criminal/terrorist abuse of money
remitters in Afghanistan and neighbouring States and in the I ndian Ocean region.
43. Although limited information is available about terrorist use of new
technologies such as virtual currencies and social media to finance their activities,
States, international and regional organizations and private -sector actors are
adopting laws, regulatory frameworks and guidelines to address this potential
vulnerability. Technologies designed to facilitate low-cost, high-speed global
transfers are rarely subject to regulatory scrutiny or due diligence requirements.
Some States have banned the use of bitcoin and other virtual currencies, while
others are reviewing legal frameworks to ensure that their providers are subject to
anti-money-laundering/counter-financing of terrorism regulations. The European
Commission is currently considering bringing all virtual currency exchange
platforms under the scope of its anti-money-laundering directive in order to ensure
that they apply customer due diligence controls.
44. Social media provide opportunities for terrorist organizations and ind ividuals
to promote their cause, recruit followers and raise funds, as well as to create and
share content through websites and mobile applications. Since December 2016, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has been working with
partners, including in the private sector, towards identifying the vulnerabilities of
social media providers and defining preventive policies. The Middle East and North

17-08837

11/17

S/2017/467

Africa Financial Action Task Force and the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering, in close coordination with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, have launched a joint project aimed at strengthening understanding of
the use, or potential use, of social media for terrorism-financing purposes. The
European Union Internet Forum of the European Commission, based on voluntary
cooperation between the Internet industry and European Union member States, is
aimed at reducing access to terrorist content online and increasing alternative
narratives online.
45. As was highlighted in the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
Global Implementation Survey (2016), the non-profit organizations sector continues
to be exploited by terrorist organizations and their supporters, including diversion of
funds, abuse of programming and false representation. Nonetheless, misinterpretation
or misuse of the international requirements on non-profit organizations (particularly
the related recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force) have led in some
instances to overregulation of civil society organizations, which may undermine
human rights protection. In June 2016 the Financial Action Task Force revised its
special recommendation and interpretive note on non -profit organizations. In
conducting their national anti-money-laundering/counter-financing of terrorism risk
assessment, several States have initiated close consultations with the non -profit
organization sector. This approach should be encouraged.
46. As I noted previously, kidnapping for ransom may become increasingly
attractive to ISIL as other revenue sources decline. In this regard, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre capacity-building project on international good
practices on addressing and preventing kidnapping for ransom, strengthens the
capacities of Governments and non-governmental organizations in North-East and
West Africa to achieve the safe recovery of hostages while simultaneously denying
terrorists ransom payments and other concessions. A regional training course on
kidnapping for ransom for relevant experts of the Grou p of Five for the Sahel (Sahel
G-5) countries is being prepared by the Centre under the regional Integrated
Assistance for Countering Terrorism (I-ACT) initiative, a capacity-building
framework for the region.

B.

Returnees
47. In response to the increase in the number of foreign terrorist fighters returning
to their States of origin or residence, a number of States have recently amended
their legislation to enable their authorities to cancel the citizenship or invalidate the
travel documents of suspected foreign terrorist fighters while they are abroad. At
least 10 States in various regions, including Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and
Asia Pacific, have amended legislation to enable their authorities to withdraw the
citizenship of an individual who joins a designated non-State armed group at any
time before or after his or her departure. In some cases, such measures can be used
without a criminal conviction or the involvement of a judge. Most of these States
may withdraw citizenship only in cases where the individual would not be rendered
stateless (i.e., in the case of dual citizens). Several States may withdraw the
citizenship of naturalized citizens. In some States, legislation lacks clear protections
preventing individuals from being rendered stateless.
48. In the absence of sufficient legal grounds and admissible evidence, transit
States face numerous challenges when detaining, prosecuting or extraditing
suspected foreign terrorist fighters in their territory. Despite action taken in certain
regions, such as the European Union, to criminalize travel for terrorist purposes,
very few States have criminalized travel to designated areas as a stand -alone
offence. Collecting and gathering sufficient evidence against foreign terrorist

12/17

17-08837

S/2017/467

fighters to prove intent remains difficult. There is therefore a risk that foreign
terrorist fighters stopped in transit will remain free to travel onwards.
49. The longer foreign terrorist fighters remain in conflict zones, the more likely it
is that they will commit acts of terrorism or other serious crimes; embrace violent
extremist causes; gain further experience and training; and strengthen networks.
Foreign terrorist fighters who remain in destination States may also experience
direct military confrontation between foreign Governments and terrorist entities.
Moreover, the networks that they build in the destination State may subsequently
assist them to return or relocate undetected by providing them with fraudulent travel
documents, as well as guidance in the use of broken travel patterns. In order to
provide comprehensive, long-term solutions to these threats, administrative travel
measures can be complemented by cooperation with other States in bringing
terrorists to justice.
50. Administrative travel measures have been abused in some cases, raising
concerns about the protection and promotion of international human rights and
humanitarian and refugee law. Such abuse can limit the effectiveness of
comprehensive strategies to prevent and counter violent extremism that l eads to
terrorism. Because international human rights law provides protection against
refoulement, such measures can never be used in cases where an individual would
be at risk of persecution in a country to which he or she is forcibly returned.
51. In enacting administrative travel measures, States should also avoid placing
undue restrictions on the travel of humanitarian aid workers, as well as
representatives of foreign Governments and international and regional organizations
carrying out official functions. In response to the urgent need — identified by
criminal justice officials — for more practical and operational guidance in this area,
UNODC is developing a technical assistance programme that will provide training
in the prosecution of foreign terrorist fighters for criminal justice practitioners in
South-East Europe. Furthermore, within the framework of its Airport
Communication Project, UNODC is developing a training curriculum that will
provide front-line law enforcement officers with the skills and knowledge required
to detect and interdict the travel of foreign terrorist fighters at international airports.
The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre is also implementing a project on
advance passenger information, which aims to stem the flow of for eign terrorist
fighters. During the reporting period, the Centre carried out capacity -building
consultations with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
52. In the Lake Chad Basin, the military successes achieved by the Multinational
Joint Task Force and national forces have led to the surrender of significant numbers
of fighters. The Lake Chad Basin States face the challenge of dealing with
combatants captured during military operations, as well as the movement of
individuals and groups, across borders and to and from camps for internally
displaced persons and refugees. Regardless of how individuals come under their
responsibility or where they are currently located, States are legally obligated to
consider appropriate prosecution, to bring to justice those who have comm itted
gross violations of international human rights and humanitarian law or terrorist
offences and to apply consistent criteria against which they evaluate such cases. In
accordance with resolution 2349 (2017), States must also develop comprehensive
measures to deal with all persons associated with a terrorist group, including, where
appropriate, programmes aimed at disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration, in accordance with international standards.
53. The United Nations continues to support national and regional efforts to
address these complex, interrelated challenges. As referred to in previous reports
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2253 (2015), the Counter-Terrorism
17-08837

13/17

S/2017/467

Implementation Task Force Office developed the United Nations capacity-building
implementation plan for countering the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, in close
collaboration with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Monitoring Team, as mandated in Security Council Presidential Stat ement
S/PRST/2015/11. The plan is being updated to better account for the increasing
threats posed by returnees.
54. In Nigeria, support for national and regional efforts will continue to build
upon the technical and high-level consultations held in December 2016, at the
request of the Office of the National Security Adviser and in the context of the
existing European Union-Nigeria-UNODC-Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate programme on “Assisting Nigeria to strengthen rule of law-based
criminal-justice responses to terrorism”, funded by the European Union. In June
2017, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and UNODC will
jointly facilitate an inter-agency workshop aimed at assisting Nigeria to build
capacity on prosecution strategies and prioritization of cases; and identifying
inter-agency relationships required to ensure effective investigation and prosecution
of persons associated with Boko Haram. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and UNODC are also spearheading efforts to launch a
regional initiative for the Lake Chad Basin States to support their development of
national approaches to prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration and the
strengthening of regional cooperation.
55. UNODC continues to train criminal justice officials, in most regions of the
world, in the investigation, prosecution and adjudication of terrorism -related offences,
in accordance with resolution 2178 (2014) and with a focus on the issue of children
recruited by terrorists and violent extremist groups, particularly ISIL and Boko
Haram.
56. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, acting in assistance of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, is
supporting the development of the country’s national counter-terrorism strategy,
which also addresses the prevention of violent extremism. In February 2017, the
Office provided training on counter-terrorism and human rights for 50 Malian law
enforcement officials. Two workshops to enhance the capacity of Malian
prosecutors from the Special Judiciary Unit on counter -terrorism and the newly
created Special Investigations Brigade were facilitated by UNODC and supported
by the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in January and February 2017. At
the regional level, United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
entities are finalizing project proposals under the United Nations Counter -Terrorism
Centre I-ACT initiative for the Sahel G-5, an “All-of-UN” regional capacitybuilding programme to counter terrorism and prevent violent extremism, mandated
by Security Council resolution 2195 (2014) and S/PRST/2015/24. In May, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force-United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre deployed a small team to Dakar and Nouakchott for consultations with the
G-5 Permanent Secretariat and regional offices of the United Nations implementing
partners to finalize this regional framework and plan for the I -ACT launch in the
coming months.
57. United Nations engagement in the Sahel will evolve in response to the
continued threats posed by terrorism, violent extremism, transnational organized
crime and illicit trans-border trafficking. I reiterate the need to strengthen
partnerships between the United Nations system and regional stakeholders and to
support in particular the Sahel G-5 countries’ efforts to fight terrorism and illicit
trafficking. The United Nations is renewing its engagement in the region, following
an independent review of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

14/17

17-08837

S/2017/467

58. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Insti tute has
developed initiatives aimed at introducing mechanisms into juvenile justice systems
to address the situation of child foreign terrorist fighters. It also supports the
development of rehabilitation and reintegration programmes in correction centres in
Indonesia, drawing on good international practices. INTERPOL continues to assist
States to enhance the response of law enforcement agencies, including through
working group meetings on the issue of returnees and their links with local militant
groups. Lastly, the Radicalization Awareness Network Centre of Excellence of the
European Commission is developing a manual on intervention to assist its Member
States in managing returnees.
59. On 24 May 2017, the Eurasian Group on Combating Money-Laundering and the
Financing of Terrorism and the Commonwealth of Independent States Anti -Terrorism
Center will hold, in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, a regional workshop on the detection of foreign terrorist fighter
returnees, including their financial profiles, and on the use of asset -freezing
mechanisms. In the context of its work on foreign terrorist fighters, INTERPOL is
currently developing a pilot initiative, with States in the Middle East/North Africa,
South-East Asia and Central Asia, for the inclusion of relevant financial information
in the profiles of selected foreign terrorist fighters/returnees.

V. Observations
60. Since my first report (S/2016/92), several factors have exacerbated the
challenges faced by States in countering the threat posed by ISIL. In the wake of
military and financial setbacks to ISIL, foreign terrorist fighters are increasingly
leaving the battlefield, returning to their States of origin or resid ence or relocating
to third States, including conflict zones. The threat posed by these individuals is
compounded by the efforts of ISIL to strengthen the role of its affiliates, by
inspiring, guiding and, in some cases, centrally directing individuals to launch
attacks on civilian targets. In order to address these challenges, States should not
only assess the travel routes used by foreign terrorist fighters seeking to join ISIL,
but also strengthen their monitoring of exit routes. Efforts to control forei gn
terrorist fighter travel should be complemented by measures to ensure that foreign
terrorist fighters are brought to justice. States continue to face numerous challenges
to generating and converting intelligence into admissible evidence against suspecte d
returning fighters. Measures to strengthen cooperation and to build capacities in this
area, as well as additional measures, such as improving the collection, preservation
and sharing of information and evidence in conflict theatres and attack sites, are
particularly important.
61. Effective monitoring of terrorist exploitation of information and
communications technology, conducted in accordance with human rights obligations,
is important in order to identify other effective ways in which to prevent and
suppress the dissemination of terrorist messages and the raising of funds for terrorist
purposes.
62. I wish to reiterate the benefits of developing prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies for returning foreign terrorist fighters in acco rdance with
resolution 2178 (2014). Such strategies can be integrated into criminal justice
responses at various stages of the criminal justice process, including outside the
prison setting; and can facilitate a proportionate, individualized, long -term and
human rights-compliant approach. They can also serve to pre-empt serious criminal
conduct, reduce prison-based recruitment, and complement comprehensive
strategies to counter violent extremism.

17-08837

15/17

S/2017/467

63. The development and implementation of strategies to addr ess specific
categories of returnees could also be beneficial. Continued recruitment of women by
ISIL and the involvement of children as fighters remain major concerns. There is an
urgent need to focus increased attention on the factors that lead to the re cruitment,
exploitation and abuse, for terrorist purposes, of vulnerable members of society —
especially children — with a view to identifying the main gaps; ensuring the
adequate protection and support of such populations, including when they are
victims of trafficking in persons, and developing approaches that address their
specific reintegration needs.
64. In seeking to address the threats posed by ISIL, including that of foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees, adequate protection should also be provi ded for
refugees fleeing conflict zones. There is concern that the increase in migrant flows,
due in part to the impact of ISIL in conflict areas, has had a negative effect on the
right to seek and enjoy asylum from persecution. Measures taken by States to
control foreign terrorist fighter travel — such as withdrawing the citizenship of
suspected foreign terrorist fighters, pushing migrants back at national borders; and
extraditing, expelling and deporting individuals without due process — raise
important human rights issues and risk rerouting foreign terrorist fighters to other
States. In some cases, such measures have created an environment conducive to
human trafficking and migrant smuggling. Measures to ensure effective and
appropriate registration and review of asylum seekers and refugees, to
systematically share information concerning decisions to reject refugees or asylum
seekers and exchange information at the national and international levels could be
encouraged. Furthermore, because ISIL is increasingly encouraging its fighters and
sympathizers to carry out attacks in the States in which they reside, the protection of
critical infrastructure, in close cooperation with relevant private sector entities and
in accordance with Council resolution 2341 (2017) is particularly relevant.
65. As it continues to lose territory and financial sources, ISIL may continue to
explore ways to diversify its sources of financing, including through illicit
trafficking in goods, cultural and archaeological artefacts, drug s, wildlife and
human beings. I reiterate the recommendation that States make increased use of the
cooperation tools provided for in relevant international counter -terrorism legal
instruments, as well as the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime of 2001 and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations Convention
against Corruption of 2004, and the relevant conventions on combating trafficking
in drugs. The recent adoption of a judicial cooperation agreement and increased
information-sharing on terrorism and organized crime among Chad, Niger and Mali
is an encouraging development. Attention should be paid to potential cases of
human trafficking to finance terrorism, as underlined by the Council in its resolution
2331 (2016).
66. Member States have made progress, with the support of international and
regional organizations, in strengthening their internal coordination and information sharing mechanisms. Understanding the terrorism-financing risks and vulnerabilities
of certain sectors, including non-profit organizations and money remitters is
particularly relevant in that respect. National, subregional and supranational risk
assessments should be particularly encouraged in certain regions, such as the Sahel,
where the terrorism-financing threat is high.
67. States continue to be hampered by legal and institutional barriers that prevent
the effective flow of information, largely on the basis of security concerns. There is
a need to integrate financial intelligence collected from private -sector and
Government entities (including welfare agencies) into a comprehensive operational
counter-terrorism strategy aimed at detecting suspicious financial flows, as well as
possible networks or cells and to disrupt their facilitation, recruitment and
16/17

17-08837

S/2017/467

operations. Traditional methods — including formal and informal cash couriers or
money remitters — are still widely employed by terrorist groups. Strengthening the
measures aimed at detecting illicit cross-border cash movements and the sharing of
this information with the financial intelligence units can contribute to address these
vulnerabilities. Virtual currencies and other online payment methods have been used
to raise and move terrorist funds. The risk for such use is growing and requires
particular attention.
68. This is my fifth report to the Council pursuant to resolution 2253 (2015). Since
January 2016, ISIL and its affiliates have remained under continuous military
pressure and experienced setbacks. It is critical for Member States to remain
vigilant, however, as the dynamic and increasingly transnational threat that these
terrorist groups represent continues to severely undermine international peace and
security. I therefore welcome the focus that the Security Council has put on ISIL
and its affiliates to raise awareness of the threat and to promote international
cooperation. Nonetheless, more needs to be done at the national, regional and global
levels to collaboratively address the threats and challenges pointed out in these five
reports. In my report on the capability of the United Nations system to assist
Member States in implementing the United Nations Global Counter -Terrorism
Strategy (A/71/858), which is currently being considered by the General Assembly,
I recommended the establishment of a new office of counter -terrorism to provide
leadership to our efforts, enhance coordination and increase the impact of our
assistance to Member States. Through this and other initiatives, the United Nations
system will step up its support to Member States’ efforts to implement the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.

17-08837

17/17
