S/PV.8880

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8880th meeting

Friday, 15 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani/Mr. Kiboino/Mrs. Toroitich. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Syed
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ben Lagha
Ms. Farrey
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2021/861)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-29123 (E)
*2129123*

Kosovo

S/PV.8880

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2021/861)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Selaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vjosa
Osmani-Sadriu to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/861, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: I am pleased to be here in the Council
today and to brief it on essential developments in Kosovo
since our last meeting, in April (see S/2021/370).
Following the end of the official reporting period
detailed in the Secretary-General’s report, we have
experienced developments that remind us — beyond
recent events in Kosovo — that a lack of political
understanding and communication is a vector for the
escalation of tensions, especially in fragile security
environments characterized by mistrust.
On the morning of 20 September, Pristina launched
a police operation in northern Kosovo to enforce a
new licence-plate validity regime. Given the history of
2/28

15/10/2021

sensitive and long-standing discussions on freedom of
movement conducted over years through the European
Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue, it would have been
natural to expect early and clear communication
with those affected. However, little or no such
communication was attempted by the authorities. The
international community on the ground, including
the Kosovo Force (KFOR), with its responsibility for
maintaining a safe and secure environment, was not
given prior notification.
As a result, a stand-off developed as protesters in
the north blockaded traffic at the northern gates along
the Administrative Boundary Line. Special units of
the Kosovo police force, armed with long weapons,
deployed to the northern crossing points in armoured
vehicles. Those units in one instance utilized tear gas
and percussion grenades in an attempt to disperse
the protesters. Over the ensuing several days, the
number of both protesters and special police units
increased. On 26 September, an as-yet-unexplained
fire was set at the vehicle registration centre in Zubin
Potok, while overnight on 25 September undetonated
ordnance was discovered in another public office in
the north. For its part, the Serbian army deployed a
platoon-strength reaction force in the vicinity, north
of the Administrative Boundary Line, and conducted
several military overflights in the same area.
International officials such as myself with long
experience on the ground could hardly be surprised by
the reaction to this strong-armed effort to implement a
change of policy, given the history of mistrust and the
sensitivity of community relations in the north. The fact
that that effort was not discussed through established
channels — in the first place, the EU-facilitated dialogue
on freedom of movement — resulted in an avoidable
yet potentially dangerous escalation of tensions lasting
for 10 days. Through the good offices of European
Union High Representative Borrell, supported also by
United States diplomacy, an agreement was achieved
to de-escalate that hazardous situation. It provided for
the withdrawal of Kosovo special police units from the
north and an increased KFOR presence to establish a
safe and secure environment. An interim solution was
agreed on licence-plate validity, with discussions to
continue during the following six months.
What we witnessed in the north could be called
a bruising episode, but it could far too easily have
turned into a real haemorrhage. The volatility of the
situation can also be understood by the direct personal
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

interventions with the Pristina and Belgrade leaders by
NATO Secretary-General Stoltenberg and President
of the European Commission von der Leyen, among
others. While closely monitoring the situation, my
Mission also played a tempering role on the ground,
making use of our experienced presence in the north,
in order to encourage calm and reduce the likelihood
of an accidental or uncontrolled confrontation between
special police and the public. I also raised my voice
against unilateral actions, calling for responsible
leadership and for the taking of immediate steps to
reduce tensions and continue the political dialogue.
Then, just this past Wednesday, Kosovo police
special units were once again deployed into the north,
as part of what has been described as an anti-smuggling
operation conducted in several locations in Kosovo. It is
questionable whether KFOR was properly informed in
advance of the deployment of special police units. Over
the course of the day, that operation provoked further
protests and clashes that resulted in a significant number
of injuries among protesters, police and uninvolved
civilians, including, in one case, a life-threatening
wound caused by police gunfire, in circumstances still
to be clarified.
Civilians in North Mitrovica reported injuries in
their homes from tear gas and percussion grenades,
which were in use by police over a period of several
hours. Protestors threw stones, and, according to
the Kosovo police, some suspects used firearms to
engage the police. As EU High Representative Borrell
observed afterward,
“Unilateral and uncoordinated actions that
endanger stability are unacceptable ... [I]ssues must
be addressed through the EU-facilitated dialogue.”
Accounting for context and exercising responsible
forethought are essential to avoiding unintended
consequences and strategically risky escalation. The
latest actions deepened the mistrust felt among the
Serb population in the north and led to strong reactions
in Belgrade, making a responsible recommitment to
dialogue all the more imperative now.
I have spoken in detail about the events of 20 to
30 September and other issues with both Prime Minister
Kurti and President Vučić. I have also been engaged
in conversations with the diplomatic actors involved,
especially those representing the United States, the
Russian Federation and China, as well as the KFOR
Commander and EU officials.

S/PV. 8880

There are several important lessons — or perhaps
better, reminders — that emerge when it comes to
Belgrade-Pristina relations, regional stability and the
indispensability of the dialogue process. Dialogue
can and should be the mechanism used to avoid the
dangers that are less often visible but are just as real
as they have been during these past 20 years. History
in the region has tragically and repeatedly shown that
ostensibly small incidents, the misreading of intentions
and outright mistakes can trigger an unstable security
escalation that puts lives at risk and benefits no one.
International actors, including my team and
Security Council members, welcomed the recent
encounter between President Vučić and Prime Minister
Kurti on 6 October during the EU-Western Balkans
summit, in the presence of French President Macron
and German Chancellor Merkel. Still, it would be
premature and overly optimistic to say that we can
see a resumption of real commitment to the dialogue,
which remains the only forum in which responsible and
result-oriented discussions can continue.
I raised the importance of continuity in the dialogue
with both President Vučić and Prime Minister Kurti
during my talks with them. This is also a daunting
challenge for the EU institutions, which are charged
with leading this process in a meaningful way. What I
noticed and heard in my meetings with representatives
of the international Powers represented in the Security
Council is that, despite differences on other matters,
they do clearly share an understanding that there is
no reasonable alternative to sustained engagement in
dialogue. It is a minimum — to help avert the retrograde
potential exhibited these past weeks. Further, it is
important to support all initiatives that may help to
promote responsible relations among all neighbours in
the Western Balkans.
From my point of view, trust continues to be
the element in shortest supply: trust in good faith
negotiations, trust between representatives and their
constituencies, and trust in the institutions that have been
established to deliver both. Observing the many cycles
of the dialogue over more than six years, I maintain
the strong personal conviction that if the vast majority
of people from the various communities, including
women and young people, do not feel themselves to be
a part of, or to have a stake in, the processes of political
discussion and negotiation, if there is no mobilization of
society, and if they are not, at the very least, even aware
of what is being discussed, then all efforts to change

21-291233/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

relations and resolve long-term tensions are destined
to remain elusive. A facilitated agreement on paper is
a vital objective but having a paper in hand does not
equate to having a solution in hand. Those who could
exert more influence on negotiating parties to succeed
are mostly worn out by tired arguments and nationalist
political sloganeering. This is true in Kosovo, it is true
in Serbia, and it is true across the entire region.
As Kosovo is approaching another local election in
two days’ time, the focus at the central and municipal
levels should now be trained upon delivering on
people’s high expectations for change. Why was turnout
so high in the past general election? In fact, what the
people called for is more responsive and responsible
government, including tangible follow-through on the
reform agenda promised during the campaign period.
Even more, voters clearly want public institutions to
work in favour of the welfare of people, in contrast to
the past. They want greater equality of economic and
social opportunity, fairness, accountability and reliable
recourse to the rule of law. Accordingly, Prime Minister
Kurti, who on at least two occasions has shared with
me the major priorities of his Government, assured
me of his focus on this reform agenda, calling it his
top priority. I urge the Government today publicly, as
I have done privately, to focus on rebuilding the bonds
of trust so long broken between all the communities in
Kosovo and the political leadership.
Rebuilding trust demands a sincere approach to the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue process, as well as building
an encouraging atmosphere among the different
communities within Kosovo. Dealing maturely and
responsibly with the past is a precondition for stability,
which includes avoiding the instrumentalization of
divisive ethno-nationalist themes for political advantage.
I have had many conversations with leaders of
countries of the region during the past year, including
with President Vučić and Prime Minister Rama of
Albania, and I want to stress that practical regional
approaches have begun to evolve, utilizing the
commonality of interest in increased prosperity as an
engine to bring about a more stable region. Like the
Berlin process, upon which it was partly modelled,
the “Open Balkan” initiative promoted by President
Vučić, Prime Minister Rama and Prime Minister Zaev
of North Macedonia, is in my view a promising step
exactly in this direction, despite differences over its
details and form.
4/28

15/10/2021

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
continues to present an unprecedented challenge to
Kosovo and the region. Curtailing its spread and
mitigating its socioeconomic consequences are
another matter that behove cooperation across borders,
boundaries and ethnicity. Through the donations on the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility,
the United Nations has helped Kosovo’s vaccination
programme, and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
United Nations Kosovo team have been working closely
with the authorities to encourage and promote the
acceptance of vaccinations and preventive measures. I
am proud that UNMIK and the United Nations Kosovo
team contributed to increasing the COVID-19 testing
and vaccination capacity in Kosovo and provided
humanitarian assistance and equipment to the most
vulnerable. They have also focused on objectively
monitoring human rights protections in relation to the
pandemic. With strong support from Headquarters, we
successfully completed a vaccination campaign for all
United Nations staff and dependents, international and
local, not only in UNMIK but also in all other United
Nations entities on the ground.
In accordance with our mandate, the Mission
continues to widely engage on the ground across
multiple sectors and areas of work, anchored by an
agenda dedicated to promoting and supporting trustbuilding among Kosovo’s diverse communities.
I have spoken already of trust as a major
preoccupation of my time and vision for our Mission,
a strategy that we have forged and refined through
experience. Such work is indispensable, and must
continue, for the reasons that I stressed earlier. We have
used the important instrument of our programmatic
funds to set the tone and to seed the realization of nearly
all the objectives laid out during the United Nations
trust-building forum that I hosted in 2018 through
the combined efforts of UNMIK, the United Nations
Kosovo team and our many international partners
working hand in hand with members of different
communities who believe in a peaceful future together.
From our work promoting the women and peace
and security and youth and peace and security agendas
to supporting multilingual education, funding and
cosponsoring debate on television and new-media
platforms and providing legal assistance and education
for access to justice, we have helped to model the
people-centred approach and society-level engagement
21-29123

15/10/2021

articulated in the Secretary-General’s
programme and Our Common Agenda.

Kosovo
reform

That is a catalyst role, to which our Mission remains
dedicated, engaging with and empowering voices for
change, while applying our creativity, understanding
and analysis of the real circumstances to promote longterm and sustainable benefits for all. In my view, such
work is the bedrock of a sustainable agreement, without
which the vicious cycles of public mistrust and the use
of divisive rhetoric for short-term political gain will
simply repeat themselves. The events of the past weeks,
with their propensity to unravel the steady but fragile
progress made in rebuilding trust among communities,
are of deep concern to me and should be a warning to
all members of the Security Council.
I thank the members of the Council most sincerely
for their attention and for their continuing support
throughout all these years to myself and UNMIK.
The President: I thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Selaković (Serbia): I would like to thank
Secretary-General
Guterres
and
his
Special
Representative and Head of United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Tanin, for the report (S/2018/861) submitted and
for their efforts made towards the implementation of
the UNMIK mandate. I would also like to thank the
members of the Security Council for the continued
attention that they have devoted to the issue of Kosovo
and Metohija. The Republic of Serbia highly values
the activities of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
and Metohija and supports it in carrying out its work
as efficiently as possible, pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999), and undiminished in scope, aiming to build
and preserve lasting peace, stability and security
in the province. I ask Mr. Tanin to kindly accept the
expressions of our gratitude for his engagement and the
cooperation that we achieved during his term of office.
Deep regret and concerns are raised by the fact that
the security situation in Kosovo and Metohija in the past
period was marked by an increasing number of various
ethnically motivated attacks and incidents targeting
Serbs, which was also stated in the report. They are
also raised by the fact that the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government (PISG) in Pristina continue to take
unilateral steps and refuse to implement the agreements

S/PV. 8880

reached in the Brussels dialogue and that institutional
discrimination against Serbs, attacks on the sites of the
Serbian Orthodox Church and the undermining of the
economic sustainability of Serb communities in the
province have continued.
We are witnessing that dangerous provocations by
Pristina are taking place every day, at an accelerated
pace, thereby seriously threatening the safety of
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija and directly violating
the agreements and arrangements reached within the
Brussels dialogue.
The latest violent incursion of the so-called Kosovo
Police Special Regional Operations Units into the
northern part of Kosovska Mitrovica, on 13 October, is
the ninth incursion of its kind. Tear gas, shock bombs and
unbridled violence are becoming a matter of everyday
life for Serbs in the north of Kosovo and Metohija, and
they must therefore be stopped immediately.
In the most recent attack with firearms and
chemicals by the Pristina special forces, 71-year-old
Verica Djelic died as a result of chemicals used in the
intervention. Ten unarmed civilians were wounded,
one of whom, 36-year-old Srecko Sofronijevic, shot in
the back with an automatic rifle, was critically injured.
A three-month-old baby, who miraculously remained
unharmed, was also the target of the shooting. The
false excuse for the latest unilateral action, as the High
Representative of the European Union (EU) for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell, called it,
was the fight against organized crime and smuggling.
Serbia is strongly against organized crime and
smuggling, but the members of the Security Council
should know that such an important and general
global goal, which we all share, was cynically used
for an armed attack on unarmed civilians, which
began with an automatic rifle raid on pharmacies at
which patients of Serbian and other nationalities are
supplied with vitally important medicines. Four days
before the local elections in Kosovo and Metohija, in
order to gain votes in an irresponsible and inhumane
way, fully motivated by separatist goals, the current
PISG regime used medicines on which people’s lives
depend to prove its position on the status, contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999).
Only a few days earlier, another provocation on
the part of Pristina led to a dangerous crisis, when
personnel of the so-called Kosovo Police Special
Regional Operations Unit, armed with long firearms

21-291235/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

and reinforced with armoured vehicles, were deployed
to administrative crossings between central Serbia and
Kosovo and Metohija — Brnjak and Jarinje — in order
to remove Serbian licence plates and replace them with
temporary ones, thereby violently preventing the free
movement of citizens.
Those events do not fall within the reporting period
covered by the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the work of UNMIK, but it is incumbent upon
us to address them on this occasion in order to have
everyone understand the gravity of the situation on the
ground and how serious the consequences of Pristina’s
unilateral actions can be.
The incursions of heavily armed Pristina police
formations, composed exclusively of Albanians, into
the north of Kosovo and Metohija with the use of
excessive force, under various pretexts and motives,
are extremely dangerous provocations that have the
potential to destabilize the already sensitive security
situation on the ground. The goal of the latest incursions
of Pristina’s special force personnel into the north
of the province was to provoke the Serbs and further
intimidate them with a show of force, as well as to
provoke a hasty reaction from Belgrade.
It is obvious that with such moves Pristina aims
to erase 10 years of dialogue, which is the only way
to resolve open issues. Those provocations once again
demonstrate that the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Pristina not only do not intend to
implement everything agreed in the Brussels dialogue,
but also aim to completely reject dialogue as a means of
resolving problems. Calling on both sides for restraint
and to be constructive, which has long been the public
messaging of some important actors in the international
community, is not an effective response to Pristina’s
lack of credibility and dangerous playing with fire,
which could have unforeseeable consequences. There is
only one source of destabilization; it has a name — the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina.
After the events of 13 October, it is clear that it can
and needs to be stopped through the urgent and
decisive action of the international community. It is
now quite obvious that these are no longer sporadic
and isolated provocations by Pristina, but rather an
organized campaign of ethnically motivated violence
and discrimination against Serbs.
We also express our concern over the latest
imposition of tariffs by Pristina on certain products
6/28

15/10/2021

originating from central Serbia, which was made public
on 8 October. We remind the Security Council that the
unilateral decision of Pristina in November 2018 to
impose duties on products from central Serbia resulted
in a de facto complete trade blockade and a long-term
stalemate in dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
In contrast to Pristina, which persistently seeks to
raise barriers towards central Serbia through unilateral
actions, Belgrade persistently and consistently works
to liberalize the flow of people, goods, services and
capital, which is the basic goal of our “Open Balkan”
initiative. North Macedonia and Albania joined the
initiative, but Pristina did not.
In the period from March to September 2021, which
is covered in the latest report, close to 100 ethnically
motivated attacks were carried out against Serbs,
their private property and their religious and cultural
heritage sites. The increase in the frequency of attacks
was accompanied by intensified ethnically motivated
violence, which increasingly targets children, the
elderly, women, the few returnees present there, as well
as churches and other property of the Serbian Orthodox
Church. That systematically intensifies the ubiquitous
sense of insecurity among the remaining Serbs and also
deters potential returnees, who are in fact being told
that local Albanian communities can attack them with
impunity and prevent them from returning to live in
their own homes.
The most striking example of the position of Serbs
in Kosovo and Metohija is the case of Ms. Dragica Gašić,
a displaced person who moved into her apartment in the
municipality of Đakovica again in early June. In that
town, which local Albanians proudly refer to as a place
forbidden to Serbs, Ms. Gašić, on her return, first faced
physical and verbal attacks by citizens of Albanian
nationality living there. Instead of being provided
protection, Ms. Gašić, who is quite ill, became a victim
of institutional persecution unleashed by the local selfGovernment bodies and the police. Since she is the
first and only Serb returnee to Đakovica in more than
20 years, it was to be expected that, at that moment, at
least civil society organizations would attempt to protect
her rights. However, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) from Đakovica soon joined the activities aimed
at expelling Ms. Gašić, including NGOs receiving
funding from international donors for projects related
to strengthening democracy and the rule of law.
I must also mention the latest attack on the house
of the only remaining Serbian woman in the centre
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

S/PV. 8880

of the city of Peć, retired teacher Rumena Ljubić,
whose windows were stoned twice in only 24 hours on
13 October.

the monastery’s ownership of over 24 hectares, is not
being respected. We therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment in his report in that regard.

The plight of Ms. Gašić and Ms. Ljubić is a
frightening reflection of the real situation of human
rights that almost every one of more than 200,000
displaced Serbs and non-Albanians would face in
Kosovo and Metohija — provided that they gather the
courage to return to their homes in the province after
more than 20 years. I would like to remind the Council
once again that since 1999 only around 1.9 per cent of
internally displaced Serbs and other non-Albanians
have achieved a sustainable return to Kosovo and
Metohija, as mandated by resolution 1244 (1999).

The Republic of Serbia remains committed to
finding a compromise political solution, as prescribed
under resolution 1244 (1999), which will ensure lasting
peace and stability. We firmly believe that dialogue and
the implementation of the agreements reached are the
only right way to resolve all open issues.

I therefore believe that those examples will
encourage the members of the Security Council and the
international presence on the ground to devote priority
attention in future to the issue of the return of displaced
persons, which is an important part of the UNMIK
mandate under resolution 1244 (1999).
I therefore thank the Secretary-General in particular
for continuing to focus on this extremely important
issue and for calling once again, in the conclusions
of his report, for the creation of conditions for the
sustainable return of internally displaced persons and
the sustainable reintegration of returnees.
Serbian medieval monuments in Kosovo and
Metohija, including priceless monuments that are
inscribed on the UNESCO List of World Heritage in
Danger, are constantly being subject to threats and
are still among the most endangered cultural heritage
sites in Europe. I wish to recall that there are over
1,300 Serbian churches and monasteries in Kosovo and
Metohija. Attacks on Serbian cultural and religious
heritage are at the same time attacks on the identity
of Serbs in the province and directly affect their sense
of safety.
A striking example of disrespect for Serbian cultural
and religious monuments in the province is the case of
the Visoki Dečani monastery, which is under threat and
has been the target of attacks and shelling several times
since 2000, and it is therefore still being protected by
the Kosovo Force (KFOR). The monastery was the
target of a series of hostile actions, and the perpetrators
are not deterred by the fact that it is a World Heritage
site. Despite frequent declaratory statements to the
contrary, including the decision five years ago of the
so-called “constitutional court” of Pristina confirming

As a State committed to respect for international
law and a Member of the United Nations, Serbia
opposes any attempt to establish an artificial balance
between the parties in the dialogue, as well as the
relativization of responsibility for unilateral acts.
We note with concern that, not even eight years after
reaching the Brussels Agreement, the establishment
of the community of Serb municipalities has not been
initiated, even though Belgrade has fulfilled all its
obligations under the Agreement.
There are also numerous and repeated examples of
Pristina violating or obstructing agreements reached in
dialogue in the areas of energy, justice, the freedom of
movement and the visits of officials. One such example
is the verdict sentencing Ivan Todosijević to two years
in prison, which is also pointed out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The Brussels Agreement was directly
breached, which was also stated by the representatives
of the European Union. With its conduct, Pristina caused
immeasurable damage to the reconciliation process in
Kosovo and Metohija. Despite the interpretation by the
European Commission that this is a violation of the
Brussels Agreement, because Todosijević had to be
sentenced by a panel in which the majority of the judges
were of Serbian ethnicity, Pristina still has not taken
any action in that regard. Pristina also continued with
the practice of banning Serbian officials from entering
the territory of the Autonomous Province of Kosovo
and Metohija.
We believe that it is important that the international
community, and especially the European Union, as a
guarantor of the Agreement, firmly insist that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina
start implementing all the agreements reached.
As before, the Republic of Serbia remains fully
committed to resolving the issue of missing persons,
as also demonstrated through full cooperation
with relevant international mechanisms, as well as
participation in the work of the Working Group on

21-291237/28

Kosovo

S/PV.8880

Missing Persons. We expect that the representatives
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina will fulfil their obligations.
Bearing in mind everything I stated in my address
at this meeting today, we hold the position that the
international presence in Kosovo and Metohija,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), is still necessary.
In addition to UNMIK, the presence of KFOR, as the
main guarantor of security, and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, due to its engagement
in the field of the rule of law, are also important.

15/10/2021

We have come a long way since then. Our story is
far from over, and much of our potential is yet to be
fulfilled. But our future is bright, and I am confident
that one day we will join Council members at this table,
part of the family of nations that today make up the
United Nations.
We have been through too much, and our sacrifice
has been too great, to take steps backwards. That is
why we look to the future with strength, courage and
confidence in ourselves and in the potential that our
young Republic holds.

I would like to emphasize once again that Serbia
fully supports respect for international law, the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the activities of UNMIK in an undiminished
scope and with adequate financial resources, so that
the mission fulfils the mandate entrusted to it under
the resolution.

As someone described it recently, Kosovo is a
beacon of hope in the region. The people of Kosovo
stand for freedom, human rights, the rule of law and
democracy. They stand for the values that make this
world a better place and values that this Organization
works hard to promote. But hope thrives only when
there is trust.

The President:
Ms. Osmani-Sadriu.

Our citizens believe in a future with greater
employment opportunities and a strengthened rule of
law. Today they believe in a Kosovo where equality,
inclusiveness and respect for all prevail — and we are
working hard to turn their expectations into reality. The
truth of the matter is that the trust of the people in their
institutions has never been higher.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Ms. Osmani-Sadriu: It is an honour to be here
with the Security Council today as the President of the
Republic of Kosovo.
Just 22 years ago, I was listening to the United
Nations meetings on the fate of our people and our
nation, while I was seeking refuge in the mountains
to avoid the shelling and the grenades of the Serbian
army against all our people. Today, 22 years later, as
the newly elected President of the Republic of Kosovo,
I have the privilege of representing my people, all the
people of Kosovo.
The truth is that I am only able to sit among Council
members today because of the determination, the
perseverance and the liberation struggle of the people
of Kosovo to see our country free from oppression and
from genocidal rule, to see our country independent
and sovereign.
That was made possible only with the help of
our allies, the ones that believed in our right to selfdetermination and our right to statehood, the ones that
stood by us in the darkest days and in the brightest. To
all of those who believed in us back then and continue
to walk with us side by side as we open new chapters
of progress, I want to take a moment to say a heartfelt
“thank you”. I thank them on behalf of all the people of
the Republic of Kosovo.
8/28

From a war-torn country to a country hit hard
by the pandemic, I can proudly say that Kosovo has
emerged as one of the most vibrant democracies in the
region. This year we are even facing the prospect of
double-digit growth in the gross domestic product.
What a potential foreign investor would find in
Kosovo today is a country with a truly talented, highly
skilled, tech-savvy and multilingual youth, where 70 per
cent of the population is under the age of 35; a country
with a system of low and extremely competitive taxes,
as well as a completely new legal infrastructure that
is compatible with European Union (EU) legislation; a
country with a 90 per cent Internet penetration rate that
has enabled us to become a tech hub in our region.
It is also worth noting that, as a historical net
importer, Kosovo’s products are becoming household
names in markets such as those of Germany, Switzerland,
Italy, the United States, the United Kingdom and many
more. Our products are even making their way to
countries such as Ukraine, India and China. And we
hope that political relations will soon reflect the existing
economic ties. In other words, Kosovo is proving to the
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

world its transformative spirit across many areas of the
economy and other sectors.
Despite being the last country in Europe to start
administering vaccines, Kosovo today is not only
vaccinating the fastest, but it has also surpassed the
region and some EU member States in the percentage
of the population that has been inoculated against the
coronavirus disease.
But above all, Kosovo is thriving in an era of
unprecedented institutional stability and trust. Our
reforms to strengthen the rule of law are being
conducted at a record level, and we hope to become an
example of effective and meritocratic governance not
just for the region, but also beyond.
I can give Council members endless statistics
about our successes, but the story of Kosovo is, and
has always been, a story of its people. Today that is
the story of three women who are now Olympic gold
medallists — Majlinda, Nora and Distria — who have
turned our young Republic, a two-time Olympic runner,
into a threefold Olympic gold medal winner.
Or indeed it is the inspiring story of Fahrije
Hoti and the women of Krusha, who are perfectly
portrayed in the film Hive — which I invite members to
watch — Kosovo’s triple-award winner at the Sundance
Film Festival, and hopefully soon to be an Oscar winner.
The film is the strongest testament to the consequences
of the war and the perfect embodiment of resilience,
survival and triumph.
Kosovo’s story is also the story of an almost 14-yearold independent country where one of the highest voted
members of Parliament is Vasfije Krasniqi, a brave
and outspoken survivor of rape during the war; where
Saranda Bogujevci, a survivor of a massacre against
her entire family, is now the Vice-President of the
Parliament; where the votes of the citizens in the last
elections produced a Parliament composed of more
women members of parliament than the EU average,
and where the country is led by a woman for the
second time. As well as endless successes at home, our
incredibly engaged and successful diaspora all over the
world continues to make us want to burst with pride.
From Dua Lipa and Rita Ora to world-renowned football
players, academics and scientists, we thank them all for
being our greatest ambassadors and showing the world
the best of Kosovo.

S/PV. 8880

Today our country is a genuine representation of a
peace-loving and peace-exporting nation. Our soldiers
serve alongside United States troops in peacekeeping
missions, and they continue to display unmatched
professionalism. In the midst of one of the biggest crises
in recent history, our people and our institutions opened
their hearts and minds to the citizens of Afghanistan
seeking refuge. That is not only a reflection of who
we are as a people, but it is also a confirmation of our
readiness to stand by our allies and actively contribute
to the international community. As former refugees
ourselves, no one better understands their suffering
than the people of Kosovo.
There is too much to share here, but for now I ask
that everyone keep their hearts and minds open to the
people of Kosovo. We will do the rest. Rest assured that
the youngest country in Europe will not only exceed
expectations and continue to strengthen its statehood,
but it will also keep making our allies proud.
As we discuss the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), I want to
take a moment to address the members of the Security
Council. UNMIK was established 22 years ago under
extremely different circumstances. Following the NATO
intervention to put a halt to Serb war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide against the people of
Kosovo, the Council authorized the establishment of an
international civilian presence to provide an interim — I
repeat, interim — administration.
The International Court of Justice, a United
Nations organ, has confirmed that the legal regime
of resolution 1244 (1999) was supposed to work only
until the final status of Kosovo was determined. That
status was determined, once and for all, on 17 February
2008, when Kosovo’s declaration of independence
was, according to the International Court of Justice, in
full compliance with international law as it was made
pursuant to the proposal of the United Nations Special
Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari.
Upon Serbia’s request, the General Assembly
asked the International Court of Justice to rule on
Kosovo’s declaration of independence. That ruling
was unequivocal: no provision of international
law was violated. Therefore, we call on Serbia to
respect international law, as we likewise call upon
those members that are still in doubt with respect to
Kosovo’s independence.

21-291239/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

The Republic of Kosovo today is a free, sovereign,
independent and increasingly prosperous country.
That should serve as sufficient evidence to make it
clear to everyone that UNMIK has not only overstayed
its mandate but is also there in contradiction to the
interpretation of the International Court of Justice.
While we thank it for its work, we urge the members
of the Security Council to put its budget to better use.
While they are using that budget, I invite them to be
impartial and not send an entirely distorted message of
what happened in the north of Kosovo, thereby showing
unprecedented bias and only contributing to tensions in
our region.
The painful irony that Kosovo is still not a State
Member of the United Nations is that it is one of the
biggest champions of peace and security in the world.
Every single citizen of our young republic understands
the devastation of war, which is something we
desperately want to avoid anywhere in the world. The
people of Kosovo are true internationalists at heart.
They want to see the world, nurture existing relations
and create new ones with people of the countries in every
corner of the world. We are passionate pro-Europeans.
We are passionately pro-NATO. We believe in a united
Europe as a political and a values-based project. We
believe in the peace and stability that NATO provides.
Equally so, we profoundly believe in a world led by
the values embodied by the United Nations. As long as
Kosovo is left out of United Nations bodies and other
international organizations, the collective effort of this
family of nations will always be one step away from
fully delivering on its mission. The common projects of
preventing future pandemics, fighting climate change,
meeting the Sustainable Development Goals and
combating international crime will be at least one step
away from being fully complete.
In that connection, I say today that is it long
overdue for Kosovo to have the support of all and to
become a member of international organizations such
as the World Health Organization, UNESCO and
INTERPOL, as well as to be given its deserved seat at
the next Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to be able
to discuss alongside all other members the common fate
of humankind.
Ultimately, we see membership of the United
Nations, its agencies and other international
organization as a coronation of our historical efforts
10/28

15/10/2021

to promote well-being, peace and security at home
and abroad. That is why those memberships are so
important to us, and why they form a key pillar of our
foreign policy efforts.
Kosovo also understands all too well that regional
cooperation is at the heart of our ambition to join the EU,
and that all such initiatives must be based on the rules
of the EU. That is why we are proud to participate in
the Western Balkans Berlin process, the only initiative
that aims to have our region join the European Union.
Let me make one thing clear, in case anyone
has any doubt. Kosovo has always been the peaceful
neighbour: a neighbour that does not use its institutions
to interfere in the internal affairs of others or to create
destabilization; a neighbour that cherishes and takes
pride in the successes of others. It is precisely in that
spirit that we see regional cooperation today.
Our region is small, but friends of Kosovo within
it are in great numbers. Those friends recognize our
struggle and our reality. They walked side by side with
us towards building on our joint achievements, and
they share our common challenges. Unfortunately,
we cannot say that is the case with Serbia, but what I
can say today is that we, as Kosovo, are committed to
making that the case with Serbia as well.
The dialogue between the Republic of Kosovo and
Serbia is designed to lead us towards meeting that goal.
Kosovo has, is and will continue to not only sit at the
table but to also actively engage in the dialogue, where
the final goal is mutual recognition. What the dialogue
is not about, though, is saving the personal career of
any politician in Serbia involved in the process. It is
not about coming up with dangerous adventures that
belong to the nineteenth century. Despite what our
counterparts may hope, it is not, and never will be,
about the status of Kosovo, which was resolved once
and for all in 2008 with the support of most members of
the Council. The dialogue is between two equal parties,
and the parties should be treated as such.
Above all, that dialogue is about the end
beneficiaries, namely, the citizens and the peoples of
both countries, improving their lives and building a more
prosperous and secure future for them. Despite having
been the victim of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, Kosovo continues to be a strong advocate
for peace and for engaging in the dialogue with Serbia
in good faith. That has been particularly clear in recent
months, as Kosovo continues to bring ideas to the table
21-29123

15/10/2021

S/PV. 8880

Kosovo

while Serbia rejects everything without engaging with
the content. Serbia must be encouraged to come to the
table with an open mind and with ideas that will move
the region forward. Most important, Serbia needs to
understand that the reality of an independent Kosovo
will never change.
Our patience will not wear thin. We will continue
to be a positive force and a constructive party to the
dialogue, presenting the interests of our country
in the best way by seeking justice for the forcibly
disappeared during the war and looking for ways to
instil sustainable peace.
If we want to be successful in that endeavour, we
need our counterpart to start implementing. Kosovo has
implemented the vast majority of the agreements — over
90 per cent, according to Brussels. With regard to the
creation of a mono-ethnic association, as specified in
the agreement signed in Brussels, that was submitted
for the seal of approval from our Constitutional Court.
However, it is that very court that ruled that the agreement
is in clear violation of our Constitution, because any
court that interprets our Constitution — a Constitution
that is founded on the idea of promoting and embracing
multi-ethnicity — cannot stand behind an agreement
that would end up doing the exact opposite.
By significant contrast, according to the
European Union itself — the guarantor and mediator
of that dialogue — Serbia has not implemented two
thirds — I repeat, two thirds — of the agreements
signed. I therefore ask Mr. Selaković not to lecture us
about non-implementation. That would not be the first
time that Serbia has ignored its legal obligations, but
how do we expect this to be a credible process if Serbia
signs agreements but never implements them?
Despite an agreement being reached in 2013, to
which Mr. Selaković referred a couple of times, the
Government in Belgrade has not yet dissolved the illegal
criminal structures that exist in northern Kosovo. They
continue to incite terror and intimidate the Kosovo
Serbs living in the north, and do not allow them to
integrate into the society of which they are part. They
also engage in challenging our institutions working to
establish the rule of law in that part of our country. Let
me be clear on this — the fight against organized crime,
whether in the north or the south, is non-negotiable and
must be uncompromising. To negotiate and compromise
with crime is to become a part of it.

This Wednesday’s rule-of-law efforts by Kosovo’s
multi-ethnic police institutions can under no
circumstances be labelled as action in the north,
because it was action in all parts of Kosovo, against
persons of various ethnicities, who had one thing in
common — they were directly engaged in smuggling
and organized crime. Let me inform the Council of the
reality of that effort under the rule of law.
The prosecutor and the judge who carried out the
investigation into organized crime were both Serbs, and
so are most of the police officers in the north. While
eight Kosovo citizens were arrested, out of them six
were Kosovo Albanians, one was Bosnian and only one
was Serb. Both the NATO Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the United States and other Quint Embassies have been
clear that that was a rule-of law-action against organized
crime all over Kosovo. Since we were quoting, let me
clarify the real public position of KFOR.
According to KFOR,
“the operation took place in several municipalities,
including those in the north. In terms of
approvals, the Kosovo police has full authority
and responsibility for exercising rule-of-law
actions. When executing them, it does not need
additional permission”.
Let me also quote the United States. According to
the United States, it is concerned about
“the response against the police action, which
was in favour of the rule of law all over Kosovo.
The violence directed towards the police, [the]
media and citizens is unacceptable and needs to
be addressed”.
According to the United Kingdom,
“acting against organized crime is in the interests
of all citizens of Kosovo. We support the Kosovo
Government in upholding the rule of law throughout
the country. Efforts to obstruct that action with
violence, as well as the inflammatory rhetoric,
only serves to aid those seeking to create divisions
between communities in Kosovo”.
According to Germany — obviously after the
statements of the Serbs:
“stop [comparing] today’s police action with
Kristallnacht; it is unacceptable. Such comparisons
contribute to narratives of Holocaust distortion and
denial. Protect the facts.

21-2912311/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

That is exactly what I am doing here — protecting
the facts. I also invite the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to include those quotes in his
next report.
There is a crucial difference between what used to
obtain in the past and what is happening now in our
rule-of-law efforts. This type of crime has always been
multi-ethnic. Crime, especially organized crime, has
no ethnicity. However, what is different now is that
the fight against such crime is multi-ethnic. Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb police officers, alongside
one another, are fighting organized crime. Serb judges,
Albanian judges, Serb prosecutors and Albanian
prosecutors are fighting organized crime alongside
one another. That is the difference — the fight against
organized crime is multi-ethnic, and that is why it will
be successful.
However, there is more to it. We witness threats
from Serbia’s illegal structures in the north and their
violence regularly in the everyday lives of Kosovo
Serbs. Perhaps the most concerning is that we have
witnessed and evidenced during the past few elections,
also detailed in the reports of the European Union, as
well as those of the United States Department of State.
When it comes to the agreement on licence plates,
unfortunately, throughout the past decade, Serbia never
upheld its end of the bargain. It instead forced citizens
of the Republic of Kosovo to remove their licence plates
in a derogatory and dehumanizing way every single
time they crossed the border.
When that agreement expired, Kosovo introduced
the principle of reciprocity, as provided in the agreement
itself. In return, Serbia used its illegal structures to
incite violence and commit acts of terrorism as its
citizens burned down public property and attacked
with explosives. Meanwhile, they approached military
vehicles and Russian combat aircraft a mere one
kilometre away from our border. In an unprecedented,
unnecessary and hostile act, the Russian Ambassador
to Belgrade, alongside his military attaché,
nonetheless showed up to give Serbian troops words of
encouragement. In the twenty-first century, what socalled peace-loving nation threatens stability in such a
flagrant manner?
Our history does not begin at the negotiation table
in Brussels. We are all old enough to remember the
sheer destruction and devastation that took place during
the 1990s in the Western Balkans. It is no coincidence
12/28

15/10/2021

that Serbia’s efforts to bring about instability occur
simultaneously throughout Kosovo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Montenegro. That plan has an author,
and its name is the Serbian Government. That should
raise alarm bells around the world, in particular for
allies who worked with us to bring peace to our region.
Vučić talks in plain and clear language when he
expresses his ambitious and dangerous ideals. He
makes no attempt to hide his admiration for his former
boss, the Butcher of the Balkans, Slobodan Milošević.
According to him,
“Milošević was a great Serbian leader whose
intentions were certainly for the best, but the
results were poor”.
Let me talk about the results of that regime.
Approximately 140,000 innocent people lost their lives
during the Milošević genocidal wars in the former
Yugoslavia. In Kosovo, more than 13,000 people
brutally murdered, 20,000 women were raped, and
more than 1,600 people were forcibly disappeared and
are still missing to this day. They are in mass graves in
Serbia. We have the highest number of children lost per
capita, if we compare the statistics to those of any other
war in the former Yugoslavia. More than 1 million
Albanians were ethnically cleansed from their homes
in Kosovo.
What happened in Kosovo and in our region
happened in front of the eyes of the Council and the
eyes of the world. No single attempt by Serbia to deny
those crimes or revise history will ever be successful
so long as we have a voice. However, the words “never
forget” should not be just a slogan. We should never
forget the true face and real aims of the Serbian regime.
Unfortunately, Milošević’s ministers are ruling the
country today. Their strategy might have changed, but
their goals remain the same, aided by pure propaganda
similar to that heard today.
When Vučić talks about “the ability to shoot targets
from a distance of nine kilometres, deep within enemy
territory”, he does not mean just Kosovo. Within that
perimeter there are eight countries of the region, six of
them NATO members. When he talks about creating a
Serbian world, he means Greater Serbia — words that
members all heard during the 1990s.
It is not enough to profess a belief in European
ideals, but mass produce ethnic division and hatred
across the Balkans.
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

S/PV. 8880

It is not enough to profess a belief in human rights
while systematically abusing the rights of minorities
through passivation in Presevo Valley and other areas
of majority Albanian population. Passivation is ethnic
cleansing through administrative means. It is not
enough to profess belief in the rule of law but show no
signs of fighting crime and corruption. It is not enough
to preach freedom of expression but strongly exercise
media control.

yourself the progress that we have made and witness
first-hand the warmth of the people of Kosovo.

We have a cancer at the heart of Europe, fuelled by
a fascist desire to create a Serbian world, aided by their
ally, Russia. Unless we all wake up to that fact urgently,
I fear that we will witness a resurgence of Serbia’s
aggression. Kosovo’s independence is permanent and
irreversible, and the sooner everyone comes to terms
with that reality, the better it will be for peace and
stability, not only in our region, not only in Europe, but
for the world as well. The Republic of Kosovo’s right to
exist cannot be denied; it cannot be stopped; and, most
importantly, it cannot be ignored. The majority of the
world has recognized our young republic; the time has
come for the rest of it to do so.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.

In the words of Judge Trindade of Brazil, a judge
at the international Court of Justice (ICJ) when it
decided on our declaration of independence and who
commented on Serbia’s crimes in Kosovo:
“States exist for human beings and not vice versa.
Serbia cannot invoke territorial integrity to commit
grave breaches of international humanitarian law
and then try to use this as a shield or shelter to
escape from the reach of law and to enjoy impunity
after shocking the conscience of humankind”.
He continued:
“An international organization like the United
Nations, created on behalf of the peoples of the
world, is fully entitled to help the people of Kosovo
in becoming masters of their own destiny, since
in this way the United Nations would be acting in
pursuance of its own Charter”.
It has been more than a decade since Judge Trindade,
as part of the ICJ, ruled on Kosovo’ declaration of
independence and its compliance with international
law. Since then, the people of Kosovo truly have been
the masters of their own destiny. So I urge my dear
friends to come and talk to us, to hear our side of the
story, to see the truth and nothing but the truth, to visit
the independent Republic of Kosovo and to see for

The Republic of Kosovo is here to commit to joining
all present in facing and addressing the new challenges
that lie ahead and to jointly celebrate new successes as
they come our way as part of the United Nations family.
The President: I thank Ms. Osmani-Sadriu for
her briefing.

Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank his
Excellency Mr. Nikola Selaković for his statement and
Mr. Zahir Tanin and Ms. Vjosa Osmani-Sadriu for
their briefings.
My delegation welcomes the positive political
dynamic prompted by the legislative elections of
14 February as well as the general policy statement
of the new Kosovo Government, which prioritizes
the management of the coronavirus disease pandemic
and the tackling of socioeconomic challenges. The
normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina requires the constructive engagement of the
parties in the process of dialogue. In order to achieve
a positive outcome, the parties must show political will
and resolve to make mutual concessions.
My delegation expresses its deep-rooted concern
at the resurgence of tensions and incidents affecting
religious and cultural sites. Hostility towards the return
of displaced persons also represents an aspect that
should be granted particular attention. To that end, we
encourage the implementation of specific measures
to protect religious sites and call for respect for the
protection of the rights of displaced and repatriated
persons, as well as for their social reintegration in the
safest and most dignified conditions possible.
Consideration of the women and peace and security
dimension is a key factor in the success of a peace
process. That is why we call on the Kosovo authorities
to guarantee the full and effective participation of
women in political processes and in all aspects of
socio-political life.
To conclude, my delegation encourages the adoption
of measures aimed at strengthening the rule of law,
human rights and social inclusion in the implementation
of the Government’s reform programme. We call
on Belgrade and Pristina to step up their efforts to

21-2912313/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

prevent any stalling of the dialogue. We commend the
commitment of regional and international actors to
support both parties on the path towards a peaceful and
lasting settlement.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too, wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing. I also welcome the participation
of the President of Kosovo and of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
The resolution of the dispute between Belgrade and
Pristina is a European security issue; recent tensions in
north Kosovo are a reminder of that. In that regard, we
welcome the interim arrangement arrived at in Brussels
on 30 September under the auspices of the Special
Representative of the European Union, Miroslav
Lajčák, and we urge both parties to arrive at a lasting
solution to this issue.
The crisis is a further illustration of the fact that
there is no path for either Serbia or Kosovo other
than reaching a comprehensive, definitive and legally
binding agreement to lastingly resolve the dispute
between the two countries.
We call on Belgrade and Pristina to pursue, in a
constructive manner and in a spirit of compromise,
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union. It is
important to refrain from any unilateral action that
could undermine that dialogue.
The agreements arrived in the framework of
dialogue since 2011 have provided tangible benefits
for the population, and they remain fully relevant and
binding. We urge both parties to respect and implement
all their obligations in the context of dialogue without
further delay. The President of the French Republic,
Emmanuel Macron, is fully committed to that end
in support of the facilitation efforts of the Special
Representative of the European Union.
We also voice our support for the reform efforts
undertaken by the Government of Kosovo, specifically
as concerns the fight against corruption; the rule of law;
and economic and social development. We commend
the adoption of the strategy for strengthening the rule
of law for the period 2021-2026. Those efforts are vital
for European rapprochement, as is mobilization for the
participation of women on an equal footing in political
and social life for respect for human rights. We call for
continued efforts to combat impunity and for continued
14/28

15/10/2021

cooperation with the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and
the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office.
We thank Mr. Tanin for his efforts at the helm of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the past six years, in
coordination with other regional and international
stakeholders, specifically the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo. UNMIK continues to advance
security, stability, the strengthening of the rule of
law and respect for human rights in Kosovo and in
the region.
France is firmly of the view that Serbia and Kosovo
have a shared European future. The European Union
is the leading commercial trade partner, the leading
investor and the leading donor to both countries. It
has demonstrated its mobilization specifically in the
fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina is vital for the lasting stabilization of the
Western Balkans and to the European rapprochement
of both countries. France will remain committed to this
issue, in support of both parties and the mediation of
the European Union.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to join
colleagues in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Selaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia.
Let me begin by reiterating India’s principled
position of supporting the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Serbia. We believe that all outstanding
issues need to be resolved through peaceful negotiations.
In this regard, we take note of the meetings held in
recent months between Serbia and authorities in Pristina
under the auspices of the European Union. However,
there was no outcome from these meetings.
It is important that meetings are held without any
preconditions. Both sides need to resume the dialogue
in good faith. Both sides need to implement alreadysigned agreements, including on the establishment of an
association of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo,
and find common ground to overcome unresolved
political, ethnic and other issues.
We are concerned about the recent developments,
and it is important to de-escalate tensions through
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

engagement and dialogue. The issue of missing persons
is an important humanitarian aspect, and we hope that,
with the support of UNMIK, the authorities will be able
to determine the fate of persons who are still missing.
The voluntary and safe return of internally displaced
persons from other countries in the region is also
essential as a confidence-building measure. UNMIK
should continue to work with other international
presences to encourage the Pristina authorities to
address the concerns of all communities.
We have taken note of the activities of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) during
the reporting period as a further part of an international
cooperation effort. We have also noted that Kosovo
Force troops from 20 NATO and 8 non-NATO troopcontributing countries have continued to effectively
fulfil their mandate under resolution 1244 (1999). Their
close tactical cooperation with police authorities in
Pristina and EULEX has contributed to overall safety
and security.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation that UNMIK has continued to implement
its mandate of promoting security, stability and respect
for human rights in the region. We call on all parties to
fully cooperate with UNMIK and facilitate its work.
Ms. Farrey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative for his briefing
and for his service to the international community
and the people of Kosovo over the past six years. We
also welcome the participation of Her Excellency the
President of Kosovo and His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, which signals the importance both
attach to a stable, secure and prosperous future for the
region and all of its people.
While there have been recent challenges to
intercommunity relations in Kosovo, we note the
overall positive trajectory of the situation in Kosovo
set out in Mr. Tanin’s briefing and in the Secretary
General’s most recent report (S/2021/861). At the last
meeting of the Security Council on this topic, we
welcomed the handling of parliamentary elections by
the Kosovo authorities and the successful formation of
a new Government (see S/2021/370). Today’s meeting
takes place just ahead of local elections, which begin
on 17 October, after preparations that have been
managed effectively.
As we did in April, we wish to register our concern
at reports of intimidation of Kosovo Serb voters.

S/PV. 8880

Everyone in Kosovo has the right to participate in free
and fair elections without fear of intimidation. Similarly,
we also wish to express concern at the intimidation of
Kosovar Serb non-governmental organizations that
work with Kosovo institutions and of individuals who
seek to join Kosovo’s multi-ethnic institutions.
We welcome the steps taken by the Kosovo
authorities on a number of issues in the reporting
period. In line with its priorities, the Kosovo
Government has made progress in strengthening the
rule of law, particularly through the endorsement of a
regional anti-corruption and illicit finance road map
and the signing off on the “Functional Review of the
Rule of Law” strategy. The Government has also made
strong progress towards its target of vaccinating 60 per
cent of the population against the coronavirus disease
virus. Finally, we wish to highlight and welcome the
significant contribution made by Kosovo to NATO’s
evacuation efforts in Afghanistan. There is of course
always more to be done, and we urge the Kosovo
authorities working with all of Kosovo’s communities
to redouble their efforts on this path.
We welcome the support provided by the United
Nations over the past six months, in particular the
Mission’s work on returns of displaced persons and
tackling gender-based violence. We should also
highlight the news of the first successful conflictrelated sexual violence prosecution in July, which is a
big step forward for both survivors and for the domestic
prosecution of war crimes.
The Mission, together with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Kosovo Force, play a valuable role in documenting
inter-ethnic incidents and attacks on cultural heritage
in Kosovo. The United Kingdom condemns all
ethnically motivated violence. Likewise, we condemn
all attacks on religious sites, including churches and
mosques. We welcome the reduction in such incidents
as reported by the OSCE and hope soon to see an end to
all such incidents.
We emphasize our continued strong support for the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU) between
Serbia and Kosovo under EU Special Representative
Miroslav Lajčák, working towards a comprehensive
and sustainable normalization agreement that will
benefit the people of both countries. We encourage both
parties to honour their dialogue commitments, engage
in the dialogue in good faith and in the interests of all

21-2912315/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

communities, and avoid actions and rhetoric that could
escalate tensions and lead to unintended consequences,
including violence. We welcome the recent agreement
brokered in Brussels by EU Special Representative
Lajčák, look forward to the start of talks in Brussels
next week and urge commitment from both sides to find
a resolution that ensures freedom of movement.
Over the years, UNMIK has done vital work in
helping Kosovo develop into a stable and inclusive
democracy. Kosovo has made huge progress since 1999,
when resolution 1244 (1999) was agreed, and conditions
on the ground are now very different. It is right for
there to be a review of the role and responsibilities of
UNMIK, which will help it operate more effectively
and better address contemporary challenges.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Special
Representative Tanin for his detailed briefing. We
commend him and the entire United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) team for
the support provided to the people of Kosovo in stabilizing
the situation in the region, mitigating the challenges
related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and addressing the socioeconomic needs within the
country for communities made most vulnerable.
We also express appreciation for UNMIK and the
United Nations team in their constructive engagement
with women and youth in Kosovo, particularly through
trust-building initiatives and those aimed at promoting
the fight against gender-based violence. We take note
of the meetings held in Brussels between the European
Union (EU) High Representative, Mr. Josep Borrell, the
EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue, Miroslav Lajčák, the Prime Minister of
Kosovo and the Serbian President.
My delegation welcomes the resumption of the
EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
after a prolonged suspension. The normalization of
relations between the parties is crucial to the stability
of the region, and we encourage the sides to continue
their engagement constructively in good faith and build
on the progress towards a peaceful solution achieved
so far.
We regret recent tensions stemming from issues
surrounding license plates, and we condemn the
incidents of vandalization of religious and cultural sites,
as mentioned in the report of the Secretary General
(S/2021/861). We call for unified actions to address
16/28

15/10/2021

the issues. Further, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
encourages the Government of Serbia and the authorities
in Kosovo to maintain the principles of the rule of law
and good governance, uphold fundamental freedoms
and promote protection and respect for human rights.
At the same time, we take this opportunity to
reiterate the significance of women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in the political and peace
processes and the COVID-19 response. We encourage
greater participation by women and youth in those
processes.
We conclude by reaffirming our support for the
critical work that UNMIK continues to do to fully
implement its mandate in Kosovo to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Tanin for his briefing and all his team for their
valuable work. I would like to underline at the outset
Ireland’s strong support for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also
want to thank President Osmani-Sadriu and Minister
Selaković for being here today.
As we know from experience, building peace takes
time and ongoing and open channels of communication.
Ireland supports the Secretary-General’s call on both
sides to engage constructively in the renewed dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. That European Union
(EU)-facilitated dialogue, mandated by the United
Nations, is the channel through which issues and
tensions between Kosovo and Serbia can, and should,
be resolved. We continue to see the value of dialogue,
including at the end of September when an arrangement
was reached to resolve the tensions in the north of
Kosovo. We urge both sides to commit to a concerted
and sincere effort to progress the EU-facilitated
dialogue. We call on leaders in both Serbia and Kosovo
to refrain from further divisive rhetoric and actions.
All agreements reached under the dialogue since
its beginning 10 years ago need to be implemented
without delay. There have been concrete gains that have
improved the daily lives of people in Kosovo, and those
must not be squandered; there cannot be a reset. Both
sides have a responsibility to respect and implement
the obligations that they have assumed under the
dialogue. A comprehensive, final and legally binding
normalization agreement is essential to the European
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

perspective of both Serbia and Kosovo and for wider
stability in the Western Balkans region.
Kosovo, like many others, continues to be impacted
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We greatly appreciate UNMIK’s role in supporting
Kosovo’s COVID-19 response, particularly through the
assistance that the Mission gives to the most vulnerable
in Kosovo.
We value UNMIK’s work on the promotion of gender
equality, including by progressing the women and peace
and security and youth and peace and security agendas.
UNMIK’s work on gender-based violence within all
communities is especially significant. Gender-based
violence in Kosovo has risen year on year since 2016.
Although steps have been taken to prevent and combat
violence against women and girls, more must be done.
Ireland welcomes the record intake of women
members elected to Parliament earlier this year and
the level of women’s representation in the Government
overall. However, the gains made by women at the
national level have yet to trickle down to the local level.
Less than 8 per cent of candidates running for mayoral
posts in the upcoming municipal elections are women.
Women do not yet have the support of, or access to,
the resources that they need to run for office at the
local level. The barriers preventing their participation
in political life and in the vital work of building peace
must be dismantled without delay.
The people of Kosovo voted for change earlier
this year and for an agenda of rule-of-law and
anti-corruption reforms, which the new Government
has set about tackling. We hope that the coming months
will see a reinvigoration of, and delivery on, the EU
reform agenda, particularly rule-of-law reforms.
In that context, I also wish to underline Ireland’s
support for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers. It is
Ireland’s view that countering impunity for past crimes
is essential in preventing future violations. It is vital that
the authorities in Kosovo adhere to their commitments
to the Specialist Chambers.
UNMIK continues to play an important role
through its trust-building projects, bringing together
members of different communities, in particular young
people. UNMIK supports the most vulnerable and
marginalized communities in Kosovo. Of particular
note is UNMIK’s work on missing persons. Progress
on the issue can provide much-needed comfort and

S/PV. 8880

solace to families of the missing and is an indispensable
step in the process of reconciliation in Kosovo. It is
important to building confidence between Kosovo
and Serbia. We greatly value that and other aspects of
UNMIK’s work. We wish Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin and his team all the best in the
next phase of their mission.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would also like to thank
Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his comprehensive briefing and for leading
the work of United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well as President
Osmani-Sadriu and Foreign Minister Selaković for
their statements.
With the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic still heavily affecting Kosovo, we appreciate
UNMIK’s support for Kosovo’s local authorities and
communities in alleviating the challenges caused by
the pandemic, including the delivery of COVID-19related humanitarian assistance and medical equipment
to meet the needs of persons in vulnerable situations.
We also commend UNMIK for its continued
support to strengthening Kosovo’s rule of law and
democratic institutions.
We welcome Kosovo’s continued strategic
commitment to its European path and encourage
further progress. That includes taking forward reforms,
particularly in the area of the rule of law, and the fight
against corruption and organized crime, as well as
promoting further socioeconomic development. We
support the work of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers
and the Specialist Prosecutor’s Office. Full cooperation
with those institutions remains essential as an important
demonstration of Kosovo’s commitment to the rule of
law. In that regard, we would like to emphasize that the
European Union (EU) Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
should continue its monitoring and advisory role to the
relevant rule-of-law institutions in Kosovo.
We welcome the agreement reached by the parties
on 30 September, under the facilitation of EU Special
Representative Miroslav Lajčák and following the
active engagement by the EU High Representative
Josep Borrell and the United States special envoy
Gabriel Escobar, to de-escalate the situation in the
north of Kosovo. Any further provocations or tensions
that endanger stability are unacceptable and must be
avoided. The EU-facilitated dialogue is the only way
forward for Kosovo and Serbia to address and resolve

21-2912317/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

all open issues. In order to make good progress on
the normalization of relations, it is crucial that both
countries fully respect and implement all previous
agreements reached in the dialogue.
With regard to the municipal elections on
17 October in Kosovo, we trust that the process will be
inclusive, credible and transparent and, as a result, will
help to take forward further necessary future electoral
reform efforts.
Finally, I would like to echo the Secretary-General’s
words on the International Day of Peace:
“[M]istrust and division are driving people apart at
a time when solidarity and collaboration are needed
more than ever ... We must choose peace ... It is ...
the only pathway to a better future.”
We therefore call on Serbia and Kosovo to refrain from
any unilateral action or divisive rhetoric that could
raise tensions and to engage in good faith, in a spirit
of compromise, and work on reaching a comprehensive
agreement on the normalization of relations. Such an
agreement would contribute to the stability of the whole
region and allow people to work together in order to
advance their common regional goals.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank Special Representative Tanin
for his briefing. We appreciate his leadership and
dedicated support for the Republic of Kosovo, including
for addressing the continued challenges caused by
the coronavirus disease pandemic. I also want to
thank President Osmani-Sadriu and Foreign Minister
Selaković for participating in today’s meeting.
I want to begin by welcoming the 30 September
agreement over license plate issues between Kosovo
and Serbia, as brokered by European Union (EU)
Special Representative Lajčák. The agreement is a step
forward for Kosovo, Serbia and stability in the Western
Balkans. It is evidence that, when leaders engage openly
and seriously, they can find common ground, benefiting
all of their citizens. We encourage Kosovo and Serbia
to continue building on that progress by implementing
the agreement, honouring prior agreements, refraining
from provocations and recommitting to finding
solutions to other issues through the EU-facilitated
dialogue. The dialogue remains the best platform to
resolve outstanding issues and normalize relations,
eventually reaching agreement on mutual recognition.
18/28

15/10/2021

We note that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) did
not play a critical role in resolving recent tensions
between Kosovo and Serbia over the license plate
issue. The de-escalation of this issue, with temporary
support provided by the Kosovo Force, shows that other
organizations can serve that role to better effect. Recent
events again demonstrated that UNMIK has fulfilled its
purpose, as outlined in the original mandate. We should
acknowledge that reality and move towards its closure.
The Security Council has a responsibility to
redirect its attention and resources to areas and issues
where they are needed most. The United Nations
can still play an important role in furthering of the
development of democratic norms and institutions in
the region. But that role does not require sustaining a
peacekeeping mission in Kosovo. The United States
expressed disappointment that prior calls from Council
members to review and take steps to end the Mission
have gone unheeded. We again call for the development
of such a plan so that the Council can sunset UNMIK
and help transition to a more effective United Nations
presence that helps Kosovo and the rest of the Western
Balkans realize their full potential.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the full
and equal participation of women in political processes
in Kosovo and encourage the Government to continue
to invest in women’s advancement within civil society.
In conclusion, the United States remains fully
committed to preserving stability in the Western
Balkans. We will work closely with our European
partners to foster peaceful, prosperous, multi-ethnic
societies that respect the rule of law across the
Western Balkans.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
on the situation in the province and for his views in that
regard. On the whole, we agree with the assessments of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/861).
We welcome the participation in this meeting by
Mr. Nikola Selaković, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia. Today we once again listened to a propaganda
pamphlet from Ms. Vjosa Osmani-Sadriu about a
peaceful, multi-ethnic Kosovo that has achieved
extraordinary success on the road to democracy and
prosperity. This fairy tale is at odds with reality.
Ms. Osmani-Sadriu relayed her version of what has
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

transpired in Kosovo over the past month. We are not
persuaded by her account; she is misleading the Security
Council and the entire international community. Her
fiery rhetoric will not change the evident facts.
The situation in the northern regions of the Serb
Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija is of
great concern, as it has worsened considerably over the
past month.
In late September, the Kosovo authorities artificially
inflamed tensions in the north of the province, leading
to the blocking of traffic across the administrative
border. Kosovo Albanian special forces, armoured
vehicles and heavy weaponry were deployed in the
Serb-populated area. There were civilian casualties
as a result. Thanks to the mediation of the European
Union (EU), the matter appeared settled. However, no
sooner had the ink dried on the agreements reached,
than new egregious incidents took place on 13 October,
when Kosovo special police forces carried out violent
raids on shops and drug stores in Kosovska Mitrovica
and Zvečan, firing guns, tear gas and stun grenades at
civilians. Dozens of people were wounded as a result.
We view such actions by Pristina as a manifestation
of a deliberate policy of escalation aimed at intimidating
and pressuring native Serbs in order to drive them
out of Kosovo. It is also clear that such sabre-rattling
also has a domestic political dimension. National
radicalism sells well ahead of the municipal elections
of 17 October. The number of attacks on native Serbs
and other non-Albanians, as well as attacks on their
property, are also on the rise — nearly double the
amount reported in 2020.
We welcome Belgrade’s responsible stance in
responding to Kosovo Albanian outrage. Belgrade
has continued to comply with all its obligations under
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kumanovo Military
Technical Agreement, and it has embraced good-faith
dialogue in order to resolve the dispute under the
auspices of the EU.
Regrettably, our Western colleagues are shying
away from giving fair public assessments to the current
developments. They continue to call for restraint on
both sides, even though it is specifically the Kosovar
leaders who are issuing ultimatums for Belgrade to
recognize Kosovo’s independence and pay reparations
of sorts. Western countries have also failed to condemn
the “Great Albanian” campaign in Tirana and Pristina.
The support of some countries for measures to create a

S/PV. 8880

Kosovo army is a serious problem. Such ideas should be
definitively quashed, and the unacceptable rhetoric in
that regard should be clearly qualified as such.
The incoherent response of Western colleagues
mentoring and practically indulging Pristina gives the
latter a feeling of impunity and will inevitably spiral
towards open confrontation. In that connection, we
wish to recall that responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security in the province lies with NATO’s
Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo.
We believe that recent developments in Kosovo, as
well as Pristina’s overt policy of refusing to prioritize
a negotiated solution, is a very dangerous trend.
In recent months Pristina twice — on 15 June and
19 July — derailed the European Union-facilitated highlevel dialogue with Belgrade. There is no doubt that this
new tactic — armed provocations — is also aimed at
undermining the negotiation process, especially since
the next round is to be dedicated to the establishment of
the community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo — a
commitment that Pristina has failed to honour since 2013.
We wish to recall the unique responsibility of the
European Union, which the General Assembly vested
with mediator functions in 2010. Brussels must therefore
conduct the dialogue impartially and ensure that the
parties unconditionally comply with the obligations
that it helped to formulate. Brussels’ credibility as a
mediator is at stake. Our American colleagues also
have an important role to play, insofar as they have
unique influence to bear on Pristina. We hope that they
will help Pristina understand that there is only one way
to resolve the Kosovo problem: through negotiations.
The Russian Federation firmly supports the
achievement of a viable and mutually acceptable
solution between Belgrade and Priština on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999). Such a solution, first and
foremost, must be in line with international law and
have the approval of the Security Council, as it is a
matter of international peace and security.
For the same reason, we object to the admittance
of Kosovo in international organizations. The right
to represent the province belongs exclusively to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
We support the continuation of the steady progress
of the Specialist Court in The Hague in investigating

21-2912319/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation Army. Twenty-two
years since the outbreak of armed conflict, it is past
time for justice to be done for the countless innocent
victims of Kosovo Albanian extremists.
Unfortunately, justice has still not prevailed in
the case of the attack, on 28 May 2019, by Kosovo
Albanian police officers against Russian UNMIK
officer Mr. Krasnoshchekov. Against the backdrop
of the constant prioritizing of the absolute safety of
United Nations staff members by the Security Council
and the Secretariat, the delays in that case are all the
more egregious.
Unfortunately, the judicial system in Kosovo
itself continues to malfunction. That is evident in the
unlawful rulings of the Court of Appeals vis-à-vis one
of the leaders of the Kosovo Serbs, Ivan Todosijević,
head of the Zvečan municipality, which upheld his
conviction in violation of the Brussels Agreement.

15/10/2021

Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, understand
Serbia’s legitimate concerns on the issue of Kosovo and
commend it for its efforts to find a political solution to
the Kosovo issue. We support both parties in working
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) to find
a solution acceptable to both parties through genuine
dialogue and consultation.
For some time, Kosovo’s continued unilateral
actions have led to an escalation in tensions. China is
concerned about that. Dialogue and consultation are the
only solution for the Kosovo issue. Unilateral actions
are not conducive to peace and stability in Kosovo and
the region, and neither are they in the interests of any
side. That is the common consensus in the international
community. China hopes the parties concerned will
avoid taking such actions and make efforts to prevent
similar incidents from happening in future.

The situation of the Serb minority in Kosovo
remains is alarming. As a consequence, there is a low
rate of return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to the province. There is an urgent need to
address the problem of Pristina’s certification of Serbian
companies that will supply and distribute electricity in
northern Kosovo. As the cold weather sets in, that is an
issue of vital importance to the Serbs in the province.

Since June, Serbia and Kosovo have conducted
two rounds of high-level talks, facilitated by the
European Union, which China welcomes. At the same
time, we regret the fact that the high-level talks did
not yield any results. China would like to encourage
both sides to continue the dialogue. We commend
Serbia’s willingness to actively engage in dialogue
and hope the international community can create a
favourable environment.

We note the relentless attacks on centuries-old
Serbian cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo. In
that connection, we welcome the decision taken by
UNESCO specialized agencies to preserve the Serbian
Orthodox Church sites on the list of endangered sites.

Resolution 1244 (1999) provides the political and
legal basis for solving the Kosovo issue. Any actions
or rhetoric that go beyond resolution 1244 (1999) might
lead the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo off the
right track and delay a final solution to the Kosovo issue.

Under these unfortunate circumstances, the work of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo remains urgently
needed. We support the maintenance of agreed-upon
budgetary and staffing capacity for UNMIK and the
agreed frequency and format of open briefings in the
Security Council on the issue of Kosovo. We also hope
that all of the challenges facing the Mission will be
reflected in the next report of the Secretary-General.

The effective implementation of existing
agreements can help the parties to build mutual trust
and inject momentum into solving pending issues.
Kosovo should uphold the Brussels Agreement and
effectively promote the establishment of the association
of Serb-majority municipalities at an early date.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin for his briefing and welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Selaković. I also listened to the statement
by Ms. Osmani-Sadriu.
China’s position on the Kosovo issue has been
consistent. I would like to reiterate that we respect
20/28

Inclusive reconciliation and harmonious coexistence
among all ethnic groups in Kosovo is in the
fundamental interests of all ethnicities and would meet
their development needs as well. Since the beginning
of this year, incidents of discrimination, attacks and
harassment targeting ethnic minorities in Kosovo have
been on the rise, and there is an increase in tension
among ethnic groups. China hopes that relevant parties
will take active and effective measures to protect the
safety, legitimate rights and interests of Kosovo Serbs,
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

promote national unity and lay a solid foundation for a
final solution to the Kosovo issue.
Recent developments in this situation show that the
Kosovo issue remains a potential security risk in the
Balkans and South-East Europe. The Security Council
should maintain its attention on the Kosovo issue. The
role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) remains very important.
China commends the work of UNMIK, under
the leadership of Special Representative Tanin, and
supports UNMIK in playing a major role, in accordance
with its mandate, in maintaining Kosovo’s peace
and stability, responding to the coronavirus disease
pandemic, promoting national reconciliation and
facilitating the return of displaced persons. We support
the provision of adequate resources to UNMIK for the
implementation of its mandate.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative
briefing. I would like to welcome Mr. Nikola Selaković,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
to this meeting and thank him for his statement. I also
take note of the statement by Ms. Osmani-Sadriu.
Viet Nam welcomes the resumption of the highlevel dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina under
the facilitation of the European Union (EU), after a
nine-month hiatus, and the readiness by the two parties
to continue discussions at the technical level to explore
opportunities for further high-level talks. At the same
time, it is regrettable that no significant progress has
been made owing to divergent views on both sides.
On the overall situation, we underscore the
importance of peaceful dialogue and reaching a durable
solution between Belgrade and Pristina, in accordance
with the fundamental principles of international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and resolution
1244 (1999), for the peace, stability and long-term
development of Belgrade and Pristina, the Balkans
and Europe. We therefore urge the parties to build on
recent commitments, resume high-level talks under the
EU-facilitated dialogue and implement already signed
agreements, including the Brussels Agreement.
Having closely followed the situation on the
ground, we are also concerned by the escalation of
border tensions over the issue of license plates in late

S/PV. 8880

September and take note of the subsequent agreement on
temporary measures. While being beyond the reporting
period, those developments are worth mentioning
because of their underlying causes and the way the two
sides deal with their differences. We hope that Belgrade
and Pristina will respect the agreement reached and
work together to find a permanent solution to the issue.
Finally, we commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
important role it continues to play in the promotion
of security and stability in the area and trust and
confidence-building measures between communities,
as well as its engagement with Belgrade and Pristina.
As reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/861), UNMIK’s work in cooperation
with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and international partners is crucial to supporting
communities in Kosovo in responding to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and medical equipment to
persons in vulnerable situations and the distribution
of COVID-19 testing materials, as well as infection
detection, training and control. We encourage the
international community to continue to support those
efforts, as well as UNMIK’s objectives and mandates
in the promotion of security and stability in Kosovo.
Ms. Syed (Norway): Let me first thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his briefing
and welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/861).
The report describes progress in some areas, but a
slow pace in fighting political instability. In that regard,
combating corruption and ensuring the independence of
the judiciary should be central. While we commend the
increased efforts towards ensuring accountability and
note with appreciation that the working group tasked
with drafting a strategy for transitional justices has
begun, we remain concerned about de facto impunity
for perpetrators of violence. We urge Kosovo’s leaders
to capitalize on the momentum from this year’s election
and to consolidate the rule of law, combat corruption
and protect human rights.
All actors need to engage fully in important
high-level political processes such as the European
Union-facilitated dialogue with Serbia. We encourage
the parties to strengthen dialogue and to engage
constructively based on the Brussels Agreement while
exercising pragmatism in finding mutually acceptable

21-2912321/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

compromises and respecting the commitments they
have already undertaken. A permanent solution to the
vehicle plate issue would be a step in the right direction.
An agreement between Kosovo and Serbia on the full
normalization of relations is key to avoiding a frozen
conflict and to achieving economic development. That
is paramount to the future development of Kosovo and
the region.
The negative socioeconomic and political impacts
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on Kosovo have
been significant. We see worrisome trends of growing
unemployment, continued loss of income, setbacks
within the health and education sectors and an increase
in domestic violence. Therefore, democratization,
the protection of human rights, the strengthening of
the rule of law and the freedom of expression and the
fight against domestic and gender-based violence are
fundamental to social transformation.
We echo the Secretary-General’s concerns about
the incidents of gender-based and domestic violence
in Kosovo and welcome the ongoing efforts of
Government institutions, civil society and international
organizations to address those issues, including those
jointly implemented by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and other United
Nations entities. Further progress to fight gender-based
violence, ensure property rights and ease the impact
of the pandemic on women and girls is essential for
Kosovo’s development into a democratic, multi-ethnic
and prosperous society.
We know women are key to peace. We call on
parties to ensure women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in all aspects of dialogue and
peacebuilding. The increased representation of women
in Parliament and in the current Government should
serve as inspiration for the full inclusion of women in
the peace dialogue.
The question of a review of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has been
raised. In our opinion, although the Mission has
adapted well in meeting new challenges, including the
COVID-19 pandemic, we would support looking at
possible efficiency improvements.
Let me conclude by reiterating that there is no
alternative to the European Union (EU)-led process. It
needs our full support. Norway will continue to work
closely with EU institutions, key EU member States and
the United States. We call on the parties to comply with
22/28

15/10/2021

their commitments in order to consolidate the gains
made and to engage constructively towards resolving
the conflict.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation appreciates the report of the
Secretary-General presented by Special Representative
Tanin (S/2021/861). At the same time, we welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and Ms. Vjosa Osmani-Sadriu.
Mexico has followed with great concern the events
of recent weeks in the northern part of the Kosovo
region, on which the Special Representative briefed us
this morning. In that regard, we recognize the important
work being carried out on the ground by Kosovo Force
components to ensure a safe environment and freedom
of movement for all communities living in the Kosovo
region. We welcome the fact that some temporary
measures have been agreed in order to reduce tensions
on the ground, as well as the establishment of a working
group to seek a permanent solution to the issue of
vehicle registration.
However, the situation is symptomatic of broader
challenges, solutions to which will be achieved only
through dialogue between the parties. Progress made
at meetings in recent months, within the framework of
the European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, has been, to say the least,
minimal. We urge the parties to engage constructively
in order to reach permanent solutions — in particular
on the final status of the Kosovo region — while fully
respecting the relevant Security Council resolutions,
which constitute the sole framework for reaching a
settlement of the conflict.
We concur with the EU Special Representative for
the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and other Western Balkan
regional issues in his call for the parties to implement
all past agreements reached, without exception, at least
until the outstanding issues of the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between the parties are resolved. In that regard, we
will closely follow the outcome of the meeting of chief
negotiators scheduled in the coming weeks.
With reference to the mention in the report of
the Secretary-General of Gjakovë/Đakovica, Mexico
reiterates, as Special Representative Tanin has done,
the importance of protecting the rights of all those
wishing to return to their places of origin. We urge
the authorities in the Kosovo region to work with civil
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

society organizations and local communities to create
an environment conducive to the safe, dignified and
sustainable return of all those who wish to do so and
to promote reintegration and reconciliation processes.
We note the observation in the report on
incidents of gender-based violence and the levels of
domestic violence. We call on authorities in Kosovo,
civil society and international organizations to continue
to promote legal action frameworks and public policies
to address that challenge and ensure their full and
effective implementation.
Mexico underscores that the full involvement of
women in political processes as well as in all areas
of political and social life is key to mending the
social fabric.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s support for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo as it works to achieve stability and enhance the
rule of law and security in the region, in cooperation with
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his
valuable briefing. We again express our appreciation
and support for his efforts at the helm of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. I
also welcome His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and Ms. Vjosa
Osmani-Sadriu.
The regrettable developments in northern Kosovo
over the past weeks — accompanied by escalating
tensions, renewed acts of violence and clashes in
Mitrovica and the northern territory — can serve only
to further complicate the situation. It is yet another
challenge to security and stability in the region.
In that context, my country’s delegation calls on
both parties to calm tensions, decrease escalation and
refrain from any unilateral or uncoordinated actions
and to resume dialogue under international auspices. In
that vein, we value the European Union’s swift response
to help calm the situation and establish a working group
to find a lasting solution.
My delegation welcomes the resumption of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. We reiterate our call on both sides to
continue to engage constructively in dialogue, fulfil
their obligations, implement agreements to ensure

S/PV. 8880

security and stability and contribute to a comprehensive
political settlement.
In that regard, my country expresses its support
for the efforts of the European Union Special
Representative for Kosovo, while hoping that the next
round of talks will bring about tangible progress on
several important issues, such as the implementation
of outstanding agreements, economic cooperation,
the return of displaced minorities and the fate of the
remaining missing persons.
Promoting trust and peaceful coexistence among
ethnic groups is the only way to achieve peace and
stability in Kosovo. Diversity cannot impede integration
and unity if primacy is given to peaceful dialogue,
consensus and reconciliation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Tunisia’s
support for the various regional and international
efforts to find a lasting and comprehensive solution
in Kosovo, in accordance with the fundamental
principles of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and resolution 1244 (1999), in order to
achieve peace and meet the aspirations of the peoples
of the region towards realizing security, stability and
sustainable development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zahir Tanin for his briefing and service.
Kenya commends the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its
efforts to promote security, stability and respect for
human rights in Kosovo and the region, in line with
its mandate. We note in that regard that UNMIK
has had constructive engagement with Pristina and
Belgrade, all communities in Kosovo and regional and
international actors.
Kenya welcomes the meetings held over the
summer between Belgrade and Pristina, including the
15 June high-level talks between Prime Minister Albin
Kurti and Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić. That is
important because it is only through sustained dialogue
that the normalization of relations between the two
parties can be achieved.
As we all know, social media and mainstream media
are increasingly important means of communication
across the demographic spectrum, especially among

21-2912323/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

youth engaging in politics. Unfortunately, its use in the
spread of incitement and hate speech is well documented
and has been reflected in some of the reports submitted
to the Security Council.
Kenya welcomes the pilot initiative by UNMIK to
monitor incitement to hatred and hate speech on social
and online media. Such an initiative, if objectively
driven, has the potential to help develop strategies to
effectively counter those corrosive forms of speech.
On Tuesday, 12 October, one of Kenya’s signature
events, which was presided over by His Excellency
President Uhuru Kenyatta (see S/PV.8877), focused on
the issues of diversity, State-building and the search for
peace. At that event, President Kenyatta noted that the
poor management of diversity is leading to grave new
threats to international peace and security. I would like
to add that, in addition to creating new threats, it risks
reigniting conflicts we thought were in the past.
We are particularly focused not only on what
leaders say to one another but what their followers
say to one another. To that end, we will hold an Arria
Formula meeting later this month on addressing and
countering hate speech and preventing incitement to
discrimination, hostility and violence on social media.
The objective will be for the Security Council to have
a keen appreciation of the ways that hate speech and
incitement are spread through social media. We will
hear from leading figures in the private sector.
The reason I focus on speech, hatred and incitement
is because the comment by Special Representative Tanin
on the lack of trust between the parties is reflected
not only between the parties but sometimes between
segments of the population. On Tuesday, 12 October,
President Kenyatta observed that that mistrust leads to
the deterioration of trust in State institutions and that,
in turn, leads to a weakening of the State’s legitimacy.
When that happens, it makes the State unable to
prevent, mitigate or resolve conflicts it is experiencing.
With that in mind, Kenya recommends that the parties
recommit to inserting their appreciation and embrace
for diversity into all their policies — and not only into
their policies but also into the growth and development
of their political culture.
I would like to commend the participation of
women and young people who seek to have their voice
heard, particularly if it is a voice that brings the parties
back together and highlights the points of convergence
and common interests that we are sure still exist.
24/28

15/10/2021

I echo the call in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/861) for the provision of an enabling
environment for the safe, dignified and sustainable
return and reintegration of all internally displaced
persons and returnees to Kosovo society. Behind
every displaced person is a tragedy, a lost opportunity,
loneliness and mental suffering.
I conclude by reiterating the need for the parties
to be consistent in their implementation of resolution
1244 (1999) and to constructively engage in dialogue
in order to make swift progress on a comprehensive
normalization of their relations at the highest levels but
also between the peoples.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of Serbia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Selaković (Serbia): We have been listening
to the citizen of the Republic of Serbia Ms. OsmaniSadriu pretending to be the so-called President of our
southern autonomous province. We have listened to
stories that cynically ignore the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/861) and the briefing by Mr. Tanin, as
well as all the casualties of their recent actions. She is
being silent about the fact that the fake State is based
on war crimes and that their founding fathers are in
prison. She is being silent about Serbian casualties and
the ethnic cleansing, as evidenced by the fact that more
than 200,000 internally displaced persons have been
waiting for over 22 years to return to their homes, while
at the same time she is bragging that they have received
refugees from far-distant countries.
The citizen of the Republic of Serbia Ms. OsmaniSadriu has been telling fairy tales describing a fake
State as “one of the biggest champions of peace and
stability in the world”. Does what happened to 36-yearold Srecko Sofronijevic, critically injured only two
days ago, reflect the actions of a champion of peace and
stability in the world? We have heard fairy tales about
the struggle against smuggling and illegal trade. Her
main arguments are lies and that is normal, because
she can lie; she is allowed to lie because she does
not represent anyone but herself. Here I represent an
internationally recognized independent State Member
of the United Nations; I cannot lie but must be devoted
to the truth.
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

The truth is that Pristina’s unilateralism is
destroying all efforts to reach a sustainable compromise
solution through dialogue. The truth is that we have
implemented our obligations from the Brussels
Agreement and that the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government are loudly and actively refusing to
implement the obligations that they have undertaken.
That was stated by Mr. Kurti during the first round
of the dialogue held in Brussels in June, and also on
12 September by Ms. Osmani-Sadriu in an interview
given to the Süddeutsche Zeitung, in which she stated
that they were not going to allow the formation of
the community of Serbian municipalities. Here is the
statement given; I can give it to all representatives of
the permanent and non-permanent members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Osmani-Sadriu must stand up when she
mentions His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar Vučić,
President of the Republic of Serbia, because he is also
her President. She must pay respect to her President.
The butchers of the Balkans — Hashim Thaçi, Kadri
Veseli and the others who have been kidnapping
innocent civilians and trading in human organs — are
in prison facing an ongoing criminal process.
She must stop lying about the 20,000 casualties
of sexual violence during the war, because, according
to the report of the Secretary-General submitted to
the Security Council on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo dated 5 April 2021
(S/2021/332), the number of cases of sexual violence
has been confirmed to be not 20,000 but 912.
The cancer at the heart of Europe is represented by
the people sitting to my right, who have cherished their
fascist traditions since early 1941 through the wellknown genocidal acts of Balli Kombëtar and the unique
SS Skanderbeg division.
Finally, I protest the fact that representatives of the
cancerous creature at the heart of Europe were allowed
to enter the Chamber wearing masks with symbols of a
fake State.
The President: Ms. Osmani-Sadriu has asked for
the floor to make a further statement. I now give her
the floor.
Ms. Osmani-Sadriu: Let me start by thanking those
members of the Security Council that have recognized
and fully supported the decisive rule-of-law efforts of
the institutions of Kosovo, which are to the benefit of

S/PV. 8880

all citizens in Kosovo, no matter their ethnicity. Let me
also thank all those who have emphasized the important
role of women in society. We want to work hand in hand
with each and every one of them to expand the role of
women in our society, in politics and elsewhere, and we
are doing exactly that nowadays.
Perhaps now I shall move on to the latest piece of
pure propaganda by Mr. Selaković. I am a proud citizen
of the independent and sovereign Republic of Kosovo.
The independent Republic of Kosovo is not going
anywhere. It is better that he faces that reality, and it
will be better for all the citizens of Serbia as well, so
that they can see a future forward, a future of peace
and stability in which their leaders no longer wage
war or create destabilization. They have also suffered
from you enough; it is not just us. I agree that there
is a tragedy behind every refugee and every internally
displaced person. I have been one myself. And not only
I but more than 80 per cent of the people of my country
were forced to flee the Milošević genocidal regime,
which is now being glorified every single day. War
criminals are not just being glorified; they are being
rehabilitated by the current Serb institutions.
Mr. Selaković speaks of the death of an old woman
in recent days in Kosovo. While I would like to express
my condolences in that respect as the President of
all the institutions and the President of all the people
of Kosovo, no matter their ethnicity, I want to speak
the truth here in front of all present today. There is
absolutely no report from any local or international
institution — and we have such a high international
presence in Kosovo that it would be able to speak
about this — that that woman died as a result of the
rule-of-law efforts of the institutions of Kosovo. Not
even an autopsy has been done; so Mr. Selaković
comes here today and gives distorted information with
respect to what happened on Wednesday in Kosovo.
He speaks of 100 ethnically motivated crimes, but,
in fact, he mentions the same crime numerous times
to get to that number of 100. The truth of the matter
is, according to international reports, that from 2017
to 2020 the percentage of ethnically motivated crimes
was 0.03 per cent. It is not 3 per cent or 0.3 per cent;
it is 0.03 per cent in Kosovo. And we are committed to
bringing that down to zero, because the Serbs in Kosovo
are not afraid of me. Rather, the Serbs in Kosovo are
afraid of the parallel illegal criminal structures, aided
and abetted, financed and supported and turned into
gangs by President Vučić himself and no one else, and

21-2912325/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

they are the ones, as mentioned by the representative of
the United Kingdom and representatives of some other
States in this Chamber, who are violating all of these
basic rights, including the right to free elections, and
they are the ones intimidating Serbs from participating
freely in elections. As the President of all the people of
Kosovo, in front of all members of Security Council, I
want to commit once again to doing everything in our
power to protect the Serbs of Kosovo from these attacks
from illegal and criminal structures.
Mr. Selaković has also mentioned the case of Ivan
Todosijević. In that case, the person before the courts
of Kosovo was indicted for denying war crimes, in full
compliance with the prohibition by the European Court
of Human Rights of genocide denial. War crimes cannot
be denied because doing so contributes to hate speech,
impunity and further tensions. But the agreement to
which Mr. Selaković referred earlier provided that the
special panels would only be for the Serb-majority
areas, and Pristina is not a Serb-majority area. It is
the capital of Kosovo, and it does not fall within the
agreement that would provide for Serb-majority panels
in the court. We have therefore fully respected the
agreement signed in Brussels.
Let me speak for a moment about the so-called
attacks on churches. Let me cite NATO again. Through
its representatives in the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
Kosovo, NATO publicly recently stated that, in the past
10 years, there has been no serious incident against the
Visoki Dečani monastery or other churches in Kosovo.
This is the truth. And in fact, it is Kosovo police, the
multi-ethnic Kosovo police of the independent Kosovo,
that is securing most of these churches except for the
Dečani monastery, where KFOR is involved. Again,
KFOR has confirmed that no serious incident has
happened there in the past decade or so. Serbia should
therefore start countering impunity and stop glorifying
war criminals and rehabilitating them.
Yes, Kosovo has fully supported the establishment
of the Specialist Chambers. No other country in the
history of the world has shown such a commitment
to international justice. All of the leaders of Kosovo
have voluntarily cooperated with this tribunal. Do
Council members know why? It is because we have
nothing to hide. We have nothing to hide. The truth has
happened before the world’s eyes, and the truth is that
members of NATO — democratic countries around the
world — intervened to stop the Serb genocide. That is
a truth that cannot be revised through Serbia’s and its
26/28

15/10/2021

allies’ revisionist history projects. The truth is that is we
have been the victims, and Serbs were the aggressors.
We never play the game of collective blame, which
is why Kosovo is committed to the dialogue. I want
to reassure the Council of that. We are committed not
just to sitting at the table, but to actively engaging,
putting forward proposals that would bring more peace
and stability to the region. But since Mr. Selaković is
abusing the time to speak in this Chamber today to
defile the names of Serbs, the citizens that I proudly
represent — the Serbs of Kosovo, the Albanians of
Kosovo, the Turks of Kosovo, the Roma of Kosovo,
the Ashkali of Kosovo, the Egyptians of Kosovo, the
Gorani of Kosovo and everyone else, who are welcome
and living peacefully in Kosovo — perhaps I could
mention some names too.
Let me start with Liria Muccioli, six months
old — the name “Liria” means freedom — who,
together with 53 members of her family, most of whom
were small children under the age of seven, but also
their mothers and their grandmothers, was not allowed
by the military and the police to flee her house and
the Milošević regime during the war. At that time, we
were taking orders from the Minister of Interior — now
the Speaker of the Serbian parliament — and from
the Minister of Propaganda — now the President of
Serbia — and many others. The family was returned to
a little room in their house where they were all executed:
54 people, most of them little children. If that was not
enough, the military and the police burned the house
down. Indeed, some of the children, several as young
as two, were still alive — injured, but still alive — and
they were burned alive in their house. And if that was
not enough, the military and the police returned to the
house to burn it down a second time. In fact, they set
the entire house on fire three times.
If Mr. Selaković went to that house today — and,
as the President of the Republic of Kosovo, I invite him
to do so — I would invite him to kneel on the ground
there, because, in the words of Willy Brandt, that is
what a human being does when words can do no justice.
One kneels at a grave. Some 54 people, most of them
small children, including six-month old Liria Muccioli,
were burned three times. What was their crime? Did
Serbia ever apologize?
Let me give Council members a couple of
other names — Dragan Obradović and Srećko
Sofronijević — who, according to the Humanitarian
21-29123

15/10/2021

Kosovo

Law Centre in Belgrade, are the two people who
ordered the crimes. Of course, they are in Serbia. Of
course, they have been rehabilitated. Of course, they
were given excellent jobs by the new regime in Serbia.
And of course, impunity continues.
I can go on and on with names of people and
families whose wounds are still open because Serbia
continues to sleep on mass graves. I can show you the
map, Mr. President. This is the map of the mass graves
found in Serbia so far. According to former President
Boris Tadić, who was killed in Serbia, there are many
other mass graves in the country.
I urge Serbia to open these mass graves. We want
our loved ones back. We want them home. We want the
return of the bodies to their grieving mothers. Back
home, we want the mothers to have a place where they
can lay a flower on the empty graves of more than 1,600
people. I urge Council members never to forget, so that
the slogan “Never forget” is no longer needed.
Never forget what the true face of the Serbian
regime is. Perhaps for Mr. Selaković, I would conclude
with the words of John F. Kennedy, the President of the
United States:
“Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well
or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden,
meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any
foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.”
Serbia cannot intimidate us. Freedom is in our DNA.
The President: The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Serbia has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. As the Council is running behind schedule,
I would request that this further statement be limited
to three minutes and that it be the final statement of
the meeting.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Selaković (Serbia): I am really concerned
about the mind of Ms. Osmani-Sadriu. She said plenty
of lies. I say to Ms. Osmani-Sadriu that this is Srecko
Sofronijevic. This is the guy that her criminals shot in
the back only two days ago. He is not in Belgrade. He is
not ordering anything. He is an ordinary citizen. This
is Srecko Sofronijevic. I ask her to please stop lying.
Boris Tadić is the former President of the Republic
of Serbia. Thank God, he is in good condition. He

S/PV. 8880

lives in Belgrade. He was not killed, as Ms. OsmaniSadriu stated.
What was she saying? What was she saying about
the so-called attacks on Serbian churches? Fifteen
churches were robbed and attacked in the past nine
months — 15 churches. Kosovo has destroyed more
than 19 graveyards and cemeteries — Serbian Christian
Orthodox cemeteries. They were guilty of something.
Ms. Osmani-Sadriu spoke about Kosovo’s casualties.
I am sorry about that. But what about the Sutakovic
family — mother, father and three children? Their
remains were recently found in the Djakovica industrial
zone. There are no other members. All the family
members were killed. She was not high in the mountains
22 years ago, because she was only a refugee. She was
there because she was with the terrorists. According to
the Central Intelligence Agency terrorist list from 1997,
the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army was declared a
terrorist organization. I ask her not to speak to us about
revisionist history projects. We know very well that
she cannot hide the SS Skanderbeg division and the
traditions of the Bali Kombatari, who were some of the
most famous people working for the Nazis during the
Second World War. I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to say these words.
The President: Ms. Osmani-Sadriu has asked for
the floor to make a further statement. I ask her to keep
her statement to three minutes, and it will be the final
statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Osmani-Sadriu: I will try to be brief. Of
course, Mr. Selaković cannot understand what victims
of the war go through. After being forced to flee my
home by the Serbian regime, alongside hundreds of
thousands of other Kosovars, I hid in the mountains for
months. Only in May 1999 were my family and I able
to leave for Montenegro, where I stayed as a refugee
for a short time. I therefore know what it means to be
both an internally displaced person, because of Serbia’s
terror and genocide, as well as a refugee. That is why
we have opened our hearts and minds to the people
of Afghanistan.
I was of course thinking about Mr. Djindjic, not
Mr. Tadić, but the truth remains that the late President
of Serbia, who was killed in Serbia, actually spoke
of those mass graves. His closest collaborators now
confirm that. The current Speaker of the Parliament
in Serbia publicly threatens Serbian citizens who are
cooperating with the international community in

21-2912327/28

S/PV.8880

Kosovo

speaking about the whereabouts of those mass graves.
He publicly threatened them on national television,
saying that Serbs who spoke about the mass graves
and their whereabouts would be spoken of as traitors
to the nation. That kind of impunity does not happen
anywhere in the world. Mr. Selaković can of course
continue with his propaganda and try to insult us. But,
as I mentioned at the very beginning, the truth cannot
be changed, because it happened in front of his eyes.
I, of course, did not mention Srecko Sofronijevic as
a member of those that were involved back in 1999. I
mentioned Mr. Selaković to demonstrate Mr. Selaković’s
propaganda because there is in fact absolutely no
proof that he was shot by the Kosovo police. There is
absolutely no proof.
The embassies of the countries that are present
in the Republic of Kosovo know the facts. They have

28/28

15/10/2021

been open about the facts. They have shown their full
support for Kosovo’s rule-of-law efforts on the ground.
I invite all those who are in doubt to recognize our
young republic, the suffering of the people of Kosovo
and the reality of an independent sovereign country,
which will never change. I invite them to come to our
country and see it for themselves — see what is going
on on the ground, the suffering and the deep wounds
that are still open because there has been no justice
for the Serb perpetrators and, at the same time, see the
great and outstanding potential of the young people of
Kosovo and what we can do. Let us join Member States
around the table as a sovereign nation that can give so
much to the world.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

21-29123
