Rc,olulions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commiti.•c

Africa by the national liberation movements concerned, in an appropriate capacity, when dealing with
matters pertaining to those Territories;
8. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
of which they arc members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in that
connexion should accord priority to the question of
providing a:,sistance, on an emergency basis, to peoples
in the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements;
9. Recommends that the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
with a view to facilitating the implementation of paragraph 8 above, should request their executive heads to
formulate and submit to their respective governing
bodies or legislative organs, as a matter of priority and
with the act,ive co-operation of the Organization of
African Unity, concrete proposals for specific programmes of all possible assistance to the peoples in
colonial Territories and their national liberation movements, together with a comprehensive analysis of the
problems, if any, confronted by these agencicf; and
organizations;
10. Requests the Economic and Socia·] Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;

11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for submission to the relevant bodies
concerned with related aspects of the present item.
with the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, a report on the action taken since the circulation of his
previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report to the General
Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2981 (XXVII). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
RecaJ.ling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, whereby it established an integrated educational and tmining programme for Namibians, South
Africans, Southern Rhodesians and persons from Territories under Portuguese administration,
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 7 of
resolution 2349 (XXII), that the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa

83

should be financed from a trust fund made up of
Vlll1111tary contributions.
J'a/,.ing nute of the report of the Secretary-General
on thL· Programme for 197 1/72, ~"
Tiding note with satisfaction of the increase in contrihulions during the period under review and the
Cllrr,·spumling increase in assi,tance, in the form of
individual awards, to persons from the Territories concernL'd to further their education,
Rccogni:)ng, however, that the funds made available
have thereby been expended to provide such assistance
and that :1dditional funds arc required if the Programme is to continue in l,pcration,
L'.1pressing i1.1· firm conviction that the provision of
assi,tance for the cducat ion and training of persons
from the Territories concerned is as essential as ever
and should not only continue, but also be expanded,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
rnadL' voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Once again urgently appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to make generous contributions
tu thl' Programme so that it might not only continue
in nperation, but also be strengthened and expanded;
3. necides that, as a further transitional measure,
provi,ion shall be made, under the regular budget of
the United Nations for the financial year 1973, for an
amount of $100,000 to ensure continuity of the Programme pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
4. J"a/,.es note with approval of the further efforts
made to strengthen co-operation between the Program me and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the specialized agencies, the Organization
of African Unity and other agencies assisting persons
from southern Africa, and hopes that these efforts will
be continued with a view to the co-ordination of their
activities in the field of education and training for persuns from the Territories concerned;
5. h,"xpresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General and to the members of the Advisory Committee on
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, established in pursuance
of paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 2431
( XXIII) of 18 December 1968, for the work they have
accomplished during the period under review in connexion with the Programme;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
activity and progress of the Programme.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2982 (XXVII). Offers hy Member States of study
and training facilities for inhahitants of
Non-SPH-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2876 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Tcrritories,:i0
211 A/8850
30 A/8855.

and Add. I.
