UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

6 JANUARY

1980

NEW .YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2187)

. . . ,. , ,. . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . , , . . . . , . , , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 3 Janual-y 198~ addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal
Republic of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kin
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America,
and Venezuela (S/13724 and Add. 1 and 2) . . . , . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . .

SlPV.2187

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .> are normally published in
quarterly Supplemem of the Officitrl RCWXY~S o.f‘ the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcso/ution,s N/IL/
Decisims of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2187th MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday,
President:

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE

(France).

Presc~zt: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.,

Provisional
1. Adoption.of
2.

1980, at 11 am.

1. The PRESIDENT
(i,?tr,prc/r/tinn
j?o~~ F~rzch):
In accordance with decisions taken at the 2185th and
2186th meetings, I invite the representatives
of
Afghanistan, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Democratic Kampuchea, Egypt, Japan,
Liberia, Malaysia, Mongolia, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Poland, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Somalia and Turkey
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2187)

the agenda

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives of Australia, the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belgium,
Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji,
Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras,
Iceland,
Indonesia,
Italy,
Japan,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela
(S/13724 and Add.1 and 2)

Adoption of the agenda
The age&

6 January

WNS adopted.

Letter dated 3 January 1980 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Australia,
the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Germany, Federal Republic
of, Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia,
Italy, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden,
Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (S/13724
and Add.1 and 2)

At the invitatio,l of the Pw.\idcnt,
Mr. S&k
(Afghrrrzistrrn),
Mr. Antlcr.son (A/l.\ trulin), Mr. Yankov
(Bulgaria),
Mr. Kiusma/l (CUIILIL~U), Mr. Lie’vano
(Costa
Rica),
(Colomhin),
Mr. Pizn Escrrltrllte
Mr.
Thioluntz Prc,,sith (Donoc.rtrtic
Kcunpuckecr),
Mr. Abdel Mcguid (Egypt), Mr. Nisihori (Japan),
Ml.. T~~h~mrt~
(Liberia),
Mr. %uiton (Mnlaysia),
Dushtseren
(Mongolicr),
Mr. Frc,ncis
(New
~~‘;rlrr,rd), Mr. Nnik (Pakistan), Mr. Joro.szek (Polcrnd),
Mr. Allcrgrrny (Sarrtli Artrbicl), Mr. Koh (Singapore),
Mr. Slzatjf (Sonlalicl) rrd Mr. ErtrIp (Turkey) took the
plnces reserved for them tit the side of the Council
chcll?dwr.

2. The PRESIDENT
(brtcrp,.c,/trtio,l Jtiouz French):
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy and Spain in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion.
In accordance with the usual pracrice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

3, The PRESIDENT
(i,lter~,‘(‘ttrtiorl
Jiom Fresh):
The Security Council will now resume its consideration of the item on its agenda.
4. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America):
Mr. President, I should like at the outset to express
our appreciation and admiration for the manner in
which the representative of China exercised his
responsibilities
as President of rhe Security Council
last month. I should like also to express our confidence that you, Mr. President, will carry on in the same

13. The first announcement of the Soviet-engineered
coup &&tat, and the replacement of President Amin
by Babrak Karmal, who had been in exile in eastern
Europe, was made using frequencies purporting
to
be Radio Kabul. In fact, the transmitters from which
those announcements were made were located in the
Soviet Union. We know this because the real Radio
Kabul continued normal transmissions for at least One
and a half hours after those announcements
were
first heard. Nothing in these broadcasts from Radio
Kabul confirmed the content of ‘the Soviet broadcast
disseminated in Afghanistan’s name.

manner during your term of office. I am sure that our
two delegations will continue to enjoy the very warm
working relations they have had over a period of years.
5. Since this is the first time I have had the opportunity to address the Council this year, I should also
like to welcome the new members of the Council.
I wish to assure them that the delegation of the United
States looks forward to working very closely with them
in the spirit of co-operation that has always characterized our membership on the Council.
6. The Security Council meets today at the request
of more than 50 Members of the,United Nations from
all parts of the world and of all political persuasions.
We meet to consider a matter of fundamental importance, to world peace and to the principles on the
,basis of which the United Nations was founded.

14. Subsequently,
Soviet troops captured all key
civilian and military installations in the Kabul area and
established a defence perimeter .around Kabul. Afghan
military forces have been disarmed.

20
Af
tit1

vie
tit1
a’
US

inc
in1
Sl::
ccl
fill

re!
inl
21
Of

Ct
15. Immediately after the coup,, two Soviet motorized
rifle divisions entered Afghanistan by land, one at
Kushka and the other at Termez. Elements of the
western division arrived at .Herat, where fighting
between Soviet and Afghan forces was reported. Much
of the Termez division proceeded .to the Kabul area.

7. A Member State of the world Organization has
been invaded by massive contingents of troops from
another State, Its Government has been overthrown.
Its leaders have been killed. Its people have been
,’
silenced. Its territory has been occupied.

16. The Soviet Union now has up to 50,000 troops
in Afghanistan. There are indications that other Soviet
divisions are moving into the Soviet-Afghanistan
border. Soviet forces have -moved out to secure
other key towns.

8. The United States has joined in the call for an
urgent meeting of the Security Council to consider the
Soviet Union’s blatant act of aggression against the
territory and the people of Afghanistan, We have done
so because the action of the Soviet Union not only
breaches the peace and violates international law but
also
threatens the viability of the fundamental principles that underlie the Charter of the United Nations.

17. The Soviet Union has claimed that the leadership
of Afghanistan requested Soviet military assistance.
Which leadership? It is beyond doubt that President
Amin was still in his office when the Soviet troops
attacked the presidential palace and when he was
executed. Are we to believe that President Amin
invited Soviet troops to come into Afghanistan in
order to oversee his own downfall and his own
execution? Or was it the leadership of Babrak Karmal,
President Amin’s Soviet-appointed
successor, a man
who was not even in Afghanistan at the time of the
Soviet intervention
but was, rather, in the Soviet
Union?

9. The representative
of the Soviet Union has
offered us a wide and confusing range of rationales
for the so-called limited but surely deadly assistance
foisted on the people of Afghanistan. Let us look at
the chilling sequence of events connected with the
Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
10. During the first weeks of December 1979, the
Soviet Union secured Bagram airfield, north of the
Afghan capital of Kabul, by sending the equivalent
of an airborne regiment there. It also landed troops
and equipment at the Kabul airport and at the same
time mobilized enormous forces in areas bordering
Afghanistan.

18. The Afghan people and the Afghan army units
have resisted this Soviet aggression despite the overwhelming military superiority of the invader. Fighting
continues in several areas of the country.
_
19. The facts of the situation are clear. Over a period
of months, the Soviet Union carefully planned and
prepared, to invade Afghanistan because it was dissatisfied with the degree of subservience of the Amin
Government and, undoubtedly,
with its performance
against Moslem insurgents in Afghanistan, who long
have been struggling’for their rights, The Soviet Union
then carried out its military operation, quickly
and
brutally. It offered no recourse whatsoever to the
authorities then in power in Afghanistan, The Soviet
Union overthrew the Amin Government,
which it
had previously supported, and replaced it with a puppet
regime.

11. On 25 and 26 December, a massive Soviet airlift into Kabul took place. In over 200 flights, roughly
10,000 Soviet
troops
were transported
into
Afghanistan.
12. On the evening of 27 December, a special Soviet
assault unit surrounded the presidential palace in
Kabul. Afghan soldiers defending the palace were
attacked and overcome, and President Amin was
summarily
executed. Simultaneously, Soviet troops
attacked Afghan forces guarding Radio Afghanistan
and other key installations and took them under
control.
2

!t *
OC

w
011
by

Nc
WI

in
017

SC
ct
ex
dii
,:.I
an
llli

Tl
it
nc
ev
re
2;!
re
Al

Tr
Ol?
Re
str
ViC

tel
so
in1

20. The armed intervention of the Soviet Union in
Afghanistan and the presence of an uninvited occupation force in that country is a gross and blatant
violation of the most important principles of international law and of the Charter of the United Nations.
What are those principles? That one State must not
use force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of another State; that a State must not
intervene by force in the internal affairs of another
State; that all States must respect the principle of
equal rights and self-determination
of peoples; that
fundamental
principles of human rights must be
respected by all Governments; that States must settle
international disputes by peaceful means.
I
21, The Soviet claim that it was acting in furtherance
of collective self-defence under Article 51 of the
Charter is a perversion of the Charter and an insult
to the intelligence of the members of the Council.
Article 51 can be invoked only “if an armed attack
occurs against a Member of the United Nations”.
Whence came the armed attack on Afghanistan? The
only armed attack on Afghanistan was the one launched
by the Soviet Union and from the Soviet Union.
No one can believe the claim that the Soviet Union
was requested by the Afghan Government to intervene
in Afghanistan in the fashion in which it did, unless
one also believes that President Amin invited the
Soviet Union in to overthrow him. Article 51 of the
Charter requires that measures taken by Members in
exercise of their right of, self-defence “shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall not
in any way affect the authority and responsibility
of
the Security Council under the . . . Charter to take at
any time such action as it deems necessary in order to
maintain or restore international peace and security”.
That neither the Soviet Union nor the puppet rBgime
it has installed in Afghanistan has given the required
notice to the Security Council under Article 51 is itself
evidence of the hollowness of the Soviet Union’s
refuge in the Charter.

calculation and advance planning, in an area of the
world which is now experiencing particular instability
and tension, makes its act even more egregious and
irresponsible. That the Soviet Union is taking military
action against a deeply religious and fiercely independent people, who are struggling for human and
religious rights, underscores the brutality and illegality
of its action. Accordingly,
it remains for the Council
to take action under the Charter to restore international peace and security.
24. A terrible miscalculation
has been made by the
Soviet authorities.
The’ ramifications
of the Soviet
intervention
in Afghanistan are enormous.
For no
State will be safe against a larger and more powerful
neighbour if the international
community
appears to
condone the Soviet Union’s armed intervention.
This
must be of particular concern to the States whose
territory lies near the Soviet borders.
25. It is, therefore, incumbent upon the Council and
upon every nation that believes in the rule of law and
opposes the use of force in international
affairs to
denounce this dangerous breach of peace and security.
It is incumbent upon the Council to make the weight
of world opinion felt.
26. We note that the Soviet Union has stated that it
intends to withdraw its troops from Afghanistdn at
some point. We urge it to do so immediately,
and to
allow the people of Afghanistan to conduct their own
affairs, to choose their own system of government,
to choose their own national leaders without outside
pressure and interference. Only in that way can the
grave threat to international peace and security created
by the Soviet Union be diminished
and this most
serious challenge to the basic principles of the United
Nations be removed.
27. No State, not even a great Power, can be allowed
to ignore with impunity the responsibilities,
obligations
and commitments it assumed when it became a Member
of the United Nations. The United States therefore
calls on all members of the Council to act vigorously
in the discharge of their Charter obligations.

22. Nor can one believe that the Soviet Union was
requested by the Afghan Government to intervene in
Afghanistan pursuant to the terms of the so-called
Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness
and Cooperation between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan’ of 1978, For the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
violates the Soviet Union’s obligation,
under the
terms of that Treaty, to respect Afghanistan’s national
sovereignty and to refrain from interfering
in its
internal affairs.

28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntiotz
j?om French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Australia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
29. Mr. ANDERSON
(Australia): In thanking you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to address
the Security Council today, I should like to offer my
warm congratulations
on your accession to the
presidency. We are fortunate that at this time of
international tension, the Council will have the benefit
of your sound judgement,
experience and diplomatic
skills. 1 should like also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of China, for his wise
and effective leadership of the Council during December. Finally, I should like to congratulate
the new

23. The Charter of the United Nations does not give
the Soviet Union, or any’ nation, the right to take
military action in another country or to replace its
Government because it disagrees with the policies or
performance of the existing Government.
The fact is
that the Soviet Union has flouted international
law
and has violated regional and international,peace
and
stability. That the Soviet Union has done so with cold
3

that the Treaty between the United States of America
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Repubiics on the
Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms (SALT II)’
would come into effect as soon as possible and would
in turn open the way to new measures of disarmament
and arms control. A11 of that is now in jeopardy
and we face the spectre of dangerous confrontation.
That would be a tragedy. Surely the precarious gains
in Afghanistan are not worth that for the Soviet Union.
But for the rest of the world, even more is at stake
than Afghanistan itself, because armed invasion and
aggression in breach of the Charter threaten the
independence and security of every country. We want
an end to the ,invasion of Afghanistan because of
that basic concern and because of our concern for the
independence and integrity of Afghanistan and its
people. But we also want an end to the invasion
because we want a resumption and intensification of
international
co-operation in the great tasks of the
world today.

members of the Council and to wish them, on behalf
of my Government, every success in their endeavours.
30. Australia has supported the holding of, and asked
to participate in, this debate because of the seriousness with which it views the current situation in
Afghanistan. What we have witnessed over the past
10 days has been an intolerable and continuing act of
interference by military force on the part of the Soviet
Union in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. That
action has greatly increased the already serious
instability
of the general region. It constitutes a
dramatic and undisguised threat to international peace
and security, It is entirely appropriate and necessary,
therefore, for the Council to be meeting promptly to
consider the situation. The United Nations generally,
and the Security Council in particular, must address
as a matter of urgency such a callous disregard for the
principles
embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and for international
security. The people of
Australia, and indeed world opin’ionat large, have been
outraged by these events and look to the Council to
take appropriate action.

35. Australia joins with all like-minded speakers in
this debate in calling for the immediate withdrawal of
all foreign troops from Afghanistan so as to allow
the people of that troubled country to choose their
own future in the full and independent freedom which
they have traditionally enjoyed.

31. Our first concern is for the rights and welfare of
the people of Afghanistan. They have experienced a
succession of Governments
since 1978. Australia
has watched with increasing concern the growing
instability in Afghanistan itself and in the region. The
present situation is, however, significantly different.
We are now faced with a situation where substantial
Soviet forces have moved into Afghanistan to install
and to maintain a r6gime in Kabul subservient to
Soviet purposes.

36. The PRESIDENT
(ifzterpretafion from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Singapore.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
37. Mr. KOH (Singapore):
Mr. President, as in
December, the Security Council is again fortunate to
have as its President this month a man of enormous
ability and vast experience. My delegation is confident
that you will be able to provide the Council with the
wise and strong leadership which it so clearly needs
during this month of January.

32. Afghanistan occupies a strategic position between
Asia and the Middle East. That fact can in no way
justify or excuse the outside interference that is now
occurring. The people of Afghanistan are entitled to
work out their future for themselves without fear of
interference from outside forces, large or small.
33. On well-documented
occasions in the past, the
Soviet Union has stood condemned for its military
interference in Warsaw Pact countries. We are now
witnesses to a large-scale military intervention in the
affairs of a member country of the non-aligned
movement. It is intervention, moreover, for which-as
previous speakers in this debate have demonstrated
conclusively-the
Soviet Union
has offered no
reasonable or acceptable justification,
It is understandable that in the circumstances the Members of
the United Nations, aligned and non-aligned alike,
are watching the situation in Afghanistan with great
apprehension.

38. At the very outset of my statement, I wish to
recall that ever since my country became independent,
my Government
has consistently pursued a foreign
policy of non-alignment.
We are not aligned with any
of the great Powers. We are not a party to their
competing military alliances and political blocs. We
have studiously avoided involvement in the rivalries
between the great Powers. The position which my
Government
takes on specific issues such as the
situation in Afghanistan is based upon the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, the generally
accepted principles of international law, the principles
of non-alignment
and our judgement of the merits of
each case.

34. Today more than ever, major questions of world
security and economics call for international
cooperation on the broadest scale. We had found encouragement in the degree of co-operation that had come
into being between the two major nuclear Powers on
matters relating to the control of arms. We had hoped

39. Relations
between small nations and great
Powers are at the best of times difficult. But when a
great Power defies the basic principles of the Charter
by openly invading and occupying weaker and smaller
nations, then association between it and smaller nations
carries obvious dangers. The Soviet action in Afghani4

Stan will certainly
small nations.

be viewed in that light by many

45. The actions of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan
have certain grave implications for countries in Asia
and for small and non-aligned countries. The fact
that this occurred barely a month after the General
Assembly adopted a resolution based upon a Soviet
initiative condemning all forms of hegemonism [General Assembly resolution 3411033, indicates clearly that
the Soviet Union has a credibility gap. How can we
reconcile Soviet deeds with Soviet words? Henceforth,
it will be extremely difficult for us to give any credence
to declarations by the Soviet Union that it will respect
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of other States and that it will strictly abide
by the principle of non-interference in another State’s
internal affairs.

40. Let me review briefly the salient facts as reported
in the press concerning recent events in Afghanistan.
41. On 25 and 26 December 1979, a massive Soviet
airlift into Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, took
place. In over 200 flights approximately 10,000 Soviet
troops were transported into Afghanistan, On the
evening of 27 December, Soviet troops were.involved
in a coup against President Hafizullah Amin, who was
killed. Immediately
after the coup, two Soviet
motorized rifle divisions entered.Afghanistan by land.
The Soviet Union is now said to have about 50,000 combat troops in Afghanistan.

46. In the past the Soviet Union has encouraged
small nations to pursue a foreign policy of nonalignment as a means of securing their political
integrity and independence. Some 90 nations, including
Afghanistan, have joined the movement of non-aligned
countries. The fact that the Government of Afghanistan, which was overthrown by Soviet troops, was a
member of the non-aligned movement and was friendly
to the Soviet Union is therefore doubly disconcerting.
It makes some of us wonder whether a foreign policy
of non-alignment
provides one with any security
against external interference and aggression in the
world today.

42. The Soviet Union has argued that its troops
are in Afghanistan at the invitation of the Afghan
Government. The Soviet Union claims that the massive
Soviet airlift which occurred on 25 and 26 December
had similarly taken place at the invitation of the
Government of Afghanistan. Unless we assume that the
late President Amin had suicidal tendencies, it is
reasonable to infer that he would not have invited
Soviet troops to enter Afghanistan in order to depose
and kill him.
43. After the coup against President Amin, the Soviet
Union brought an Afghan, Babrak Karmal, from exile
in Eastern Europe and made him the new President of
Afghanistan. The important fact is that at the time of
the Soviet intervention, Babrak Karma1 was not part of
the Government of Afghanistan and therefore had no
authority to request the intervention by Soviet troops.

47. The great Powers have a special responsibility
by virtue of their strength and prestige to adhere
loyally to the basic purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. They should set an
example for smaller nations on the rational and
peaceful conduct of relations between States. They
should be the enforcers of the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. That is why five of the members of the Council have been accorded the special
status of permanent members with veto powers. They
have been accorded this privileged position because
they have a special responsibility. But when those in
this privileged position to enforce the purposes and
principles of the Organization breach them at the
expense of a small nation, then we are well on the way
to a world without law and without principles.

44. Have the actions of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan violated any of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the generally accepted principles of international law? The answer is yes. In the
first place, the use of Soviet troops to depose one
ruler and substitute another is clearly in violation of
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of other States and of the principle of non-use of force
against the political independence of other States. The
actions of the Soviet Union also violate some of the
principles contained in the Declaration on Principles
of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, unanimously
adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth
session [see resolution 2625 (XXV)]. One of the principles violated is the principle that “Every State has
the duty to refrain from any forcible action which
deprives peoples . . . of their right to self-determination
and freedom and independence”.
Another principle
which has been violated is that “No State . . . has the
right to intervene, directly or indirectly,
for any
reason whatever, in the internal or external affairs
of any other State.” Finally, the Soviet actions also
violate the principle that “no State shall organize . . .
armed activities directed towards the violent overthrow of the regime of another State . . .“.

48. In conclusion, my delegation joins others in
demanding, first, the withdrawal of Soviet forces from
Afghanistan; secondly, the cessation of Soviet interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan; and,
thirdly, respect by the Soviet Union and all other
States for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Afghanistan.
49. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. The
Security Council will once again be able to draw on
your long experience and well-known diplomatic skill
in the best French tradition at a most critical time for
the Council and the world at large.
5

50. .4t the same time, I should also like to pay a
tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Chen Cku, of
China, whose wise and able handling,of the duttes of
that office enabled the Council to arrive at important
decisions pertaining to international peace and security
during the last month of 1979.
51. It is also a pleasure to welcome the new members
of the Council, We look forward to working closely
with all of them and pledge our full co-operation in
the year ahead. I should also like to express my
appreciation to the departing members of the Council. It was a privilege to have worked with them in the
discharge of our common duties during the last year.

57. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Spain,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
58. Mr. PINIES (Spain) (interpretdon
from Spanish): I am sure, Mr. President, that you will understand how pleased I am to see the Security Council
presided over by a personal friend of mine who,
furthermore, is the representative of a country closely
related to my own in so many ways.
59. I wish, through you, Mr. President, to thank the
Council for the opportunity that I have been given to
speak on the question of Afghanistan. The fact that
51 States Members-in
other words, one third of the
membership of the United Nations-have
sought the
urgent convening of this main organ, responsible for
maintaining international
peace and security, is clear
proof of the concern of the international community
at the recent events in Afghanistan which resulted
from Soviet Military
intervention
in that country,
thereby jeopardizing internatiohal
peace and security.

52. The Norwegian Government is deeply concerned
at the situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security. The Soviet armed
intervention in that country represents a violation of
Afghanistan’s sovereignty and increases tension in the
region and beyond. It is a clear interference in the
internal affairs of another country and constitutes a
potential danger to international peace and security.
In view of this serious situation, Norway joined a
large number of other countries in requesting an
urgent meeting of the Council.

60. My country and Government deplore this violent
act in breach of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. As we have learned
from the news media, as early as 21 December 1979,
there were Soviet troop movements on the Afghan
border; since that date, a gradual penetration by forces
numbering up to 50,000 troops has been observed.

53. The Norwegian Government must once again
reiterate its firmly held principle that the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State in contravention
of the
Charter of the United Nations cannot be accepted on
any pretext whatever.

61, As a result of this intervention,
the President of
Afghanistan was executed. If anyone actually called
for Soviet intervention,
the request must have come
from the Government
of Hafizullah
Amin himself,
who led the Afghan Government until the Soviet troops
reached Kabul. It is scarcely logical for a Government.
to call in foreign troops to be annihilated by them.
As a consequence of the invasion, not only have the:
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United1
Nations been violated, but a Member of the Organization-Afghanistan-has
seen its sovereignty and
political independence encroached upon. This military
intervention is quite paradoxical when we recall that
at the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly,
the Soviet delegation
submitted
an item entitled
“Inadmissibility
of the policy of hegemonism in international relations”.

54. The developments in Afghanistan have added in
a dramatic way to the sense of instability and strife
which, regrettably, has come to characterize various
parts of that area of the world over the last year.
55. In a broader international context all countries,
big and small, must view the recent developments
with great apprehension. At a time when it was hoped
that nations could make progress in terms of bridging
gapsand lessening tension between them, recent events
have regrettably brought this process into question.
Whereas there is no alternative to a process aimed at
lessening international tension and conflict in the long
run, no one can accept that the very principles
on
which such a process must be built can be violated,
as they have been in the case of Afghanistan.

62. The non-use of force, the inviolability of frontiers,
the territorial
integrity
of States and the self
determination
of peoples: all these principles have
been brutally flouted. If there had been any conflict
it would have been logical to seek a peaceful settlemen
of disputes, as established in the Charter.

56. In the view of the Norwegian Government,
it is
of the utmost importance that peace and stability be
restored in Afghanistan and that the threat of a wider
conflict be removed. The right of the people of
Afghanistan to choose their own Government without
outside interference must be respected. That requires
an immediate withdrawal of all Soviet forces from
Afghanistan and the strict observance of the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
another country,

63. While the events in Afghanistan are extremel:
serious, my delegation wishes to draw attention to 0-k
alarming consequences which those events may hav
for the international
situation at a time when th
international community is endeavouring to go beyork
6

the cold war and avoid an outbreak of war, with
irreparable consequences. These efforts are not
enough, however: we must prevent this kind of military
intervention against small, defenceless countries that
are at the mercy of the mighty, which, using conventional means,. can deprive them of their political independence. I do not think it necessary to exaggerate
these facts; the simple reality of what has occurred
speaks for itself.

70. Mr. SHARIF (Somalia): Mr. President, I thank
the Council for giving me the opportunity to participate
in this debate. I should like first of all to extend
congratulations
to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I have confidence
in your ability to guide the Council wisely during these
troubled times when international
peace and security
are seriously endangered.
71. We express our appreciation
also for the able
and efficient manner in which your predecessor,
Mr. Chen Chu, of China, conducted the affairs of the
Council last month. We. likewise convey our felicitations to the newly elected members of the Security
Council-namely,
the representatives of Tunisia, the
Niger, the Philippines
and the German Democratic
Republic.

64. The talks which led to the SALT II Treaty2
have been seriously jeopardized since the ratification
of that Treaty has been frozen by one of the signatories.
In other words, at a time when we are striving to
achieve detente and promote
international
cooperation, and when everything was leading us to
believe that the world was embarking upon a period
of peace in which the cold war would be a thing of
the past, this new act of violence takes place: interference in the internal affairs of a State Member of the
United Nations.

72. We have come here to add our voice to the many
which have been raised in condemnation
of the Soviet
Union’s
military
intervention
in Afghanistan-an
action which constitutes aggression against a nonaligned Moslem State and against a proud and independent people with which we share common civilization, culture and values.

65. The year 1980 should have marked the beginning
of a decade in which, on the basis of the SALT II
Treaty and the understanding among the great Powers,
we would achieve the necessary harmony in order to
make progress in the field of world-wide co-operation
and the struggle for development. The world situation
today gives no grounds for optimism, however: in the
past 12 months, the Council has met repeatedly to
deal with a long succession of acts of aggression and
violence. We are thus eroding the world political
structure which had been built up with such devotion
and endeavour.

73. The Soviet action is a dangerously explosive
one that may bring about incalculable consequences.
This intervention of a super-Power in the affairs of a
small country in order to further its own ends sets
back the clock of international
progress, assaulting as
it does the rule of international
law and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, and threatening
the precarious balance of world peace and security.

66. Bearing in mind the matters to which I have
referred, the Spanish Government, at the meeting of
the Council of Ministers held on 29 December last,
emphasized the following points: first, any threat to
international peace and security constitutes a source
of serious concern to the Spanish Government;
secondly, every country is free to look after its own
security; but the Spanish Government opposes any
military intervention and interference in the internal
affairs of other countries, particularly when it is liable
to promote tension in an already extraordinarily
tense
area.

74. Instruments
such as the Declaration
of Principles Governing Friendly Relations and Co-operation
between States in accordance with the Charter of the
United
Nations
[Gener~~I
Asse&ly
redutiou
2625 (XXV)] and the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International
Security [Grneral Assernl?ly wsdrrlion 2734 (XXV)] validate and extend the principles
of the Charter when they emphasize the importance
of non-interference in the internal affairs of States-a
principle equalled in importance only by that of the
right of peoples to self-determination
and independence. Non-interference,
respect for national
sovereignty, and the inadmissibility
of the use of
force in international
relations are cardinal principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, by
which all Member States are committed to abide.

67. My Government hopes that the Security Council will take prompt and effective action to prevent a
worsening of the situation in that area and to see that
peace and security are rapidly re-established there.

75. The group of non-aligned
States, of which
Afghanistan is a founding member and which constitutes the largest group within the United Nations,
can only view the Soviet action with angered dismay.

68. My Government deplores this ‘Soviet military
intervention in Afghanistan and hopes that the troops
of that country will be immediately withdrawn, thus
creating conditions t.hat will allow the Afghan people
to decide its own political future by democratic means.
!
1
li
i

76. Afghanistan has a long and illustrious history of
cultural and political independence.
It has preserved
its national identity because of the unconquerable
will of its people, and it must continue to enjoy the
rights and privileges of membership in the community

69. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jkm F~rzch):
The next speaker is the representative of Somalia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
7

84, I join previous speakers in congratulating
the
new members on their election 10 the Council-namely,
the Philippines, the Niger, Tunisia and the Germail
Democratic Republic. Malaysia iS especially happy to
see the Philippines, a fellow member of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, take a seat on the
Council.

of nations. The massive armed aggression against its
territorial integrity and national sovereignty cannot
be countenanced in our world today, however larger
and powerful the attacking State may be. Indeed,
the super-Powers have a special responsibility towards
the rules of international law, a special responsibility
to observe the principles of the Charter and to preserve
world peace. When the Soviet Union is seen instead to
use its power to install or demolish Governments in
a neighbouring State, it must be said to have abandoned
these responsibilities.

85, I wish also to thank you, Mr. President, and
members of.the Council for giving me the opportunity
to participate in today’s meeting. Malaysia is one of
the more than 50 countries that have joined in the call
for the convening of the Council to consider a serious
issue confronting the international community, that is,
the external armed intervention in the internal affairs
of Afghanistan, a State Member of the United Nations.

77. Of course, Afghanistan does not provide the only
example in recent times of the exercise of imperialist
policies and action by the Soviet Union carried out
through armed intervention. The same kind of
opportunist and large-scale aggression we are witnessing in Afghanistan has already been perpetrated
in many parts of the world, including Africa, where it
has been directed against peoples struggling to achieve
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence.

86. As was widely reported, a mnssivc introduction
of troops of the Soviet Union into Afghanistan took
place around Christmas, about a fortnight ago. On
27 December 1979, the legal Government of Afghanistan, under President Hafizullah Amin, was toppled
and the President himself was executed along with
members of his family. A new. Government closely
backed by the Soviet Union has been installed in its
place. Today it is reported that there are in Afghanistan about 50,000 Soviet troops with the latest equipment, including tanks and aeroplanes, helping to
prop up the new regime and maintaining
absolute
control over the country. My delegation views this
development as a clear case of external interference
and intervention in the internal affairs of another
country. It contravenes the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and violates the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan.
In addition, it constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security.

78. The excuse given for the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan is inept and lacking in credibility. It is
evident that the real motive for the Soviet Union’s
aggression was the furtherance of its hegemonistic
policies.
79, The Soviet action in Afghanistan must be clearly
and severely condemned by the Security Council and
by the international community. It violates international law, and it has been carried out at a time when
world tensions are already high and when a lesser
incident could trigger a chain reaction of events
leading to super-Power confrontation and even nuclear
war. This is a time for restraint and statesmanship for
the sober and responsible conduct of international
affairs.
80. We urge the Soviet Union to withdraw its troops
from Afghanistan so that its people can exercise in
freedom their inalienable national and political rights
and so that a dangerous threat to world peace and
security can be removed.
81. The PRESIDENT (i,~top,etulion jh.m Fre~zch):
The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
82. Mr. ZAITON (Malaysia): Mr. President, I should
like first of all to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I am confident that, with your wide experience
and acknowledged diplomatic skill, you will be able
successfully to guide the Council in its deliberations.
83. At the same time, I should also like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Chen Chu, of China, for having
ably and skilfully conducted the affairs of the Council
last month.
8

only live
next vict
89. We
peace ar
to the pr
ber of tb
obligatio
such vie
and bY
consiste
recalled
during t
chea. Vi
ever WC
a meml
ference
Afghan!
speak L
what w
integrit
90. In
Securit
interve
drawal
thus p
escalai
stan F
destin:
or infl
stabili
91. 1
The n
I invit
make

87. It has been claimed that the Soviet troops had
been invited into Afghanistan to assist the Government
and the people of that country to face alleged interference and provocation by external enemies and that
they came there in response to treaty obligations
binding the two countries. My delegation finds it
difficult to accept such a claim, in the light of available
evidence to the contrary, in that the request was made
only after, the armed intervention,
the murder of
President’ Amin and the setting up of a Soviet-backed
Government took place.

92. 1
pvefai
has jf
Orgat
Sew
Afgh:
occu
and :
fund;
wp
a gn

88. As a small country interested in peace and
stability in which to pursue the goals of nation-building
and economic development,
Malaysia
views the
events in Afghanistan with grave concern and anxiety,
That is a view which must be shared by all, especially
the small and developing countries of the world. For
how could we live in peace, security and harmony
and how could our independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity be ensured if countries, and more
especially, major Powers, openly violate the basic
Principles Of peaceful relations between nations as
enshrined in our Charter‘? In such a world we would

93.
with
pent
afar
justi
94.
base
Afg
FrL
of :
thal

only 1iVe in fear and dread as to who would be the
next victim of subjugation and domination.
89. We see no other way of achieving international
peace and secu.rity except through strict adherence
to the principles enshrined in the Charter, As,? Member of the United Nations, Malaysia fully realizes it+,
obligations am] will not hesitate to speak out against
such violations wherever and whenever they occur,
and by whomever they are carried out., W,e have
consistently done so in the past, and, as will ‘be
recalled, we did so recently in the General Assembly,
during the consideration of the situation in Qmpuchea, We shall continue to do so in the future, whenever we see such a case occurring. Furthermore,
as
a member of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the non-aligned movement,
to which
Afghanistan also belongs, Malaysia could not but
speak up on behalf of the people of Afghanistan on
what we firmly believe to be a clear violation of their
integrity and sovereignty ,
90. In conclusion, I should like strongly to urge the
Security Council to call for cessation of the ar’med
intervention in Afghanistan and for immediate withdrawal of the foreign forces from that country, and
thus prevent the situation from deterioriating
and
escalating into a wider conflict. The people of Afghanistan must be allowed to decide their own future and
destiny by themselves, free from foreign interference
or influence, for only on that basis can peace and
stability in that country be restored.
91, The PRESIDENT
(i!?@rpr&ntion from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Costa Rica.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
92.

Mr.

ESCALANTE
(Costa Rica) (interThe delegation of Costa Rica
has joined a large number of other Members of the
Organization in requesting this urgent meeting of the
Security Council to ascertain what is the situation in
Afghanistan and to consider that events which have
occurred in that country, despite ever-present Pretexts
and subterfuges, constitute a serious violation of the
fundamental principles of international
law, Openly
perpetrated by the Soviet Union, and furthermore,
a grave threat to international peace and security.

pretrttiutrfiotn

PIZA

Spcrttish):

93. It is always the case with any aggression or
with any violation of a nation’s sovereignty and idependence, especially if the nation is small and the
aggressor great, that arguments are concocted to
justify the aggression.
94. In the case of Afghanistan, these arguments are
based on an alleged request by the Government
of
Afghanistan to the Soviet Union, under the Treaty of
Friendship, Co-operation and Good Neighbourliness
of 1978,’ to send in troops to Bunter a conspiracy
that had originated outside the country. The truth is that

the Soviet troops, which had been stationed on the
border of Afghanistan since before 21 December 1979
invaded the country on Christmas Eve. This mean;
that, if the request for assistance alleged by the Soviet
Union were genuine, that request would have had to
have come from the Government of Hafizullah Amin
who was .deposed and executed on 27 December’
precisely by those. responsible for the c*oly> d’e’tni
supported by the Soviet Union, and whose Foreign
Minister came here yesterday to justify the invasion
[218Sth

tievting];~

9.5. Things are SO clear that no one can have any
doubt as to their reality. In this respect, it can all
be summed up in the statement made yesterday by the
representative of Pakistan when he said: “It does not
stand to logic that a Government should have invited
foreign troops to liquidate itself.” [Ibid., pant. 76.1
96. MY country, like most of the third world and nonaligned countries, relies on the rule of law for its
external security, and is free from any suspicion of
wishing to intervene in the internal affairs of either
its neighbours or any other State. For that reason, we
car&t accept the argument that such a request was a
planned attempt to check revolutionary
change in
Afghanistan.
What concerns us is that treaties of
friendship,
co-operation
and good neighbourliness
overnight can become arms of aggression, invasion
and intervention
in the affairs of a sovereign State.
We are rightly concerned when it happens in our own
region, but we are also concerned when it occurs in
any other part of the world, especially when good faith
and friendly intentions, the genesis of international
law, are violated. We hope that we are not witnessing
a new escalation of aggression which could become
the norm for all the great Powers throughout the world,
if there was the least suspicion that a friend, ally,
satellite or simply a nation which was considered to be
in the backyard of one of the Powers, were deviating
from the submission which its supposed friends had
imposed or had tried to impose.
97. We are hurt, above all, that such clear acts of
aggression have been perpetrated by those who, in
the current General Assembly session, have Proposed
against hegemonism
and proclain$
resolutions
themselves
champions
of decolonization,
determination
of peoples and the non-use of force in
international
relations. Their acts rub out their words.
98. The great Powers, precisely because they are
responsible for maintaining
international
peace and
order, as is always the argument put forward to justify
their right to the veto in the Security Council, must
be moderate and generous and recognize their errors
in time. The greatness of a Power must not depend on
its military
might but on its ability to maintam the
balance of forces in the world, letting each country
decide its own internal affairs without interference.
Greatness must reside in the rational action of States
‘and n& in superiority or in the ability to trample on

the rights

of other peoples. History has shown that
arbitrary
peoples, using law as a weapon to impose
their own will, fall victims to their Own excesses and
mistakes.
gg, ~~ country, because it is sovereign and takes
orders from no Power, condemned, through its Government, the sneaky invasion from the time the international wires were announcing it and once it became
clear that it was not simply a COUPd’itat, Or an
internal revolution or an attempt against President
Amin, but an invasion in the most refined Fascist
style. In fact, my Government, in San JosCon 2January
of this year, issued the following statement:
“The Government of the Republic of Costa Rica,
always anxious to see absolute respect for the fundamental principles which govern relations among al1
peoples, is deeply concerned at the current intervention of Soviet military forces in Afghanistan.
“That offensive is aclear imperialist move directly
affecting the principle of self-determination
of
peoples enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and clearly endangering world peace.
“For the sake of world peace, Costa Rica calls
for the effective observation of the principle of nonintervention which is the basis and cornerstone of
all international law.”
100. We all know beforehand that the rules for voting
and the veto in the Security Council will make it
impossible to adopt a resolution firmly condemning the
acts of aggression which have made a victim of the
people of Afghanistan even more than its Government.
In this respect, all that we can do is to let the whole
world know of the unanimous condemnation by ffee
peoples and the truly non-aligned. For this reason I am
grateful for the honour of addressing the Council.

important questions which are at present on its agenda,
May I also express our gratitude to your predecessor,
the representative of China, for the skilful way in which
he conducted the difficult proceedings of the Council in the course of the past month, and extend our
congratulations
to the new members of the Council,
with all of which Italy entertains friendly relations.
104. In requesting, together with 50 other delegations
of different geographical regions, this urgent series of
meetings of the Security Council, my Government
wished to give concrete expression to the deep concern
we feel over the recent developments in Afghanistan,
We considered that, whatever the outcome of the
meetings, the international
community
should be
allowed to voice publicly its views about the events
which are currently occurring in that country.
105. The Council dealt at length in January and
March 1979 [210&h to 2112th, 2114th to 2118th rrd
2129111 meeti/lgs],
with the armed invasion of Kampuchea and the most dangerous. sequel of events it
generated. At that time the international community,
with few exceptions, expressed its condemnation
of
the use of armed intervention in the internal affairs
of other States and strongly reasserted the right of the
Kampuchean
people to self-determination
and to
decide freely their own destiny. Similar feelings
were recently reiterated by the General Assembly at
its thirty-fourth
session through the adoption of resolution 34/22 on the situation in Kampuchea, and even
more firmly in resolution 34/103 on the inadmissibility
of the policy of hegemonism in international relations.
106. Yet only a year has elapsed since the invasion
of Kampuchea and we are now witnessing the development of a practically
identical pattern of events,
this time in Afghanistan. Once more the Government
of a State Member of the United Nations has been
overthrown through external armed intervention,
and
the presence of foreign armed forces on the territory
of Afghanistan
has been belatedly endorsed by a
rkgime set up by those same forces.

101. The PRESIDENT (interpretntion frurn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Italy. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

107. The Government
and public opinion in Italy
has been following with grave concern the developments taking place in Afghanistan in the last few
months. Our concern has found ample justification
in
the growing intensity of the armed struggle waged by
insurgent movements against the Government of that
country, the massive and overt violations of the human
rights of the Afghan people, and the increasingly
widespread and ubiquitous presence in the country of
foreign advisers.

102. Mr. LA ROCCA (Italy): May I thank you,
Mr. President, and through you, the members of the
Security
Council for inviting my delegation to participate in the debate on the most serious matter
before it.
103. 1 should like first of all to convey to you,
Mr. President, my warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are particularly gratified at seeing
the work of the Council presided over by the representative Of a country with which Italy has in common
centuries of Ch'ikatiOn, links of alliance, and membership in the European Community, and we express
confidence that your most able guidance will greatly
facilitate the work of the Council in dealing with the

108. The Italian
Government
cannot accept the
position that the military intervention of the -Soviet
Union in Afghanistan
can be justified on the basis
of the right to self-defence, either individual
or
collective, enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. The analysis made by the ItaIian
Government,
with all objectivity, of the situation
10

prevailing in Afghanistan before the recent military
intervention by the Soviet Union does not point to
the existence of acts of subversion of the affairs of
Afghanistan on the part of third countries. The Soviet
military
intervention,
therefore, represents open
interference in a situation characterized by an internal
conflict but not by foreign aggression.
109. Italian public opinion and political forces have
unanimously condemned the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan and my Government fully shares that
position. We are convinced that those involved in the
situation in Afghanistan must promptly abide by the
norms and principles of the Charter, thus allowing the
people of that country freely and autonomously to
decide their own destiny without external interference
and in full respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan.

.crucial debate which is now going on, Mr. President,
than your noble country France, whose humanitarian
attributes, including an abiding love of peace, made it
an early victim of aggression in those dark days. But
while we are confident that France will be wise and fair
in the conduct of this debate, and grateful as we are
to members of the Council for the opportunity
of
addressing them today, my delegation is deeply
troubled because we are keenly aware that a situation
of threatening and dangerous confrontation between
two great Power alignments in the world cannot be
divorced from the issues in this debate.
114. In Liberia we say: “when elephants fight, it is
the grass which dies”. Therefore when, as now, events
are shaping up for a serious clash between the great
Power blocs, we small nations, especially if we are
non-aligned, can make a real contribution to peace,
not by remaining silent nor by taking sides, but by
calling for strict adherence to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and by insisting upon a
role for the United Nations, whose indispensable
relevance in safeguarding international
peace and
security has been demonstrated in recent weeks and
will be a vital factor in international relations during
the complex and dangerous era which the world has
entered. The days when the big Powers used the
Organization as an instrument for selfish power play
and manipulation
are gone. While that unhealthy
situation lasted, the effectiveness of the Organization
was impaired, because its objectivity
and evenhandedness were held in suspicion. Such a view of the
United Nations, regrettably, but in the view of my
delegation unjustifiably, still persists in many quarters.

110. Italy attaches particular importance to the urgent
fulfilment of those conditions, which are the prerequisites of the re-establishment of normal international coexistence and of the pursuit of the policy of
detente. In our opinion the policy of detente has no
alternatives and we are committed to continuing to
work for its successful achievement. However, we
cannot forget that detente has a global dimension and
requires particular restraint by the Governments
entrusted by the Charter of the United Nations with
specific responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace and security. In the case of Afghanistan,
we therefore call for’strict observance of the principle
of non-intervention
in the domestic affairs of other
States and for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign
armed forces from the territory of that country. We
sincerely hope that the proceedings of the Council will
effectively contribute to the achievement of those
objectives.

115. How often in times past have we small States
not bemoaned the contemptuous manner in which the
United Nations has been prevented by the powerful
States from considering grave matters that were of
concern not only to the big Powers, but to the whole
international community? In the event of a nuclear
war, which country would be spared the most
devastating direct or indirect effect? Which countries,
even now, do not suffer adverse effects caused by the
worsening international economic situation that has
come about, at least in part, because of happenings in
regions far away from their shores? The interdependence of our world today is an inescapable fact.
A breach of the peace therefore, whenever it occurs,
and particularly, where it involves or threatens to
involve the major Powers, poses a dire threat to the
whole world. If the Security Council cannot rightfully
be seized of such an issue, the prospects for peace
and stability in the world are very bleak indeed.

111. The PRESIDENT
(irtterpretntionflom
French):
The next speaker is the representative of Liberia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
112. Mr. TUBMAN
(Liberia): At this moment international tensions and frustrations are high, because of
uncertainties in the Middle East. Crises in the world
economy deepen with each passing day. At such a time
the rumble of foreign tanks, the menacing sounds of
invading military aircraft and the presence of some
50,000 foreign troops in Afghanistan have shattered
the peace of that small, defenceless non-aligned
nation,
113. The international
scene today, with detente
apparently crumbling, bears a frightful resemblance to
the situation in Europe just 40 years ago, when hopes
for peace in that time faded. The lights went out and
the horrors of a most devastating war were unleashed
upon the world for the second time in this century.
Of the many countries that were severely scarred by
that war, none is more qualified to preside over this

116. The Security Council therefore, by consenting
to hold this debate, has risen to its responsibilities
under the Charter and deserves the appreciation of
all States, particularly small ones and those that belong
to the non-aligned movement.
117. There are efforts currently under way-which
our brave Secretary-General, at peril even to his life,
.l

has recently sought to advance-designed to resolve
the crisis of the American hostages in Iran. Those
efforts and now this debate concerning the situation in
Afghanistan are aimed at solving the problems through
the United Nations. That cannot but be welcomed by
all small and medium-sized countries because, quite
frankly, when we small countries are in trouble, when
we have been the victims of aggression or of racist or
colonial domination, we come here to the United
Nations because we have no better place to turn to.
More often than not, the results we obtain here are
far from satisfactory. Let me give one example; for
more than 30 years we have been trying to solve the
problem of Namibia through the United Nations, but
we have not succeeded yet. In the view of my
delegation, had greater weight and relevance been
attached to the United Nations over these many
years by the powerful States, and had all States really
tried to develop the marvelous machinery provided
in the Charter for the preservation of peace and the
fostering of international co-operation, the Organization today would have been better equipped to
respond speedily and effectively to issues such as those
posed by the troubles in Iran and Afghanistan, issues
which only the United Nations can solve if they are to
be solved peacefully.
118. But it is better late than never; therefore we can
all hope that henceforth all States, not just the small
ones, will make the United Nations a cardinal point of
focus of their international relations and policy.
Because this debate can only help to foster a wholesome development of that kind, my delegation for
that reason and for that reason only did not hesitate
to sign the letter in response to which the Security
Council is now meeting.

the relevant provisions which are contained
c]e 51 of the Charter:

in Arti.

“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence
if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the
United Nations, until the Security Council has taken
measures necessary to maintain international peace
and security. Measures taken by Members in the
exercise of this right of self-defence shall be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall
not in any way affect the authority and responsibility
of the Security Council under the present Charter
to take at any time such action as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore international
peace and security.”
121. Against the clear stipulations
of Article 51
certain questions may be asked. Was there an armed
attack within the meaning of Article 51 in this case?
Against which State was the attack made? As we
listened to the Soviet representative speaking on this
point yesterday, we were left in some confusion. For
reasons of this kind, in other words, in order to enable
clear and authoritative
explanations
to be given
regarding events which have alarmed the whole international community, these meetings of the Security
Council are more than justified-but
let me continue.
122. At one point in his statement yesterday, the
Soviet representative seemed to be saying that the
territory of Afghanistan was being used as a beachhead from which attacks against the Soviet Union could
be launched. If such a factual situation indeed existed,
then the sending of Soviet troops into Afghanistan
was, the Soviet statement seems to suggest, an act of
self-defence, not necessarily by Afghanistan, but by the
Soviet Union. And if, indeed, that was the reason for
the entry of Soviet troops into Afghanistan, given
the Treaty of Friendship, Good Neighbourliness
and
Co-operation between the Soviet Union and Afghanistan,’ which was apparently invoked, it is no wonder
that Pakistan has felt threatened by those developments, since the Soviet representative also stated that
Pakistan’s territory was being used as a beach-head
for attacks against Afghanistan.

119. The entry by and the deployment of foreign
military forces in Afghanistan and their engagement in
a shooting war there, without any other qualifying
elements, is in the view of my delegation a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations. The representative of the Soviet Union, in his statement
yesterday [22/85th meeting], conceded that point by
clear implication, because he saw the need to explain
the presence of his country’s military forces in Afghanistan, a presence which according to him was in
response to a request from the Government of that
country. That request, we were told, was made and
responded to on the basis of a treaty between the two
countries.

123. If the Soviet arguments justifying the use of
armed forces in Afghanistan are allowed to stand, the
concerns felt by Pakistan and other States ih the
region are fully warranted, and unless they can be
allayed by the Council’s handling of the matter, grave
tensions and insecurity must persist in the region.

120. A treaty of that kind and, more particularly,
the despatching of armed forces under its provisions
into the territory of another State must, in our view
in order not to constitute a violation of the Charte;
of the United Nations, comply with the provisions
dealing with the concept of self-defence as laid down
in the Charter. Considerable legal learning and opinions surround the dimensions of that concept in international law, but their thrust can be briefly summarized. Before endeavouring to do so I would quote

124. AS regards both the Soviet Union and Afghanistan, no evidence has been adduced of anything that
would qualify as an armed attack for the purpose of
invoking Article 51 of the Charter. Reference was
made by the Soviet representative to reports in certain
Western news organs [2186th meeting]
concerning
sites in Pakistan that were allegedly being used as
training grounds for subversives to carry out attacks
12

against A
has denit
baseless.
Soviet U
co-opera1
Stan, cou
wipe out 1
50,000 trc

125. Ag
Are they
defencek
who are 1
had this
Afghanis
Council’:
has it bc
simply t
Afghanis
That pre
justify tt
self-defe
regime I
liquidate
126. Tl
law canr
armed ii
crush tl
people.
interfere
of anott
de 2, pa

127. T
ures tak
of self-c
Security
of these
Council
and the
the Set
this iss
Govern
If Artic
the Ch:

128. E
authori
to take
sary to
securit;
more h
to be (
interna
Counci
view, !
have
disquie
start. I
disarm
been a

against Afghanistan. But the Government of Pakistan
has denied those charges and dismissed them as
baseless. In any event, one is left to wonder why the
Soviet Union, which has a treaty of friendship and
co-operation, as well as common borders with Afghanistan, could not assist its neighbour to the south to
wipe out bands of infiltrators without having to dispatch
50,000 troops to Afghanistan.
125. Against whom are those troops now fighting?
Are they killing the foreign subversives, or is it not the
defenceless Afghan people in all parts of that country
who are being attacked and slaughtered? In any event,
had this matter of a threat to the Soviet Union or to
Afghanistan ever been brought to the Security
Council’s attention by either country? Even now,
has it been done? The international
community
has
simply been told that 50,000 Soviet troops are in
Afghanistan to counteract infiltration
from outside.
That pretext is not tenable, and, as an argument to
justify the use of armed forces in a supposed act of
self-defence, it disappears altogether because the
regime supposedly being defended was immediately
liquidated by its would-be defenders.

and trust between the United States and the Soviet
Union in particular has been greatly disturbed.
129. Those developments have raised the level of
international insecurity and already they are giving rise
to new momentum
in the wasteful and dangerous
arms race. The gravity of such a situation is inescapable
and its implications
for world peace are plain. The
Security Council is therefore called upon to act clearly
and decisively to protect the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
130. The immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces,
including subversive elements-if
any are there-from
the country must be insisted upon, so that the people of
Afghanistan can be left alone to conduct their affairs
without outside interference. The Council should call
for full respect by all States of the basic principles
of the Charter according to which all disputes are to be
settled peacefully and armed force shall not be used
save in the common interest.
131. But, beyond the actions which the Council
should take in response to the situation in Afghanistan,
it is incumbent,upon
all States-particularly
the great
Powers-at
this time of tension and aggravation of
international
relations to do everything within their
power so that the gains of many years of peaceful
coexistence and detente laboriously pursued may not
be thrown away. Let there be no return to the
dangerous days of the cold war nor, worse still,
to war itself.

126. The doctrine of self-defence in international
law cannot be invoked‘in those circumstances. Foreign
armed intervention cannot be justified when used to
crush the free political expression of a sovereign
people. Such an action is not self-defence at all; it is
interference of the worst kind in the domestic affairs
of another State and it is clearly proscribed by Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the United Nations.

132. We, the States of the developing world-and this
includes all members of the Organization of African
Unity-have
looked forward to 1980 as the year for
the commencement of new, more effective ways and
means by which to improve the economic well-being
of our people. To do this we need a climate of security
and peace in the world. If tensions and strife are
allowed to rise between the great Powers, their
resources will again be diverted in ever-growing
measure to armaments, and neither the will nor the
means will be forthcoming for addressing the pressing
problems
of international
economic
and social
development.

127. The second sentence of Article 51 states: “Measures taken by Member States in exercise of this right
of self-defence shall be immediately
reported to the
Security Council . . .“, Far from having had a report
of these supposed acts of self-defence to the Security
Council, we have heard both the Soviet representative
and the Foreign Minister of Afghanistan declare that
the Security Council has no competence to discuss
this issue. Accordingly,
even in the view of those
Governments, Article 51 does not apply in this case.
If Article 51 does not apply, then it seems to us that
the Charter has been violated.

133. It is my delegation’s earnest hope that its sincere efforts to contribute positively to this debate will
not be misconstrued by anyone-not
least by the
representative of the Soviet Union, whose great country’s unmatched
support of the struggles against
colonialism
and racist domination
has won for it
gratitude, respect and friendship throughout the third
world. If that friendship is to grow-and its growth will
serve immeasurably the cause of world peace-it must
be based on candour, and not on fear. Otherwise, it
will lead to the same ugly subservience and domination which, coming from others, the Soviet Union has
helped the developing world to attack. Subservience
and domination,
from whatever source, can have no
place in the new world order which, even now, is
struggling to be born.

128. Even if Article 51 had rightly been invoked, the
authority of the Security Council and its responsibility
to take, at any time, such actions as it deems necessary to maintain or restore international
peace and
security are clearly provided for in that Article. What
more has to be shown for the situation in Afghanistan
to be considered as having serious implications
for
international peace? The 52 States at whose request the
Council now deliberates have declared that, in their
view, such implications do exist. Many other States
have issued strong statements
expressing grave
disquiet at the presence of foreign troops in Afghanistan. In addition to all that, the momentum towards
disarmament between the great Powers has already
been adversely affected, and the feeling of security
13
d.

134. The PRESIDENT
(interpretnti$m fi’ot??: Fj-,g,zch):
The last speaker is the representative
of Hungary,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table
and to make his statement.
135. Mr. HOLLAI
(Hungary): Mr. President,
before
turning to the question appearing on the Council’s
agenda, I wish to present OUT warm congratulations
on your assumption of the highly’ important
functions
of President of the Security Council.
We are paititularly happy to see you in the presidency
of the
Security Council, since you represent a Country
with
which friendly and co-operative relations with Hungary
have recently been developing at an impressive
rate,
and our bilateral relations hold:further possibilities
for
the benefit of both our countries. You are taking up
your activities at a crucial moment in the history
of the
Security Couticil and the whole of the United
Nations.
We all know the circumstances in which
we have
found ourselves for the past. weeks, and also the
reasons why the thirty-fourtli
session of the General
Assembly was not able to finish.its ,work on time. We
are also aware of the tasks lying aliead for the Security
Council, At this rather complex juncture,
I shduld
like to voice our conviction that, under your wise
guidance and wilh your long experience
and well,knqwn competence, the Council will be able to. remain
faithful to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and to discharge
its duties
constitutionally, and successf$ly.

ship of the country from the cqnstructive tasks Of
development to the defence of ,the conquests of the
April revolution came, in fact, ‘as,qo surprise.
136. In their attack on the G&&nment
in Kabul,
these enemies of the revolutibn
were joined
by
extremists of all tints and were’&-&uraged
and backed
’ by regional and global forces opddsed to the ineluctable
hrocesses of history and hostilk to the cause of the
social emancipation of the peopie’s of the world and to
the principle of self-determination.
These conspiracies3
.resorting to all kinds of preteltts and “arguments”
against the right of peoples freeljr’ to determine their
destinies and to take a step forward to progress, have
recently been seen in the cases of Viet Nam, Kampuchea and Iran. Now it is the pe,ople of Afghanistan
who decided to take a bold $tep forward but were
immediately’ challenged by th‘e Same imperialist forces
and their i.lewifangled allies’ which try to impede
progressive evolution througlidut
the world, overtly
‘and covertly, through open ‘interference or indirect
or disguised involvement.
: ‘;,I,
140. In the ‘course of the,-‘history of the United
Nations, more than once have we heard denials of
such involvements
and behindlthe-scenes
activities
by obscure forces specializihg in this type of action,
in co-operation with fugitive elements nostalgic for
their past positions. Later, however, when the passions triggered by these actions abated, there came
confessions and acknowledgements from authoritative
people and institutions
adniitting
their role and
involvement in those actions. Should we wait again
for a couple ‘of years until someone publishes his
memoirs op publicIy speaks Out on these issues? The
concealment of such questions constitutes at present
the pillar of the pretext for convening the Security
Council, and their disclosure would help to demonstrate what the real situation is in Afghanistan.
In
this regard, I welcome the presence during the debate
in the Council of Mr. Shah Mohammad Dost, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People’s Repu blit of Afghanistan, and his highly revealing statement
[ibid.] on the actual state of affairs in his country.

136. &ly intervention in this debate derives from the
well-known policy of principle of the Government
of
the Hungarian People’s Republic. Hungarian
public
opinion and the Hungarian Government have followed
with the greatest attention the developments
that
have taken place in Afghanistan since the revolution
in April 1978. The toiling Afghan people successfully
began uprooting feudalism in their country,
liberating
themselves from their dependence on big landowners,
abolishing the outdated socio-economic
s true tures of
the country, ensuring equality of rights for all citizens,
regardless of nationality, religion and sex, distributing
vast lands previously owned by feudal lords to masses
of landless farmers, eliminating
illiteracy
among
the
population, carrying out the first national
population
census and starting a new Five-Year
Economic
Development Plan.

141. Yes, since the revolution of April 1978 there has
been continuous foreign intervention in the domestic
affairs of Afghanistan. The Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan has not so far been given
the chance to dedicate itself solely to the peaceful
development of the country. The defence of the new
rkgime and the practical measures taken to this end
have always stood in the forefront of the preoccupations of the leaders of that country. As is clear from
recently published public sources, the Afghan leaders
have asked several times for military aid from their
neighbpur, the Soviet Union, in order to repulse the
assaults of external and internal enemies on the gains
of the Afghan revolution-assaults
aimed at the
overthrow of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.

137. Those are some of the most outstanding
and
truly spectacular changes of historic importance
in the
life of Afghanistan, among many other transformations
designed to place that country on the path of democratic development and social justice. And we in Hutigary all applauded these events.
138. We have also been witnessing
the internal
convulsions taking place in that country-part
of any
difficult and painful revolutionary
process. The subversive activities of the enemies of the Afghan
revolution, clinging to their past privileges,
and
their
desperate attempts to divert the attention of the leader-

142. We share the view expressed by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan that the assistance
14

given by the Soviet Government in response to the
numerous appeals ,of the Afghan leaders is in full
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
the Treaty’ concluded between the two countries
in December 1978. It is a matter which falls completely
within the scope of the‘domestic affairs of Afghanistan
and does not condern anyone but the two countries
involved, that is, Afghanistan and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. In our view, this limited and
temporary Soviet move undertaken at the specific
request of the Afghan authorities does not in any way
represent a threat either to other countries in the
region or, least of ,all, to international
peace and
security.

146. The matter which has been invoked as the reason
for convening the Security Council is obviously one of
bilateral relations between the Afghan and Soviet
Governments,
and, therefore, we believe that the
Council should not deal with this problem. While we
understand those Governments which closely follow
the events and are not indifferent to what has been
going on in Afghanistan recently, we cannot understand those among them which, voluntarily .or not,
contribute to the campaign of hysteria launched in the
non-official and official circles of certain countries.
We wish to state very firmly that the creation of
such an atmosphere is not at all conducive to a rational
assessment of the situation and does not contribute to
helping to understand all its elements. Those voices,
which are reminiscent of the infamous era of the cold
war, threaten to undo all the positive achievements of
recent times.

143. Those who try to, depict it in that way only seek
to divert attention from the really burning questions
pertaining to that region and from overt attempts to
bring the countries and seas of the area under direct
imperialist
control. The major war buildup that had
already been taking shape for weeks in the immediate
vicinity
of those countries has apparently found
another excuse in., the alleged Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, Those who are at present raising a hue
and cry about Soviet, assistance are simply trying to
cover up their aggressive activities in that part of the
world.

147. It is incumbent upon all the States Members of
the United Nations, and particularly those that are
members of the Security Council, immediately to halt
‘this perilous trend and the malicious propaganda and
address a stern warning to those who want to use the
Organization again in their selfish political interests
as they did during the cold-war years. Let us hope that
the international community will be in a position to
achieve its genuine major tasks and to act accordingly,
instead of letting itself be dragged into a futile exercise
of accusations and tendentious statements, thereby
considerably worsening the chances of a peaceful
future for all of us.

144. Incidentally, none other than the United States
maintains 429 permanent military bases abroad and
3,000 supplementary military installations in 30 countries; and none other than the United States has
undertaken since the Second World War 215 military
actions and threatened or used actual force against
other countries a total of 215 times.

The meeting r’ose at 1.45 p.m.

145. I wish to assure the people and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan of the
support and solidarity of the people and the Government of Hungary in their struggle for social progress
and the advancement of their country and for the
strengthening of a sovereign, democratic and nonaligned Afghanistan.

t

NOTES
I To be printed
in
No. 179%.
2 See CD/53/Appendix

s
C
In
11
w
.d
it-

m
t-s
3
le
1s
te
1,
er
ce
15
t

“United
III/Vol.

Nations,
I, document

Twtr(~
CD/B.

Series”,

under

HOW TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United Nations
publicalions
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
may be obtained
your bookstore

LE.S PUBLICATIOSS

or

from
bookstores
and disiributora
wrih
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

L&I publicntions
des Nations
Unies sent en vente
tlans les librairies
et les agences
d&ositaires
du mondo entier. Informer-vous
aupr&s de votro librnire
ou adressez-vous
1 : Nations Unies, Section cles ventis. New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las public&&es
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&in
buidoras en todas partes de1 mundo.
ConsuIte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in

Unit&

Nations,

New York

00400

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en ventn en librerias
y caaas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

8%61462-December

1985-2,425
