UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/41
23 August 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3569th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 August 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Rwanda", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council views with deep concern the forcible
repatriation of Rwandan and Burundian refugees by the Government of Zaire
and the increasingly tense situation in the region.
"The Security Council takes note of the recent letter from the
Government of Zaire to the Secretary-General (S/1995/722) and the
Secretary-General’s reply (S/1995/723) in which he urges the Government of
Zaire to continue to provide assistance to Rwandan and Burundian refugees.
"The Security Council considers that Zaire and the other States which
have accepted refugees from Rwanda and Burundi make an important
contribution, in spite of the considerable difficulties created for them
thereby, to peace and stability in the region. Their contribution is of
special importance in view of the genocide which took place in Rwanda and
the possibility of further bloodshed in Burundi. The Council also notes
the commitment of the Government of Rwanda to take the necessary steps to
facilitate the safe return of its nationals as soon as possible and
encourages it to continue its efforts in order to implement its
undertakings in this respect.
"The Security Council calls on the Government of Zaire to stand by its
humanitarian obligations regarding refugees, including, inter alia, those
under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951, and to
reconsider and halt its declared policy of the forcible repatriation of
refugees to Rwanda and Burundi.
"The Security Council supports the decision by the Secretary-General
to send the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to the region to
engage in urgent discussions with the Government of Zaire and neighbouring
States with a view to resolving the situation. It encourages all

95-24821 (E)

230895

/...

S/PRST/1995/41
English
Page 2

Governments in the region to cooperate with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to achieve the voluntary and orderly repatriation
of refugees. It also calls on the international community to provide all
possible assistance to help care for the refugees."

-----
