S/PV.8155

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8155th meeting

Wednesday, 10 January 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. French

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2017/1113)
Assessment by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General of phase one of the reconfiguration of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2018/12)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-00694 (E)
*1800694*

S/PV.8155

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2017/1113)
Assessment by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General
of phase one of the reconfiguration of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2018/12)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.

10/01/2018

as submitted in the joint report (S/2018/12), in line with
paragraph 6 of the resolution. I shall also touch upon
recent development in Darfur in the context of the latest
60-day report of the Secretary-General on UNAMID
(S/2017/1113), issued on 27 December 2017.
In June last year, in acknowledgement of the overall
improvement of the security situation in Darfur, the
Security Council endorsed the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission in their special report of 18 May 2017
(S/2017/437) for a two-pronged approach, with a focus
on protection in the Jebel Marra area and on stabilizing
the situation in other areas of Darfur. In the same
context, the Security Council authorized a reduction
of the Mission’s uniformed and civilian personnel in
two phases, including the handing-over of 11 UNAMID
team sites to the Government of the Sudan, while
requesting a written assessment by 1 January 2018 of the
first six months of the reconfiguration. The assessment
was conducted by a joint African Union-United Nations
team, with representation from the United Nations and
humanitarian country teams, which visited Khartoum
and Darfur from 7 to 17 November 2017.

Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur.

Allow me to briefly introduce the main findings
of the assessment. The conflict trends indicated in the
special report of 18 May 2017 continue, since, following
the military victory against the rebel movements,
the Government of the Sudan is firmly consolidating
its control and State authority across Darfur, except
for the pockets in the Jebel Marra area controlled by
a fragmented and weakened Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid, with the other rebel groups having
been engaged in mercenary and criminal activities in
neighbouring countries. In Darfur, the deployment of the
Rapid Support Forces and the execution of the weaponscollection campaign have increased the Government’s
capability to respond swiftly to security challenges.
The developments have also created new dynamics by
bringing the different groups under the authority of the
Rapid Support Forces, including, recently, the border
guards of Musa Hilal, and by gradually creating the
conditions for new political realities.

Six months after the adoption of resolution 2363
(2017) on the two-phase reconfiguration of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), I am honoured to bring to the attention of
Council members the joint assessment of the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission of the Mission’s phase one reconfiguration,

Without major incidents overall, the disarmament
campaign has been received with mixed reactions
and scepticism, particularly by the communities
of internally displaced persons (IDPs), while the
local authorities and tribal leaders believe that it has
increased security among the communities. UNAMID
is engaging the authorities on reported concerns over

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/1113, which contains the text of
the report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
and document S/2018/12, which contains the text of the
assessment by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of phase one
of the reconfiguration of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.

2/10

18-00694

10/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

non-respect for the rule of law and violations of human
rights associated with the campaign, while monitoring
its execution in the IDP camps, including the Kalma
camp. In the meantime, progress towards achieving
a negotiated political settlement to the conflict
remains elusive.
Thus far, the humanitarian indicators illustrate
a continuing emergency situation, with 2.7 million
people displaced, of whom 2.1 million across Darfur
are in need of assistance, and 1.6 million people living
in various camps and settlements. While no additional
displacements occurred during the assessment period
and some voluntary returns have taken place, including
the recent repatriation of Sudanese refugees from the
Central African Republic to South Darfur, the lack of
security, basic services and sustainable livelihoods in
the areas of return, as well as issues related to land
ownership, have become major impediments to return.
Phase one of the reconfiguration of UNAMID
was completed before the deadline of 31 December
2017, with 11 team sites closed and handed over to
the Darfur state government by the end of October.
The military component currently stands at 11,461,
against an authorized strength of 11,395 at the end of
phase one; the police component at 2,666, against an
authorized strength of 2,888; and the number of civilian
staff positions has been reduced by 558 following the
conduct of a civilian staffing review. In the context of
the two-pronged approach of the Operation, the mission
recently formalized the concept of the Jebel Marra task
force, and will activate it in the second half of January,
while, on 7 January, the Government reported having
allocated land for the Golo team site, although details on
the actual establishment of the site are yet to be agreed.
The mission is currently working on the state-specific
stabilization plans in cooperation with the Darfur state
Government and the United Nations country team.
During phase one of the reconfiguration, the
Government of the Sudan has been very cooperative
in facilitating the repatriation of contingents and
the timely closure and handover of team sites. The
overall operating environment for the movement of
humanitarian personnel across Darfur has been reliable.
However, the Mission is facing some difficulties in
obtaining visas for international staff, in particular
those working on human rights.
The assessment in Darfur was undertaken within a
few weeks of the closure of team sites, which allowed

S/PV. 8155

for only a preliminary analysis of the impact of the
UNAMID reconfiguration. While no serious adverse
impact was noted during the field mission and the
subsequent weeks, it is clear that it is too early to draw
a definite conclusion with regard to the consequences
of the closure of team sites for the population. In the
period ahead, we will continue to keep the Council
informed of any emerging issues.
The developments covered by the SecretaryGeneral’s progress report reaffirmed the trends outlined
above. While the reporting period did not witness any
armed clashes between Government forces and the
Darfur armed movements, the initiation of the forceful
stage of the weapons collection campaign across Darfur
and its launching in the IDP camps constituted its key
features. In addition, the start of the migration season
continued to generate violence among communities,
although at a lower level than in previous years. No
tangible progress was noted in the Darfur political
process or in the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur.
In conclusion, I would like to bring two issues
to the attention of the Council. First, as the Mission
moves towards the implementation of phase two of
the reconfiguration, provided that the current trends
continue, I recommend, for the Council’s deliberation,
that a review take place to consider a new mission
concept with adjusted priorities in the context of the
renewal of the UNAMID mandate in June. Secondly,
funding for the consolidation of peacebuilding efforts
in Darfur should be treated by Member States as a
political issue of high priority in order to protect the
investments made to date in peace and to avoid a relapse
into conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing,
which, as usual, has been very useful. We also thank
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General for their assessment report
(S/2018/12) on phase one of the reconfiguration of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
We are very encouraged that the security situation
in Darfur continues to show marked progress and that

18-006943/10

S/PV.8155

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Government is consolidating State authority across
Darfur. We commend the Government for extending
the unilateral ceasefire and for the fact that there has
been no fighting with one of the rebel groups since
around the beginning of 2015 and with a second rebel
group since the beginning of 2016. Humanitarian access
has continued to improve in Darfur and the operating
environment for the movement of humanitarian
personnel across Darfur has been reliable and open
since December 2016.
We are particularly pleased to learn that the weaponscollection campaign launched by the Government is
helping to consolidate the prevailing relative peace
and stability in Darfur, including its contribution to
the significant decrease in intercommunal conflicts,
especially given the valid concerns raised during the
launch of the campaign. It is also encouraging to note
that the collection process has been without incident in
the internally displaced persons (IDPs) camps and that
an agreement has been reached to establish a trilateral
committee, with the participation of UNAMID, the
Government and representatives of IDPs, to conduct
the collection of weapons in Kalma camp. It is our hope
that the weapons campaign will contribute to further
reducing the level of armed violence and to improving
the conditions necessary for the return of IDPs to their
original homes.

10/01/2018

to involvement in acts of banditry. That is why we are
reiterating our call to the Council to put pressure on the
rebel groups to participate meaningfully in the peace
process or face the consequences.
We are also concerned about the slow progress of
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. As the Secretary-General has said, the Doha
Document represents a comprehensive framework
for a political solution, and we urge all armed groups
to lay down their weapons and join it without delay.
We are encouraged by the Government’s expressed
commitment to the Doha Document’s implementation
and the recent action that has been taken in that
direction. It must be understood that the Government
is making these efforts in spite of the difficult regional
security dynamics and the hostile actions of other
external actors, aimed at fomenting more trouble in the
Sudan and the region by supporting some of the armed
opposition groups, as is highlighted in the report of the
Panel of Experts (S/2017/1125).

Although we are pleased that no new displacements
occurred in the reporting period, the high number of
IDPs remains one of the greatest challenges to the 10
months of sustainable peace in Darfur. However, the
Government has limited capacity to fully address that
enormous challenge and therefore needs the support of
the international community.

We are also pleased to note the successful
completion of phase 1 of the drawdown and
reconfiguration of UNAMID, and the Government’s
commendable cooperation in that regard. Furthermore,
we are pleased that no serious adverse impact has been
noted following the closure of team sites as part of the
reconfiguration process. We believe that the situation
in Darfur is conducive to proceeding to phase 2. This
time, a great deal of emphasis should be placed on
peacebuilding efforts, and that is the universal request
being made to the assessment team — for development
projects to support peace in Darfur. That will require
enhancing the financial and human resources of the
United Nations country team.

Of course, we are disappointed that progress
towards achieving a negotiated political settlement has
remained difficult so far. As the Panel of Experts on the
Sudan established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
explained in its final report (see S/2017/1125), the core
problem is the unrealistic expectations of the rebel
groups. It is difficult to assume that the rebel groups
are ready to engage with the Government in good
faith or, indeed, to consider the interests of the people
a priority. What their acts show is that they have been
involved in criminal activities, including in Libya and
South Sudan. As the report of the Secretary-General
indicates, and as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix just
stressed, whatever rebel activities there may be are
limited to pockets of Jebel Marra and have descended

It will also be very important not to overlook the
humanitarian challenges in the region. The report
shows that the number of refugees entering Darfur from
South Sudan now totals 192,826, with 89,000 of those
having arrived in 2017 alone. The Sudan obviously
need support for this, including considering the fact
that it has also been contributing to peace and stability
in the region, as can be seen from President Salva Kiir’s
visit to the Sudan on 1 and 2 November and President
Al-Bashir’s visits to Uganda on 13 and 14 October
and Chad on 1 and 2 December. In that context,
we support the efforts of UNAMID and the United
Nations country team to develop a joint fund-raising
strategy for implementing the Integrated Strategic
Framework for Darfur for the period from 2017 to

4/10

18-00694

10/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

2019. The international community should also provide
all necessary support to the peacebuilding efforts in
Darfur. We appreciate the fact that the Government
has allocated land for a temporary operating base for
the Jebel Marra task force in Golo. That will no doubt
greatly facilitate UNAMID’s anticipated traditional
peacekeeping role in the Jebel Marra area.
Lastly, we support the outcome of the assessment
and recommendations made by the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral regarding the way forward. We look forward
to the conduct of the joint review by the African Union
and the United Nations, in close consultation with
the Government, before the renewal of UNAMID’s
mandate in June.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for his report (S/2017/1113), and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for his briefing
on the various aspects of the reconfiguration of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
We consider Darfur’s progress towards stability a
positive development. The arms-collection campaign
has resulted in a decrease in violence in recent
months, and we encourage the Government to continue
those efforts in line with the provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, backed by the necessary
political support. However, we note with concern that
violations of human rights continue. We would like to
remind the Sudanese authorities of their responsibility
to protect the civilian population, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons in
vulnerable circumstances. It will be very important to
strengthen the capacity of the police and the judiciary
to prosecute and punish those responsible for atrocity
crimes. With regard to the evaluation of the UNAMID
reconfiguration and drawdown process, we would like
to highlight three issues that require urgent attention.
First, the speed with which phase 1 of the process
has been carried out has to some extent limited the
ability to plan and implement the reconfiguration
process adequately. It will be crucial to ensure that phase
2 is conducted in a more organized and coordinated
way among the teams involved. Peru supports the
recommendation to postpone the delivery of the Kalma
base until the end of phase 2 of the reconfiguration
process, so that the process can be carried out as safely

S/PV. 8155

and peacefully as possible. We are also concerned
about the delays in establishing a temporary base in
Golo. We believe that will be key to enabling UNAMID
to make progress with the peacekeeping process and
focus its resources and activities on sustainable
development in Darfur with a view to addressing the
root causes of the conflict. We consider it urgent and
vital to address the problems preventing humanitarian
aid from reaching its recipients. We acknowledge the
fact that improvements have been made in the process
of issuing visas, improvements that should also be
extended to humanitarian personnel. But it will be
equally important to eliminate bureaucratic obstacles
to the entry of containers into the country.
In our view, sustaining peace in Darfur means
achieving a permanent ceasefire and addressing the
root causes of the conflict. In that regard, we welcome
UNAMID and the United Nations country team’s
initiative in implementing the Integrated Strategic
Framework for the period 2017 to 2019. Donor
contributions, including from non-conventional sources
and regional financial institutions, should be solicited
to ensure that it is adequately implemented.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his detailed briefing
on the bimonthly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1113), and the assessments by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral on the first phase of the reconfiguration of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
We would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the positive aspects of the issue, which have been chiefly
in the security sector, as we also saw during the previous
reporting period. The fact that have been no clashes
between the Sudanese Government and the rebel groups
in Darfur for a subsequent reporting period represents
significant progress. In that regard, we welcome
the Government’s decision to extend the unilateral
ceasefire to 31 March, creating an environment that will
make it possible for the Government and UNAMID to
focus their efforts on consolidating peace in Darfur and
on the political process, by addressing the underlying
causes of the conflict, such as land-ownership issues,
and promoting development in that area.

18-006945/10

S/PV.8155

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Another aspect we would like to emphasize is the
progress that has been made with the weapons-collection
campaign promoted by the Government. Its success is
essential to improving security in local communities
and building a stable and sustainable peace. We should
prevent any possible disputes and foster commitment
to the process on the part both of civilians and militias.
This Government-initiated process aligns with
UNAMID’s peacebuilding efforts and needs committed
support from the international community.
On the humanitarian front, it is clear that the
improved security conditions have prevented any
further displacement of civilians. While that is a
positive, however, the situation of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) is still worrying, and no significant
improvements have been made despite the efforts of
the Government, agencies and humanitarian workers.
It is urgent that the international community support
the development of projects that will make it possible
for IDPs to obtain access to basic services and improve
their quality of life. We also express our thanks
for the work that is being done by the World Health
Organization, UNICEF, the World Food Programme
and other humanitarian actors.
We would highlight the fact that new cases of
obstruction to humanitarian access have been reported.
However, access has been provided to people in Jebel
Marra, which reflects the good relationship between and
the joint work done by the Government and the various
relevant agencies. In addition, although the number
of cases of human rights violations and other types
of crimes has declined compared with the previous
period, we must redouble our efforts to put an end to
cases of illegal detentions and violence against women
and children, in particular sexual and gender-based
violence, and promote access of women to justice.
Bolivia believes that one of the main challenges
facing Sudan at the moment is the revitalization of
the political process. We welcome the work of the
Government to promote the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur and stress that the only possible solution to
the crisis in the area is a political process that will
make it possible to resolve the outstanding issues
between the parties, primarily disputes with regard to
land ownership. Conflicts between communities, the
disarmament of the civilian population and militias,
and a permanent ceasefire, inter alia, are issues that
must be addressed.
6/10

10/01/2018

We believe that the differences that exist with
regard to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
must be resolved, and we encourage those parties that
have not yet signed on to it to engage in a consultative
dialogue with the Government. We also welcome the
good offices of the Special Representative, Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, and members of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel.
Finally, we believe that in order to make progress
in development and to consolidate a stable peace in
Darfur, the Sudan needs the United Nations to work
together with the African Union and the international
community in general. We also commend the progress
that has been made in the process of reconfiguring
UNAMID, and we believe that we must strengthen the
capacities of the United Nations country team in order
to move on to the second phase and ensure a successful
drawdown of the Mission. We thank UNAMID for its
efforts and dedication to peacebuilding in Darfur.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to start by expressing my
gratitude to Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (S/2017/1113). The report sheds a great deal
of light on the current situation in Darfur. We noted
therein some positive developments, which were made
possible by the joint efforts of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Sudanese Government.
We note with satisfaction the positive results of the
joint efforts of the Sudanese Government, as reflected
in the fact that the number of clashes between the
Government and rebel groups in Darfur has dropped
significantly. This improved atmosphere makes it
possible to focus the efforts of all the parties on the
political process, which should lead to the achievement
of a lasting peace. We would also like to highlight the
Government of the Sudan’s commitment to promoting
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.
Equatorial Guinea has always believed that the
conflict in Darfur must be resolved through a political
process that makes it possible to deal with the most
controversial issues, including the issue of land
ownership, conflicts between communities and the
disarmament of the civilian population and militias.
All the movements involved in this process must work
18-00694

10/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

hard to achieve peace with the Government through a
process of negotiations that is frank and inclusive. We
therefore urge the Sudanese Government to continue
working closely with UNAMID, which would be a way
of ensuring the success of the Operation and would
help the State re-establish its authority throughout
the territory.
We also welcome the fact that the movement of
UNAMID and humanitarian personnel has improved,
which was made possible by a reduction in the level of
violence. That is a very significant step forward.
We, too, urge the international community, at this
very decisive moment, to strongly support the Sudan
so as to consolidate the positive developments that we
heard about in Mr. Lacroix’s report and to help resolve
the issues that require attention.

S/PV. 8155

mass displacements of people that we are seeing once
again today.
My delegation believes that peace in Darfur must
include national reconciliation, a permanent cessation
of hostilities and an inclusive political dialogue. We
therefore call upon all of the parties involved to involve
themselves in a genuine effort to restore peace, in the
interests of the well-being of the people and the stability
of the entire region.
With regard to the implementation of the
recommendations of the strategic review, particularly
with regard to phase one of the reconfiguration of
UNAMID, my delegation would like to welcome the joint
assessment of the United Nations Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.

Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation would like to thank Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix for his high-quality presentation to the
Council, which has helped us to understand the most
recent developments in the region of the Sudan.

My delegation would like to stress two of the points
listed in paragraph 6 of resolution 2363 (2017), of 29 June
2017, with regard to the joint assessment: the progress
achieved in the implementation of phase one of the
reconfiguration of the hybrid force and the cooperation
of the Sudanese Government with UNAMID.

In our statement today, Côte d’Ivoire would like to
focus on two key points: the peace process in Darfur and
the status of implementation of the recommendations
emanating from the report on the strategic review of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2017/437), as dealt with in the
joint review of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, in particular the implementation of phase
one of the reconfiguration of UNAMID.

With regard to the first point, my delegation
welcomes the fact that phase one is functioning well. It
has resulted in the closure of 11 sites and the reduction
in the number of military personnel to 11,395 from
15,845 and of police officers to 2,888 from 3,403. The
Ivorian delegation welcomes the fact that the Sudanese
Government has allocated sites to be used in the
establishment of the Jebel Marra task force, which, in
our view, is a way to build capacity in UNAMID as it
carries out peacebuilding activities in the Sudan.

Although my delegation welcomes the improvement
in the security situation, characterized by a significant
reduction in the number of clashes between the
Sudanese Government and armed groups in Darfur,
since the extension of the unilateral ceasefires by
the protagonists and since the weapons-collection
campaign, we nevertheless remain concerned at the fact
that little progress has been made in the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, which
remains a useful political framework to address the root
causes of the conflict and to give the people of Darfur
the possibility of enjoying the dividends of peace.

With regard to the second point, in a spirit of
constructive cooperation, my delegation would like to
invite the Government of the Sudan to allow UNAMID’s
troops to move freely, in accordance with its mandate,
and facilitate the administrative procedures required to
conduct its activities.

Côte d’Ivoire fears that the current political
deadlock will bring to nought the efforts made to
date to find a way out of the crisis and that we will
see a return to the previous situation, which caused the

Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I welcome the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, to the Security
Council and thank him for his detailed briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1113) on phase
one of the reconfiguration of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In
addition, I welcome the encouraging developments
outlined in the report, in particular with regard to the
reduction in the number of clashes and levels of violence

18-006947/10

S/PV.8155

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

during the reporting period. We believe that phase one
is vital to achieving stability in Darfur.
We welcome the fact that the Government of
the Sudan has accepted the conclusions of the joint
assessment and allocated land for the establishment
of a temporary operating base in Golo. Furthermore,
we welcome the efforts of the Sudanese Government
to stabilize Darfur, in particular with regard to the
return of refugees, the collection of weapons and the
national dialogue. We support the national dialogue
process and the efforts of the African Union’s Highlevel Implementation Panel. We welcome the efforts
of UNAMID, in cooperation with local forces in
Darfur, to facilitate the transition to the post-conflict
peacebuilding phase. We reiterate the importance of
supporting the Sudan in its efforts.
The positive role played by friends of the Sudan
in implementing development projects in Darfur
facilitates the voluntary return of displaced persons
and helps to provide them with a decent life. In that
regard, I reiterate the importance of reaching a political
solution in Darfur and of ensuring that all stakeholders
participate in a peaceful political process.
It is important to end arms proliferation in Darfur.
I welcome the cooperation between UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan with regard to the collection
of weapons in certain refugee camps. In addition, I
reiterate the importance of respecting the sovereignty,
unity and independence of the Sudan. I note the
attacks perpetrated by militia groups in the Sudan
that destabilize the country and the wider region. We
reiterate our support for the Government of the Sudan
in its efforts to overcome challenges and meet the
demands of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.
We join others in expressing our deep
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
comprehensive briefing.
My delegation supports the conclusions of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1113) on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), as well as the joint assessment of
the progress of UNAMID’s reconfiguration, and would
like to offer the following observations.
Kazakhstan is encouraged by the continuing
progress made on the security and humanitarian
8/10

10/01/2018

situation in Darfur, as well as by enhanced cooperation
among the Sudanese Government, the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). The most recent proof
of such cooperation is the Government’s consent to
establish the operating base in Golo. We also welcome
the decision of the Government of the Sudan to extend
the unilateral ceasefire until the end of March. We hope
that the other parties will also undertake the efforts
necessary to invigorate an inclusive political process led
by the AU High-level Implementation Panel. Gradually,
we must move towards fulfilling the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur.
Kazakhstan is also pleased to note that no adverse
effects have been observed during phase one of
UNAMID’s reconfiguration. We believe that, during
its mandate renewal in June, UNAMID’s duties should
be adjusted towards prioritizing its peacebuilding
capacities. Peacebuilding efforts should focus on
the implementation of the UNAMID United Nations
country team’s Integrated Strategic Framework for
Darfur for 2017-2019, which identifies the priorities
for sustainable peace in Darfur. At the same time, the
Government of the Sudan needs international support,
including expertise and financial assistance to resolve
the plight of internally displaced persons and succeed
in the arms collection campaign. That effort should also
be accompanied by investment in development projects.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month.
I also welcome the new non-permanent members
of the Council and wish them every success in their
efforts. I assure them of our cooperation in the Security
Council with regard to the situation in the Sudan by
sharing all information with them.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/1113), which is before the Council. I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Lacroix, for his comprehensive briefing, from
which we greatly benefited. I would like also like to
greet from afar the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Commission itself for their efforts,
and thank them for their ongoing support to the Sudan.
18-00694

10/01/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We have considered the report before the Council
on the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. It
is a periodic report that is submitted every 60 days as
an assessment of the situation in Darfur. The Council
has perhaps noted that such reports seem to contain
nothing new. We believe that the Secretariat examines
only minor incidents and misdemeanors documented
in police stations. We believe this practice reveals
shortcomings in preparing the reports submitted by the
Secretary-General to the Council.
I would refer to paragraphs in the report that outline
the situation and the conflict in Darfur, listing minor
incidents that could occur even in the safest and most
secure cities. It appears that the authors of the report
have prepared it based on incidents reported to police
departments. This fully reaffirms what we have been
repeating and confirming, which is even confirmed in
those reports, to the effect that the situation in Darfur
is now normal, safe and just like many other areas and
cities throughout the world.
In that regard, I recall that we warned against that
situation when UNAMID’s mandate was renewed in
June 2017 (see S/PV.7989), saying that shortening the
length of the reporting periods could result in weakening
the reports submitted to the Council. We said that it
would be preferable to increase it or maintain a 90-day
reporting period.
The adoption of resolution 2363 (2017), which
calls for the gradual withdrawal of UNAMID and a
reconfiguration of the Mission, has brought Darfur to
a new phase of peacebuilding and the consolidation of
achievements in the areas of peace, security and stability
in all areas of the state, with the exception of a small
pocket in Jebel Marra. The resolution has validated the
calls that have been made by the Sudanese Government
since 2015 for the Mission to adapt to developments in
Darfur that changed the nature of the conflict that was
fought there.
In that regard, all that remains of the crisis in
Darfur are its consequences for development and
displaced persons, which are directly linked to the
peacebuilding agenda. We see it as high time that the
United Nations and the international community work
to support the Sudanese Government in addressing
those challenges once and for all. Similarly, we are
grateful for the tireless efforts of Qatar, the sponsor of
the Doha peace process, and other friendly States in

S/PV. 8155

providing assistance in rebuilding and the voluntary
return to villages and making basic services available,
which has encouraged displaced persons to return to
their homes and normal lives.
Furthermore, a number of representatives in the
Council have spoken about the Doha agreement. The
essence of the agreement has brought us to this stage
because 85 per cent of it has now been implemented. I
should also like to draw the Council’s attention to the
fact that the Implementation Follow-up Commission
for Peace in Darfur was established under the Doha
agreement and includes the five permanent members of
the Security Council. It meets in Khartoum and Doha
every six months, in rotation, to assess and analyse
developments in Darfur. We call on Council members
to consult its reports so as to see the implementation of
the Doha agreement, which was overseen by the League
of Arab States, the United Nations, the African Union
and other peace partners.
With all due respect, I therefore have to say that
I cannot accept two statements made by Council
members, calling for the need for a peace process. We
believe that the Doha Document offers the constitutional
foundation for the peace operation. To substantiate that,
I need only cite the changes in size that the Mission
has undergone on the ground and the provisions of
resolution 2363 (2017), adopted on 29 June last year.
The Sudanese Government, supported by the will
of the people of Darfur, is working to consolidate and
sustain peace by implementing projects that assist in
this regard, the most important of which is the weaponscollection campaign, because the reasons for keeping
weapons no longer exist. Overall, the report indicates
that the campaign has had outstanding results despite
a lack of resources and capacities, but the real and
sincere willingness to see it through has contributed
to its success and completion. As we have said in
previous statements, weapons collection is an absolute
prerequisite for sustaining peace and security. The
Sudanese Government has therefore spared no effort
to ensure the completion of the campaign and collect
weapons from civilians so that members of the armed
forces are the only ones to carry them and to police all
those who fail to respect laws that apply to bearing and
acquiring weapons.
We reaffirm that the success of that campaign
depends on firm respect for the law without exception — a
precept that we have followed consistently. Furthermore,

18-006949/10

S/PV.8155

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

we stress the importance of cooperation with UNAMID
and of meetings and consultations with the Joint African
Union-United Nations Special Representative for
Darfur. It is worth noting that the Vice President of the
Sudan, the resident representative of the African Union
and the United Nations will meet in Darfur shortly. The
Vice President of the Sudan has said that the Sudan is
ready to fully leave the process to and allow UNAMID
to address it if the Mission is committed to carrying
out the weapons-collection campaign. This is where we
can be flexible with regard to that issue, but we must
address weapons collection because the proliferation of
arms in any conflict zone will result in the persistence
of challenges and emergency special operations that
will be launched automatically.
My country welcomes the steps taken by UNAMID
in the context of implementing the recommendations
contained in resolution 2363 (2017). In that regard,
11 sites have been closed during the first phase of
reconfiguration. We look forward to the start of the
second phase of the Mission’s downsizing, pursuant
to resolution 2363 (2017). Accordingly, I reaffirm that
the Sudanese Government will continue to cooperate
with UNAMID towards the fulfilment of its mandate,
including the closure of the remaining sites during the
second phase. We agree that such cooperation is very
important. Various reports, including the one before us,
have highlighted that cooperation, in particular with
regard to authorizing customs clearance for containers,
visas, freedom of movement, and granting access to the
Mission and humanitarian partners.

10/10

10/01/2018

Furthermore, we have also approved the Mission’s
request to establish a temporary operating base in the
Golo region. In that spirit, the Sudanese Government has
allocated a 5,620-square metre parcel of land in Jebel
Marra for the temporary operating base in Golo. We
call on UNAMID and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to reconsider the construction of a ground
route connecting Zalingei, Golo and Rokiro, which
would be of great benefit to the population of that
region. The construction of the military airport in Golo
will not have the same beneficial impact as would such
a ground route, which would permit access to the region
and provide services to Darfur. The Governor of Darfur
has submitted our plans to UNAMID.
In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing tireless and
complementary efforts aimed at completing the peace
process, and we welcome once again the dawn of peace,
which will bring development that will end the conflict
once and for all. The delegation of my country thanks
UNAMID for its work in various areas. We also thank
police- and troop-contributing countries and reiterate
our willingness to cooperate with all regional and
international partners in connection with UNAMID so
that it can finally leave the Sudan.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

18-00694
