UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/11
7 March 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3748th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 March 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Great Lakes region", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the deteriorating
situation in the Great Lakes region, in particular in eastern Zaire. It
underlines the urgent need for a comprehensive and coordinated response by
the international community in support of the efforts of the joint United
Nations/Organization of African Unity Special Representative for the Great
Lakes region to prevent any further escalation of the crisis there.
"The Security Council reiterates, in that respect, its full support
for the five-point peace plan for eastern Zaire contained in its resolution
1097 (1997) of 18 February 1997 and welcomes the endorsement of that plan
by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) at its 65th ordinary session of
the Council of Ministers held in Tripoli from 24 to 28 February 1997.
"The Security Council welcomes the declaration of the Government of
Zaire of 5 March 1997 (S/1997/197, annex) regarding its acceptance of the
United Nations peace plan endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1097 (1997).
"The Security Council calls upon the Alliance of Democratic Forces for
the Liberation of Congo/Zaire to declare publicly their acceptance of
resolution 1097 (1997) in all its provisions, in particular an immediate
cessation of hostilities, and calls on all parties to implement its
provisions without delay.
"The Security Council is concerned about the effect which the
continued fighting is having on the refugees and inhabitants of the region
and calls upon all parties to allow access by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and humanitarian agencies to refugees and
displaced persons and to guarantee the safety of refugees and displaced
persons as well as United Nations and humanitarian aid workers. It also
takes note with concern of allegations of violations of international

97-06379 (E)

070397

/...

S/PRST/1997/11
English
Page 2

humanitarian law in the conflict zone and welcomes the sending of a United
Nations fact finding mission to the area.
"The Security Council reiterates its full support for the joint United
Nations/OAU Special Representative for the Great Lakes region and urges all
Governments in the region and all the parties concerned to cooperate with
him fully. It also urges the parties to the conflict to begin, under his
auspices, a dialogue in order to achieve a lasting political settlement.
"The Security Council welcomes all efforts, including those of the
Organizations and States of the region, aimed at resolving the crisis,
including the initiative of President Daniel Arap Moi of Kenya to convene
another regional meeting in Nairobi on 19 March 1997 and the initiative of
the OAU to organize a summit of the members of the Central Organ of the OAU
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution on the Great
Lakes region in Lome before the end of March 1997. The Council encourages
other facilitators and representatives of the regional organizations,
including the European Union and the States concerned, to coordinate
closely their efforts with those of the Special Representative.
"The Security Council reaffirms the importance of holding an
international conference on peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region under the auspices of the United Nations and the OAU.
"The Security Council expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General
for keeping it informed of developments in the Great Lakes region and
requests him to continue to do so on a regular basis.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
