S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6298th meeting
Wednesday, 14 April 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Juen
Ms. Marinčić
Mr. Garcia
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Mr. Kassianides
Mrs. Ntyam-Ehya
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Rodiles Bretón
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Dizdar
Mr. Kamudoli
Mr. Afshar
Ms. Masilko

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-31422 (E)

*1031422*

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Jordan.
Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. I also wish to commend your
predecessor for the prudent manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council in March. I would
also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing.
I should like to convey my condolences to the
Government and people of China for today’s
earthquake.
Jordan associates itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and of the Syrian Arab
Republic on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.
There is a great deal of stress and tension in our
region because of the lack of real and concrete progress
towards achieving the two-State solution and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The severe
tension in the Middle East may have alarming
consequences if the Israeli Government continues to
flout the international consensus in favour of the
two-State solution and comprehensive peace based on
agreed terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative; to defy the resolutions of international
legitimacy; and to pursue its intensified and
provocative unilateral practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories, in particular in East Jerusalem.
The perpetuation of the status quo would undermine
the sincere efforts being made in that respect, fuel
violence and drag the region and its people into chaos
and conflict. That, in turn, would have negative
repercussions on the security of the world as a whole.
The only way to avert that bleak scenario and to
reach a bright future lies in the intensification of
international efforts in the coming months to achieve
tangible progress towards the implementation of the

2

two-State solution — the only option for resolving the
Palestinian question and confirmed again and again in
the Security Council’s resolutions. Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
Al Hussein, is committed to continuing its work with
all parties concerned to achieve regional peace and
security on the basis of that solution, leading to the
establishment of an independent, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State on Palestinian national territory,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel,
with its capital in East Jerusalem and on the basis of
the borders of 4 June 1967.
In that regard, Jordan highly appreciates the lead
role of the United States and stresses the importance of
its ongoing efforts and the efforts of the international
Quartet, the European Union and all stakeholders to
relaunch serious negotiations with clear timelines and
benchmarks to measure progress towards the two-State
solution in a regional context of comprehensive peace
based on agreed principles of international legitimacy,
in particular the Arab Peace Initiative.
Jordan has repeatedly expressed its grave concern
about and frank condemnation and rejection of all
Israeli practices in the occupied Palestinian territories,
with East Jerusalem at their heart. We have repeatedly
warned against their consequences for international
peace and security, especially considering the esteemed
place held by Jerusalem in the minds and souls of
hundreds of millions of Christians and Muslims
throughout the world. We warn again today that the
continuation of such illegal, illegitimate and
condemned procedures in the occupied Palestinian
territories in general, and in East Jerusalem in
particular, and Israel’s feverish attempts to Judaize
these territories will drag the entire region into a
situation it will be unable to control, posing a major
threat to international peace and security, the
maintenance of which is a principal function of this
Council.
The practices of the Israeli Government in the
occupied Palestinian territories contradict the spirit of
genuine peace and reflect no desire for peace. Israel
has pursued its provocative unilateral measures in
occupied East Jerusalem, including excavation around
and underneath sacred Islamic and Christian sites, in
particular the Al-Haram Al-Sharif; the demolition of
homes; the obstruction of the work of the Palestinian
Endowment administration; the confiscation of lands;
the expulsion of Arab residents; and ongoing attempts

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

to create new realities on the ground, to change the
demographic nature of occupied East Jerusalem, to
obliterate the Arab, Islamic and Christian features of
the city, and to alter the legal status of the city under
Israeli occupation.
Such practices are illegal, illegitimate and null
and void, and must not continue. They contravene
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War, and relevant United Nations
resolutions, including many adopted by this Council.
They represent a grave violation of Israel’s obligations
and commitments as the occupying Power.
For the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
Al Hussein, the desecration of the holy city is a red
line that cannot be crossed. Jerusalem will remain a
priority of our country and we will spare no effort to
preserve it, to protect and maintain the Islamic and
Christian holy sites, to safeguard the Arab nature and
identity of the city, to end the Israeli occupation, and to
support its steadfast people. The international
community must promptly hold Israel accountable for
its actions and urge it to end violations that undermine
the prospects for peace and impose a fait accompli.
Jordan calls on the international community to see to it
that no irresponsible measures are undertaken to
undermine the potential for negotiations between the
two parties.
Jordan appreciates the clear positions recently
enunciated by the international community, including
the Quartet, which has emphasized the importance of
Jerusalem and reiterated that East Jerusalem is an
integral part of the territories occupied in 1967. It has
also condemned the settlement activities there and in
the other occupied Palestinian territories, all of which
are blatant violations of international humanitarian law
and of Israel’s obligations under the Road Map.
The Israeli settlements and their ongoing
construction are an unbearable burden to the
Palestinians, their movement and their development,
and represent a genuine obstacle to international and
regional efforts to relaunch the negotiations. They
undermine the prospects for a peaceful solution and a
future independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian
State. We call upon Israel to immediately and
completely halt all such activities in the occupied

10-31422

Palestinian territories, first and foremost in East
Jerusalem, including so-called natural growth.
Achieving peace requires a radical change in the
tragic status quo experienced by the Palestinians in the
occupied territories, especially in the Gaza Strip. We
call upon the international community, owing to its
humanitarian and legal responsibility, to support our
Palestinian brothers and sisters, to provide humanitarian
assistance, to end their suffering and its consequences,
to take immediate, effective action to ensure that Israel
abides by resolution 1860 (2009), and to work to lift
the blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip. We in Jordan
will spare no effort in continuing to provide all forms
of support for our Palestinian brothers and sisters and in
making others aware of their profound suffering.
Israel must know that it cannot depend on
occupation, walls and military power indefinitely. It
cannot be governed by a fortress mentality. Genuine,
lasting peace for Israel will never come about until that
country can become naturally integrated with its
surroundings and can coexist peacefully with other
countries of the region.
The explicit collective commitment of the Arab
and Islamic States, which constitute more than a third
of the United Nations membership, to attaining such a
peace is reflected in their support for the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted at the 2002 Beirut summit. This is a
key starting point for addressing all aspects of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. Today we repeat our call to seize
the historic opportunity presented by the Arab Peace
Initiative to put an end to conflict and establish a just
and comprehensive peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, to put an end to the occupation of all Syrian
and Lebanese territory and to ensure peace and security
for all the States and peoples of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): As Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe noted in his briefing, yesterday in
Madrid, Norway chaired the biannual meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC), the coordination
mechanism for the international donor community. The
purpose of the meeting was to take stock of the
implementation of the Palestinian Government’s
two-year plan and to discuss the way forward.
Launched in August 2009, the plan is a political vision
for the establishment of a Palestinian State and the

3

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

primary platform for the engagement
international donor community.

of

the

Prime Minister Fayyad reported that his
Government is on track with the implementation of the
plan. Some sectors are in need of additional attention,
while others are developing beyond expectations. But
overall the Palestinian Authority is progressing towards
the goal of completing the State-building process by
the end of 2011. In the Prime Minister’s words, we are
approaching “the home stretch” of the Palestinian
State-building process and seeing the contours of an
emerging Palestinian State structure.
The Palestinian economy, however, is suffering.
While economic growth for 2009 is estimated at
around 7 per cent, there is doubt as to whether that
growth can be sustained unless Israel continues easing
restrictions and allows the Palestinian economy to
flourish. A precondition for a sustainable Palestinian
economy and reduced donor dependency is access and
movement of goods and people throughout the
Palestinian territory. East Jerusalem constitutes 12 per
cent of the Palestinian economy and must become an
integral part of the West Bank. The Palestinian
Authority estimates its annual loss of revenue from the
blockade of Gaza at $500 million, representing around
42 per cent of the estimated donor funded budget
support to the Authority in 2010.
There is, however, a limit as to how far the
Palestinian Authority, with the financial support of the
donor community, can move the reform agenda without
a meaningful peace process and a negotiated
settlement. At one point, the fundamental issues that
stand in the way of a two-State solution must be
negotiated and resolved, paving the way for a
Palestinian State. Norway strongly supports the efforts
by the United States of America to resume the
negotiations and will continue to work with the
international donor community to make sure that
support for the two-year plan remains intact. However,
the unconditional support of donors cannot be taken for
granted. Unless the donor community sees a strong
determination by the parties to enter into a meaningful
peace process with a timeline for the completion of
negotiations and the two-State solution, willingness to
continue funding the Palestinian State-building project
will erode, undermining all that we have achieved over
the past 17 years.

4

When it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
warnings that we are at a critical juncture have over the
years not been in short supply. But I would like to
point out one element that has changed the picture. The
notion of a Palestinian State has over these years
evolved from merely a concept, through a possibility,
and now, judging from the reports to the AHLC
meeting yesterday, to a reality within reach. The
Palestinian Authority has provided us with a timeline
for the completion of the State-building process. It is
time for the parties to provide us with a timeline for the
completion of the final status negotiations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this open debate as part of the intensified
programme of the Japanese presidency of the Security
Council for this month, especially in the light of the
current delicate situation in the Middle East. I wish
also to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing on recent developments in the region.
It is only natural that we support the statements
made by the representative of Kuwait on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, by the representative of Syria on
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
and by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. Nonetheless, I wish to make
a number of points in my national capacity.
Let me begin by saying that no neutral observer
of recent developments in the Middle East could fail to
notice the stark contrast between the international
community’s tireless, constant efforts and initiatives,
on the one hand, and the unfortunate facts on the
ground, on the other. Every time there are prospects on
the horizon for the peace process to move forward, the
Israeli party takes opposing measures in order to block
and stifle those positive efforts to resume the
negotiating process in their infancy. The international
community has repeatedly taken note of the very grave
decisions taken by Israel over the past two months. In
addition, however, only a few days after the decision
taken by the ministerial-level Arab Peace Initiative
Committee at the beginning of March, and despite all
attempts and measures to counter this, Israel
announced its immoral and illegal decision to construct
1,600 additional housing units in East Jerusalem.

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

Following that, the most recent Arab summit,
held in early April in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, took
several important decisions, including a reaffirmation
that negotiation remains a strategic option for the Arab
side to regain usurped rights and consequently to
achieve the just and comprehensive peace desired by
all. But instead of responding positively, the Israeli
side chose a policy of escalation and took an extremely
grave decision last week, declaring its intention to
deport tens of thousands of Palestinians from the West
Bank, thus labelling them foreigners in their own land
and declaring their presence there illegitimate.
However, however grave they are, these decisions
are further links in a long chain of procrastination on
these issues. This can only lead to further deterioration
of the situation and to the further strengthening of
extremism and violent fundamentalism, thus hindering
dialogue and weakening the prospect of peace that
would enable the Palestinians to regain their legitimate
rights under the aegis of the international community
and within the framework of international legitimacy.
It is evident that the recent decisions taken by Israel
were only meant to stall negotiations and vitiate the
process, particularly because those who wish to see the
negotiations succeed and an independent State
established on the Palestinians’ own land will be
deported from that land.
Based on our responsibility under the leadership
of His Majesty the King of Morocco as Chair of the
Al-Quds Committee, we reiterate our serious concern
over the grave decisions that the Israeli authorities
continue to take in East Jerusalem. In this regard, we
are also following with grave concern the escalation of
the illegitimate settler policies in the occupied
Palestinian territories in general and in East Jerusalem
in particular, in an attempt to change the demographic
composition of the city, to create a new fait accompli
and to reduce the contiguous Arab presence as much as
possible. This in turn undermines the possibility of
establishing a viable Palestinian State.
In its insistence on these unilateral actions, Israel
has continued its rejected campaign against Islamic
holy sites, targeting the Al-Aqsa mosque by covering
up provocative actions by Israeli extremists to prevent
people from safely reaching houses of prayer, and by
its ongoing excavations and tunnelling under and
around the Al-Aqsa mosque.

10-31422

In this context, my delegation has previously
expressed its total rejection of the recent decision to
place Islamic sites in Hebron and Bethlehem on the list
of Israeli heritage sites, which is a direct provocation
to the feelings of hundreds of millions of Muslims and
of all those who advocate peace and coexistence in the
holy city. Considering the central position of Jerusalem
in the Middle East crisis and its symbolic value to all
religions, we appeal to the international community,
and especially the Security Council, to shoulder their
responsibility and translate their words into action to
put an end to these practices, in order to pave the way
to meaningful and firm negotiations.
The international community’s awareness of the
gravity of the recent developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the resulting consequences
for international peace and security should be
accompanied by firmer and more effective positions
that guarantee the minimum necessary for a relaunch of
genuine negotiations that preserve the vital mutual
interest of all peoples of the region to live in an
environment of peace, security and cooperation.
In order to attain this objective, the Kingdom of
Morocco will continue to carry out its best efforts
within the framework of the Arab Peace Initiative
Committee, with a view to achieving a comprehensive
and lasting solution through negotiations on final status
issues, particularly with regard to Jerusalem,
considering its importance and status. However, such a
just and comprehensive solution can come about only
with Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan and the occupied
Lebanese territories, and with the establishment of a
viable and independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital.
We continue to follow with great interest the
intensified efforts of the United States and the Quartet,
and we take note of the obstacles on the path of the
negotiating process. We also value other international
efforts, including those of the European Union, and
hope that they will lead to the launch of new, serious
and genuine negotiations, based on relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map, which all have the blessing of the
international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.

5

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council during the month of April.
I would like to join others in expressing our
sincere condolences to the People’s Republic of China
on the loss of life caused by the earthquake.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East.
As we have stated many times before, it is our
strong view that the Security Council should shoulder
its responsibility in this matter in a fair, just and
consistent manner. As we meet here today, the
insecurity in the Middle East continues to affect the
occupied Palestinian territories and the State of Israel,
as well as the Middle East region as a whole. This
insecurity is the result of the continued illegal
occupation of the Palestinian territory by the State of
Israel, the continuation of the unlawful blockade of the
Gaza Strip, the unlawful settlement activities within
the occupied territories of Palestine, the failure to
address the legitimate right of return of Palestinian
refugees in the diaspora, as well as the continuation of
retaliatory Qassam rocket attacks from the Palestinian
territory into Israel. These activities are compounded
by the failure to achieve a negotiated settlement with
respect to the occupied Palestinian territory.
The South African Government has noted with
concern Israel’s recent settlement announcement
regarding East Jerusalem and its decision to declare the
holy shrines in Hebron and Bethlehem in the West
Bank as national heritage sites.
South Africa maintains that these settlement
activities and the decision by Israel regarding these
holy shrines in two West Bank cities erode trust and
threaten the peace process. These actions by Israel
constitute yet another attempt to extend its control over
the West Bank and create a new reality on the ground.
South Africa reiterates that these actions on the part of
Israel make a resumption of negotiations in the stalled
Middle East peace process difficult and undercut the
confidence and trust required to take the process
forward. We therefore call on Israel to cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory immediately and to abstain from further

6

actions in East Jerusalem that could lead to an
escalation of violence in the region.
My delegation also notes with concern the
activities and policies of the Israeli Government and its
military forces aimed at creating a new reality on the
ground. These provocative and defiant actions of the
occupying Power — as witnessed in its settlement
policies, recent orders threatening the deportation of
thousands of Palestinians, aerial raids on Palestinian
areas and the illegal blockade on Gaza — continue to
cause suffering and destruction and adversely impact
health and educational services and the socio-economic
and humanitarian situation in Palestine.
South Africa is deeply concerned about Israel’s
prohibition of the importation of construction materials
into Gaza, which undermines and negatively impacts
reconstruction efforts following the devastating and
destructive attacks on Gaza. As an occupying Power,
Israel has specific and clear obligations under
international law. The international community’s
demand that Israel end the illegal blockade, which has
exacerbated the suffering of ordinary civilians, must
complied with. The blockade and the restrictions
imposed are in violation of international humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
contrary to the will of the international community, as
expressed in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
1515 (2003) and in the Arab Peace Initiative.
My delegation welcomes the recent meeting of
the Quartet held on 19 March 2010 in Moscow and the
ongoing efforts of the Government of the United States
of America to launch proximity talks that should lead
to negotiations with a view towards resolving all final
status issues.
In conclusion, South Africa maintains that the
creation of a viable and independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side
the State of Israel within the 4 June, 1967, armistice
borders, as well as the complete withdrawal of Israel
from all occupied Arab territories, including the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, as encompassed in
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), along with a
guarantee of the right of return of all Palestinian
refugees as set forth in General Assembly resolution
194 (III), is the only means of finding a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the conflict in the
Middle East.

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

In this regard, mere words and good will from the
international community are no longer good enough.
Meaningful action to bring about peace in the Middle
East and the realization of Palestine’s legitimate
expectation of statehood is required. Israel must be
held accountable for its actions. Action on the part of
the Security Council, which shoulders the noble
responsibility of securing international peace and
security, would certainly be a step in that direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): At the outset, I would
like to express our condolences to the Chinese
delegation for the loss of life and property in the
earthquake that struck China today. Our hearts go out
to the victims.
The Pakistani delegation would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your successful
handling of the work of the Security Council during
your presidency. We also thank you for convening this
very important meeting.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his invaluable insights on the
current situation in the region.
Pakistan would like to associate itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt and
Syria on behalf of the Non-Alignment Movement and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
respectively.
The Middle East question and the plight of the
Palestinians have remained a major challenge for the
international community for many years. After seven
decades of futility in addressing this challenge, one has
to say that, if nothing else, at least a consensus for
peace seems to be emerging in the international
community. The statements that we have heard so far
this morning confirm our recognition that this must be
so. The question now is how to convert our collective
desire for peace into a credible action plan for a wider
political settlement that would end the cycle of
violence and conflict in the region.
Without an end to mutual suspicion and discord, I
am not sure that a durable and viable political
settlement could actually take place. It would require
the international community to unequivocally call upon
Israel to check the policies of its occupying forces that
have converted the sacred land into a complex of

10-31422

checkpoints, roadblocks, siege and separation walls.
These policies have compounded the humanitarian
plight of the Palestinian people by disrupting and
adding misery to their already miserable lives.
This does not augur well for developing a
peaceful atmosphere. In addition to an improvement in
the humanitarian situation, it is essential that any
provocative measures taken by the authorities cease.
Such measures include settlement activity, especially in
and around East Jerusalem, and a growing trend to
alter the status of centuries-old places of prayer —
mosques, churches and cemeteries of the Palestinian
people. These provocations neutralize the voices of
peace and accord. These provocations also resonate as
a loud political statement of utter disregard for the
norms of international law and respect for heritage,
culture, history and traditions.
More disquieting are the latest reports of the
imposition of a military order that empowers the
occupying forces to arbitrarily expel the Palestinian
people from the West Bank and Gaza. Of late, the
world has
been riddled with
extrajudicial,
extra-constitutional and other such activities; this order
is the latest among them. Imposed under the garb of
so-called additional legal oversight, this order will be a
new tool for deporting and imprisoning the Palestinian
people. Such a measure will not only vitiate the
atmosphere, which needs to be conducive to the cause
of peace, but also raise doubts about the commitment
of Israel to a negotiated political settlement.
The cessation of repressive and provocative
measures is essential to building an environment that is
conducive to implementing the strategies of peace
within given timelines. In this context, we have taken
positive note of the strategy outlined in the statement
issued by the Middle East Quartet in Moscow on
19 March 2010. However, the Quartet must now back
its words with greater political drive for a sustained
dialogue towards the final settlement, in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions.
We believe that the Quartet’s commitments do not
obviate the role of the Security Council, but reinforce
it. We hope that the Council, in accordance with its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, will continue to strive
for the implementation of its relevant resolutions.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Pakistan’s full
support for a lasting peace for all the inhabitants of the

7

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

region and our strong commitment to the realization of
an independent, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living
side by side and in complete peace with all its
neighbours.

The great physical, economic and social
devastation caused by these illegal and destructive
colonization practices have a profound effect on the
peace process and may prejudice the outcome of an
agreement on the final status of Jerusalem.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.

Such measures and policies carried out by Israel
constitute serious and flagrant violations of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations,
the numerous General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his presentation
to us today. We would like to join others in offering our
condolences to the people and Government of the
People’s Republic of China on the earthquake that just
occurred there. The Cuban people express their
solidarity with the people of China.
Cuba associates itself with the statement by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Security Council periodically reviews the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. However, little progress has been achieved.
The situation in the region, particularly in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, is marked by
instability and insecurity.
Israel’s ongoing illegal occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab territories remains the major obstacle to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region. In flagrant violation of international law
and counter to the objectives of the peace process,
Israel, the occupying Power, continues its illegal
construction of the wall along the West Ban and, in
particular, in and around East Jerusalem, among other
things.
The settlement activities, even after the partial
and temporary moratorium proclaimed in November
2009, have continued uninterrupted. At present, over
3,700 housing units are under construction and more
than 200 Palestinian homes have been demolished to
carry out these illegal activities.
Cuba expresses great concern at the ongoing
demolition by Israel of Palestinian homes and the
eviction of Palestinian families in East Jerusalem, as
well as other illegal acts of incitement, provocation and
aggression by extremist settlers against the Palestinian
population and sacred places. This makes the current
situation very volatile and dangerous.

8

The international community, including the
Security Council, must urgently act in response to
these dangerous illegal measures adopted by Israel,
which are aimed at hindering and putting an end to the
peace initiatives, even before they begin, with the
objective of continuing to consolidate its unlawful
occupation of Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and carrying out a de facto annexation of
more Palestinian land.
Israel cannot be allowed to continue to perpetrate
serious and flagrant breaches of international law with
impunity. The international community must demand
that Israel comply with its obligations, including those
arising from the Fourth Geneva Convention, and put an
end to all its illegal policies and practices in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
The situation in the Gaza Strip, after the brutal
attack perpetrated by Israel a year ago, is
unsustainable. The imposition by Israel of closings and
restrictions on the free circulation and access of people
and goods, including humanitarian and medical
supplies, has made the recovery and reconstruction of
the area virtually impossible and has further affected
the already precarious living conditions of the
population.
The international community cannot remain
indifferent. It must take all possible practical measures
to ensure that Israel puts an end to these inhuman and
illegal policies, which heighten the tensions in the
Palestinian population. Once again, Cuba calls for
Israel to lift the cruel and illegal blockade and allow
the free entry of supplies into the Gaza Strip.
Cuba reaffirms that all measures or actions taken
or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, aimed at
changing the legal, physical and demographic
composition of the occupied Syrian Golan and its

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

institutional structure, as well as the Israeli measures to
exercise jurisdiction and administrative power there,
are null and void and have no legal effect.
We also reaffirm that all those measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the Charter and resolutions of
the United Nations, including Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), and of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as well as a challenge to the international
community. Cuba demands that Israel withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967.
Cuba once again reiterates its position in support
of a just and lasting peace for all peoples of the Middle
East that would put an end to the occupation of all Arab
territories by Israel since 1967 and guarantee the
Palestinian people’s exercise of their self-determination
by establishing an independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Mr. President, let me first
congratulate you on your presidency of this Council
and, secondly, align myself and my delegation with the
statements by the representatives of Egypt and Syria,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
Thirdly, I would like to extend our condolences to the
People’s Republic of China for the loss of life and
damage caused by the most recent earthquake.
By constructing thousands of new illegal
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Israel is killing off whatever hopes there are for peace
in the Middle East. In so doing, Israel has put itself
firmly on the wrong side of history, whereas everyone
else around the world has moved or is moving towards
peace. These actions have also subjected it to
unprecedented and unanimous condemnation by the
entire international community, at a level of ferocity
hitherto unprecedented.
Israel has found itself completely isolated. But
most disturbingly, Israel’s intransigence in building
these settlements is another example fitting a general
pattern of behaviour proving its general unwillingness
to undertake any measures that may lead to peace,

10-31422

which first and foremost requires compromise. Other
examples include the building of the separation wall,
which snakes into Palestinian territory; the eviction of
Palestinian families and the demolition of Palestinian
homes; the revocation of residency rights of Palestinian
inhabitants of East Jerusalem, forbidding them to live
in the city of their birth; the new Israeli military order
which will give the Israeli occupying forces the power
to deport Palestinians in the West Bank who are
deemed to be infiltrating the occupied territory; and,
incessant attacks on Palestinians by illegal Israeli
settlers, and the lack of law enforcement by Israeli
authorities to stop or even prevent such attacks.
It is apparent that such behaviour defies
numerous Security Council resolutions, which call
upon Israel to cease and desist and to comply with and
abide by international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Above all, it pre-empts the viable
two-State solution by changing the facts on the ground.
Hence, the international community, including the
Security Council, must hold Israel accountable for its
illegal actions and put an end to this occupation.
The blockade imposed by Israel in war-wrecked
Gaza is a form of collective punishment forbidden by
international law. It has forced 1.5 million Gazans to
live in deplorable conditions. We urge Israel to lift this
inhumane blockade in order to allow the movement of
essential goods, including construction materials. In
addition, it is imperative for the parties concerned and
the relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, to undertake actions in accordance
with General Assembly resolutions 64/10 and 64/254 in
order to ensure accountability by bringing the
perpetrators identified in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48) to justice.
Resolving these issues requires the international
community to focus all its energy and efforts on
restoring comprehensive peace in the region and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their right to an independent State of Palestine. This
requires, inter alia, the political will of this Council to
bring into effect the Council’s very own resolutions.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran ): Allow
me at the beginning to join previous speakers to
convey our condolences and sympathy to the

9

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

delegation of China for the tragic earthquake that
occurred today in its country.
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your presidency and for having
convened this open debate at this critical juncture. The
issue under discussion is of paramount importance, and
this meeting is all the more important because it is
being held at a time when the fate of the Palestinian
people is at stake due to different ineffectual peace
proposals and the continuation of the most heinous
brutalities against that people, particularly in Gaza and
East Jerusalem. Although more than a year has passed
since the end of the brutal attack on Gaza,
reconstruction of the destroyed and damaged areas,
buildings and infrastructure remains nearly impossible
due to the Israeli regime’s continuing blockade. Relief
agencies in Gaza continue to work in a very harsh
environment to help those in desperate need, in
particular the children, women and other vulnerable
people in the region.
The problem of the Middle East is not a lack of
peace plans, but rather the lack of a correct
understanding and reading of the root cause of the
crisis. As we have mentioned repeatedly, the
fundamental problem of this long-standing crisis is the
illegitimate occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories and the Israeli regime’s intransigence with
respect to every single principle of international law.
Furthermore, persistent attempts to introduce external
elements as the main factors hindering the so-called
peace process and the preservation of stability in the
region, with a view to diverting attention from the root
cause of the crisis and to evading its crimes and
responsibilities, have been an integral part of the Israeli
regime’s policies since its unblessed birth.
Israeli officials, in line with this policy, instead of
answering to world public opinion of their unparalleled
record of non-compliance with all humanitarian and
human rights principles and their long and dark
catalogue of crimes and atrocities — including
occupation, aggression, militarism, State terrorism, and
crimes against humanity — have always embarked on
making inflammatory remarks and baseless allegations
against other countries. It is now widely recognized
that the Israeli regime’s clandestine development and
unlawful possession of between 100 to 300 nuclear
warheads, and its constant threats to use them against
certain countries, pose a uniquely grave threat to
regional and international peace and security.

10

The blatant support of certain Powers for the
Israeli regime is one of the bitterest realities of our
world today. By blocking any action against the
inhumane policies and acts of this regime in each and
every corner of the world, its supporters have given it a
blank check to freehandedly violate, in an atmosphere
of impunity, all internationally recognized rights of the
Palestinian people and other peoples of the region.
Turning to the issue of Palestine, it is regrettable
to witness that the inaction of relevant United Nations
organs in dealing with the Israeli regime’s illegal
policies and practices has emboldened that dangerous
regime to continue its crimes against the defenceless
Palestinian people. The systematic acquisition of
Palestinian lands through unlawful policies and
practices, the killing and injury of hundreds of
Palestinians,
and
causing
an
unprecedented
humanitarian crisis in Palestine are part and parcel of
the normal activities of this brutal regime.
Persistent assaults against the Islamic and
Christian holy places in Jerusalem; the continued
construction of the separation wall and excavation
work in and around the Holy Mosque; the revocation of
Palestinian residency rights in the city; the forced
eviction of Palestinian families from the city; and the
imposition of severe restrictions on movement are but
some of the illegal acts carried out by the Israeli
regime in the West Bank.
Despite strong international condemnation, illegal
settlements are being expanded much faster than they
were in the past, and more and more Palestinian houses
are being demolished. The illegal decision of the said
regime to build new housing units is a move that is
undoubtedly geared at altering the demographic
composition and architectural, cultural and religious
character of the Palestinian territories, particularly in
Jerusalem and its surrounding areas.
There is an urgent need to put an end to these
acts. There should be no room for criminals who are
motivated to commit atrocities. This Council should
live up to its responsibilities in supporting the
Palestinians and relieving them of their long suffering
under occupation.
With regard to the follow-up to the Goldstone
report (A/HRC/12/48), we particularly hope that,
within the coming months as United Nations bodies
review the report again, those members of the Security
Council who rock-solidly and unwaveringly support

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

the Israeli regime in total disregard of the norms and
principles of international human rights and
international humanitarian law will adjust their
positions to the growing international demand for
justice and the prosecution of the Gaza war criminals.
The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
and expansionist policies towards Lebanon by
constantly violating Lebanon’s land, sea and air space
and by refusing to withdraw from occupied Lebanese
land in the Sheba’a, the Kfar Shouba hills and the
northern part of Al-Ghajar village. It is also continuing
its occupation of the Syrian Golan. That regime should
immediately and fully withdraw from those occupied
territories in compliance with the basic principles of
international law and the United Nations Charter.
Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made about my country by the representative
of the Israeli regime this morning. I would like to put it
on record that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations and distortions she expressed. This is yet
another tired practice by that regime to distract the
attention of the international community from its
nuclear arsenal, as well as its criminal policies and
abhorrent atrocities in the region, including its recent
heinous crimes against the people of Palestine and
Lebanon.
Attaining a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative for the realization
of a comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in
the Middle East and beyond. In our view, a lasting
peace in Palestine and the region is possible through
justice, an end to discrimination and an end to the
occupation of Palestine and other occupied territories.
Today, we need to act collectively to demonstrate our
wholehearted support for the cause of Palestine and
rally to assist those who have been deprived of their
rights. Let us hope that the oppression and occupation
will end and justice and freedom will prevail in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mr. Rosales Díaz (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like first to convey the condolences
of the Government of Nicaragua to our sister nation of
China for the earthquake that occurred this morning. I
would also like to congratulate you on your presidency
of the Security Council and to thank you for convening

10-31422

this meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.
Nicaragua, as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement, fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt as
Chair of our Movement. I would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for the briefing he gave the Council
this morning.
Once again, Nicaragua reiterates its profound
condemnation of Israel’s illegal occupation of all
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories, and we
demand its immediate withdrawal. We condemn the
Israeli policies and practices of construction and
non-dismantling of settlements, as well as the inhuman
blockade of Gaza and the policy of breaking up the
West Bank and other Palestinian territories. Having
converted the Gaza Strip into a cemetery, the
occupying army has launched a policy aimed at
completely crushing the Palestinian people with the
construction of 1,600 new settlements in East
Jerusalem, breaching international law, particularly the
Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel has also illegally
and provocatively designated two sacred places in the
occupied Palestinian territory as belonging to Israeli
national heritage.
As if this were not enough, the occupying force
has decided to proceed with mass expulsions by
promulgating a military order, which, if implemented,
would mean that tens of thousands of Palestinians
would be arrested and illegally expelled from their
homes in the West Bank. This order is not merely
illegal and in violation of human rights; its wording is
so general that, in theory, it would enable the Israeli
army to deport all the Palestinian inhabitants of the
West Bank by classifying them as infiltrators, thus
achieving the aim of cleansing the entire West Bank of
its Arab population.
Nicaragua rejects and roundly condemns the
illegal expansion of settlements and the expulsion of
Palestinian inhabitants, and categorically denounces
Israeli plans and actions aimed at the demographic
re-engineering of East Jerusalem by cleansing it of all
Arab characteristics. This is further proof that for Israel
the two-State solution, living side by side, is not an
option. Israel, ignoring the international outrage, in
contravention of the most basic rules of international
law, is violating the Charter of the United Nations and

11

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

every human rights law and ignoring the relevant
United Nations resolutions — as well as the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, which
declared the wall to be illegal — thus perpetuating the
hardline and brutal occupation of Palestine.
For some inexplicable reason, many developed
countries, supposedly in favour of human rights,
maintain political, economic and military support for
Israel, thus rewarding it for its conduct, such as, for
example, the updating of the agreement with the
European Union and the invitation to Israel to join the
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development. It is unacceptable to see the total
impunity with which Israeli actions and policies have
been carried out over the last 60 years, and
demonstrating the surprising incapacity of the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Jayasekara (Sri Lanka): At the outset let me
express our condolences to the Government and people
of China on the loss of lives and property due to the
devastating earthquake today.
Permit me to congratulate your delegation,
Mr. President, on the assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. We also wish to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs for his briefing.
My delegation believes that a resolution of the
Palestinian issue is crucial for restoring peace in the
entire Middle East, with implications elsewhere. Sri
Lanka has consistently supported peaceful settlement
of the Palestinian issue and called on all sides to fully
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council and
the General Assembly regarding the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people and the realization of the
two-State solution. Our hope is that the day will soon
come when Israel, Palestine and their other regional
neighbours can coexist in peace and harmony.
We remain deeply concerned at the daily
widespread suffering and hardships that the Palestinian
people continue to endure as a result of the economic
blockade and the ensuing grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory. While we note the
relaxation of some restrictions by the Israeli
Government, we call for the removal of all restrictions.
Further relaxations could enhance the confidence level
of all concerned. The Palestinian people have suffered

12

for too long and continue to live under occupation. The
denial of their fundamental right to statehood, which
has been recognized by the United Nations, due to
continued Israeli occupation has seriously affected
progress in the socio-economic indicators for the
population in Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem.
In that context, my delegation believes that, if
peace is to be viable and sustainable in the Palestinian
territory, Israel must withdraw from all occupied
Palestinian territories back to the 1967 borders. It must
end the economic blockade, the illegal expansion of
settlements and the construction of the separation wall.
Changing the demographic character of the Palestinian
territory will only increase tension and animosity in the
entire Middle East region.
The Palestinian Authority needs to continue the
implementation of its security plan and make every
effort it can to improve law and order and ensure that
its territory is not used for illegal attacks on Israeli
civilians. Allegations of illegal arms flows must be
investigated. Both sides must do everything possible to
ensure the safety and security of civilians.
Sri Lanka reiterates its support for the Palestinian
National Authority under the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas. We stress the need to preserve and
protect national and democratic institutions, which are
vital to a future independent Palestinian State. We
therefore urge Palestinian groups to act speedily to
reconcile and reunite within the framework of the
Palestinian National Authority. Unity among the
Palestinian people is their strength.
My delegation supports international efforts
towards the early resumption of negotiations and
believes that the unity of the Palestinian people is
essential to ensuring proper conditions for the
resumption of dialogue between Israel and Palestine at
an early stage. We also urge both sides to ensure a
climate conducive to the resumption of negotiations.
We regret that the announcement of new settlement
construction has resulted in a setback to the progress
that has been made.
We also remain concerned about the situation in
the occupied Syrian Golan, including the plight of
Syrian detainees. We call for the implementation of all
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981).

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

Sri Lanka reiterates its support for lasting peace
in the Middle East, including the peaceful settlement of
the Palestinian issue.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Vice-Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Tanin: Before I begin, I would like to take a
brief moment to pay tribute to those who lost their
lives in the earthquake that took place today in western
China. As reports continue to come in, it is clear that
this tragic event and its consequences will have serious
effects on tens of thousands of lives, in addition to the
hundreds killed and thousands injured. The Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People stands in solidarity with the people
of China as they work to rebuild. I would like to offer
the Chinese delegation our deepest sympathies and our
full support today and in the days and months to come.
In my capacity as Vice-Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the exemplary manner in which you
have been steering the work of the Council during this
month. I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Emmanuel Issoze-Ngondet of Gabon for
the efficient manner in which he presided over Council
during the month of March.
On behalf of the Committee, I would like to
express my appreciation to the Secretariat for its
monthly briefings on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. Such briefings serve
a useful practical purpose, as they reflect the latest
developments on the ground and the efforts of various
stakeholders in the international community to move
the peace process forward.
Sadly, as we meet here today there appears to be
little hope for a serious turnaround in the all-toofamiliar pattern of events on the ground. Violence
continues to affect the lives of Palestinians and Israelis.
The Committee has condemned the use by Israel of its
military might against the occupied Palestinian people,
be it through the bombing of areas in Gaza, incursions
into Palestinian cities in the West Bank and Gaza, or
dispersing non-violent protestors in front of the
separation wall built illegally on Palestinian land. The
Committee has also been unequivocal in condemning
the indiscriminate firing of rockets by Palestinian

10-31422

groups from Gaza into Israel. Violence from both sides
has to stop.
The Committee also considers it alarming and
totally unacceptable that the Government of Israel
continues to flagrantly dismiss numerous calls by
members of the international community, including the
Quartet, to halt its illegal settlement activity in the
occupied West Bank, and especially in East Jerusalem.
Prime Minister Netanyahu’s latest statements in that
regard send a clear message to the international
community that the Israeli strategy is to continue to
build in Jerusalem in violation of international law. At
the same time, the occupying Power has continued to
displace Palestinian residents in East Jerusalem
through illegal house demolitions, evictions and
revocations of residency rights.
The Committee is also seriously concerned about
the new Israeli military order that went into effect
yesterday, threatening thousands of residents in the
West Bank with deportation. The order is part of the
Israeli policy of consolidating and perpetuating its
occupation of Palestinian land through forced
displacement of the population. Implementing the
order would constitute a breach of the Forth Geneva
Convention, in particular article 49, which prohibits
individual or mass forcible transfers and deportations
of protected persons from occupied territory.
It is absolutely clear that, by creating such facts
on the ground, the occupying Power is undermining
efforts to restart the political process and
predetermining the outcome of sensitive permanentstatus negotiations on the status of Jerusalem. That
approach renders any such negotiations devoid of
purpose. In the same vein, Israel’s actions and policy
on the issue of settlements are a serious threat to the
concept of achieving a permanent settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State
solution. It is obvious that those illegal and provocative
actions of the Israeli leadership are also directly
undermining current efforts to relaunch the political
process between the parties.
The Committee fully supports the demand of the
Middle East Quartet that Israel freeze all settlement
activity, dismantle outposts and refrain from illegal
house demolitions and evictions in East Jerusalem. I
would like to emphasize here that those are not
preconditions for resuming the negotiating process;
they are Israeli obligations under the Road Map, as

13

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

endorsed by the Council. It is hoped that the 10-month
freeze in settlement expansion declared by the Israeli
Government will be comprehensive, extended to East
Jerusalem and retained indefinitely.
I would like to inform the members of the
Council that, at the end of March, the Committee
convened its annual United Nations seminar on
assistance to the Palestinian people. Its goal was to
draw the attention of the international community to
the programme of the Palestinian Authority entitled
“Palestine: Ending the occupation, establishing the
State”, which has become known as the Fayyad plan.
The programme might be understood as the Palestinian
answer to Israeli settlement-building, as it aims to
unilaterally create positive facts on the ground. Unlike
Israel’s settlement activity, the Palestinian Authority’s
programme is consistent with international law,
welcomed and supported by the international
community and promotes rather than impedes
prospects for a peace agreement. The plan reflects the
Palestinians’ determination to empower themselves by
taking their destiny into their own hands and
shouldering their share of responsibility by building
State institutions under the Israeli occupation with a
view to ending it.
This forward-looking programme of the
Palestinian Authority deserves the full attention and
tangible support of the international community. The
Palestinian Authority has proven its ability to transform
international support into concrete Governmentadministered programmes, as demonstrated by the
reform of the law and order sector and improved
transparency at all levels and in all sectors of its
activity. The Fayyad plan is a logical continuation of
these efforts.
It has to be borne in mind that this programme is
not being implemented in a political vacuum. It is now
and will be in the foreseeable future critically affected
by developments in the political process. In fact, its
success is determined by the measure of progress in the
political area. On the international level, support needs
to be built for the broad recognition of an independent
Palestinian State. At the end of the projected two years
of the plan, this recognition could be enshrined in a
Security Council resolution clearly determining the
borders of the Palestinian State based on the pre-1967
lines.

14

Our Committee has come out strongly in support
of
the
Palestinian Authority’s
State-building
programme. We would like to encourage the members
of the Security Council to support the realization of
this plan, which has already been endorsed by the
Secretary-General, the Quartet and the League of Arab
States. By putting the weight of its authority behind
this plan, the Council will create the necessary political
framework
for
ending
the
occupation
and
implementing the two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you every success in your deliberations.
I also extend my sincere condolences to the
Chinese delegation for the earthquake in China, which
has caused grave loss of life and property.
Since the most recent open debate of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, held in January, the
stakeholders in the peace process have made intensive
efforts and the international community has striven to
establish conditions conducive to a resumption of
negotiations in order to end the stalemate in the region.
At that time, we looked forward to a détente and
improvement in the situation that would reactivate the
negotiations. However, in recent months, a number of
incidents and escalations have further exacerbated
tensions and the situation in the region.
Israel’s intransigent position, intensification of
settlement activities and recent acts of aggression
towards the Palestinian people have undermined efforts
to relaunch negotiations, despite broad international
support and the efforts of the influential parties
concerned, especially the United States of America, to
resume indirect talks between the two parties that
would pave the way towards substantive consultations
to address the root causes of the conflict. These
endeavours have been supported by the Arab States in a
statement issued by the follow-up committee on the
Arab Peace Initiative, embodying a constructive
position that reflects the eagerness of Arab countries to
support any effort to implement the will of peace.

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

Unfortunately, the ongoing appeals of various
States and regional and international organizations
have not been met with a positive response from the
Israeli occupation forces, which have continued to act
provocatively and to disavow agreements and terms of
reference previously agreed with a view to attaining a
peaceful settlement of the situation. In that respect, I
should like to reiterate my country’s full condemnation
of Israel’s policy of maintaining the status quo. I recall
in that respect the statement of President Zine
El Abidine Ben Ali at the recent Arab summit in Sirte,
Libya, in which he said that
“Israel’s
ongoing
acts
of
provocation,
maintenance of the status quo, and deliberate
intent to thwart any serious attempt to resume
negotiations can only deepen the despair and
frustration of the Arabs and of peace-loving
nations throughout the world, and will aggravate
the regional tensions and stalemate”.
I also recall His Excellency’s position on the
same occasion concerning Tunisia’s categorical
rejection of Israel’s schemes to alter the identity of
Jerusalem and to forcefully displace its population, in
particular in East Jerusalem, which it occupied in 1967
and seeks today to annex, in flagrant defiance of the
will of the international community.
In a statement issued by its Ministry for Foreign
Affairs on 11 March, Tunisia denounced the decision
of the Israeli Government to build 1,600 settlement
units in Jerusalem and the West Bank. This plan was
denounced by all parties concerned, including the
Secretary-General in his statement of 9 March, the
Quartet and a number of regional and international
organizations. Despite the clear, firm and unwavering
positions adopted in this respect, Israel’s illegitimate
practices have continued unabated, calling for
immediate and decisive intervention on the part of the
international community to compel it to respect the
resolutions of international legitimacy and its
commitments under agreements and resolutions
previously concluded.
The maintenance of the deteriorating status quo
in the Gaza Strip, which is causing a large-scale
humanitarian, economic and social crisis; settlement
activities in Jerusalem and the West Bank; the
desecration of holy places; the use of force against
Palestinian civilians and deprival of their basic rights;
the forced displacement of numerous Palestinians in

10-31422

the West Bank and Jerusalem; and Israel’s
intransigence and the impossible conditions it has set,
hindering the resumption of the peace process, will
clearly freeze and kill any prospects for the peace we
all seek. This is all taking place in a region ill-equipped
to endure this tense and deteriorating situation, which
is a real cause of alarm and the source of tangible
problems and tension on the ground.
Tunisia reiterates once again its call on the
international partners, foremost among which is the
Quartet, to step up their efforts to force Israel to end its
acts of provocation and to engage seriously in the
peace efforts. On the basis of its adherence to the
principles of peace, justice, détente and the will to
implement peace, Tunisia calls on the international
community to mitigate the suffering of the brotherly
Palestinian people by improving their humanitarian,
economic and social circumstances. My country
reaffirms that a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
can be achieved only through dialogue and negotiation,
which require the parties to abstain from all acts of
provocation and violence and from any activity likely
to prejudge the outcome of negotiations on the main
substantive issues in the Arab-Israeli conflict,
especially the question of Jerusalem and the borders of
the future Palestinian State.
The Palestinian question has always been a top
priority for Tunisia, which has consistently stood with
the brotherly Palestinian people in its just endeavour to
recover its national rights and to establish its
independent State on its national soil. In that respect,
Tunisia reaffirms its support for all serious efforts to
find a just and lasting settlement to the Arab-Israeli
conflict that would restore the occupied Arab territories
on the basis of resolutions of international legitimacy
and the terms of reference of the peace process,
including the Arab Peace Initiative.
With respect to the two sisterly countries of
Lebanon and Syria, I reiterate my country’s demand
that Israel fully withdraw from Syrian and Lebanese
territory, in line with the option of attaining a
comprehensive settlement of all aspects of the Middle
East crisis, and in a way that will provide peace and
security for all peoples of the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Thank you, Sir, for
giving me the opportunity to add my voice to the

15

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

debate on this vexed subject. Also, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for the month of April. My appreciation goes also to
the delegation of Gabon for having presided over the
work of the Security Council during the month of
March.
Like previous speakers, let me also take this
opportunity to extend my condolences to the Chinese
delegation following the sad disaster of a devastating
earthquake.
In Louis Fischer’s book entitled The Essential
Gandhi: An Anthology of His Writings on His Life,
Work, and Ideas, Mohandas Mahatma Gandhi ventured
into the question of Israel and Palestine with a mixed
sense of foreboding. He went on to express his
sympathy for the ages-long persecution of the Jewish
community, with whom he had developed a rapport and
affinity while in exile in South Africa. However, he
also observed that the call for a national home for the
Jews in the Middle East and the fact that the Arabs
sought to call Palestine their home were equally
compelling.
What is evident therefore is that neither party was
more qualified to impose their will on the other.
Gandhi would later say, in 1938, “What is going on in
Palestine today cannot be justified by any moral code
of conduct”. But for generations now, that Middle East
region has known no peace, and success in the
international community’s efforts to resolve the
conflict has been elusive.
More than 60 years down the line, we are still
struggling with finding a durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East, including progress on the
question of Palestine. It is inconceivable that people
who were born in the same place, as we could be led to
understand, and who also have so much in common
cannot agree to live peacefully side by side.
As Botswana has stated before on this subject in
various forums, there is merit in the two-State solution.
We believe that Israel and Palestine must coexist as
two sovereign States that share not only a border, but
also a common desire for peace, security and
prosperity.
We therefore urge the people of the Middle East
to summon the necessary will and courage to recognize
the folly of war and accept the virtue of dialogue. They
should start building a common future for generations

16

that will know no violence or conflict, but will instead
recognize the virtues of tolerance, accommodation and
concord.
In the interest of peace and the protection of
innocent civilian lives, it is necessary that all the
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions be given full effect and respect, alongside
the strict observance of basic humanitarian principles,
international law and international humanitarian law by
all parties to the conflict.
Over the years, international diplomatic efforts
have intensified with a view to creating an atmosphere
conducive to negotiations which are aimed at mutual
recognition and achievement of a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. We therefore
wish to echo the call of the international community
for both parties to fulfil their obligations under various
international instruments and to refrain from any steps
that could undermine the momentum of the
negotiations process.
The continuing campaign of violence as well as
the unending annexation of new territories in the area
are the most undesirable of the ingredients that should
be avoided in this delicate procedure of remoulding a
peaceful accord. Those who employ such unsavoury
tactics risk compromising their own credibility and
integrity as genuine and committed partners in the
quest for solutions to the Situation in the Middle East
and settlement of the question of Palestine.
The
responsibility
for
bringing
about
transformative change in the Middle East would be the
greatest reward, and it is a moral imperative, in
contrast with carrying out provocative actions,
demolitions and invasions and outdoing one another in
the theatre of war. Such change should be brought
about so that, for the first time in living memory, the
children of that region can also realize their dreams
rather than face constant confrontation and difficulty,
so that they too, like all children in other parts of the
world, can live the dignified lives experienced by their
counterparts elsewhere in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. De Las Ovalles Colmenares (Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
join in the expressions of distress and condolences on

10-31422

S/PV.6298 (Resumption 1)

the earthquake suffered by the fraternal People’s
Republic of China.
We wish also to thank you, Sir, for the manner in
which you have presided over the work of the Security
Council and to congratulate you on having convened
this debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under your
presidency.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier today by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
convinced of the need for a final, lasting, negotiated
solution that will put an end to violence in the region
without undermining the rights of peoples including
their free and legitimate right to protect their
sovereignty. This conflict poses a threat to international
peace, and we therefore support initiatives that
promote possible talks. To that end it is important to
build mutual trust, within the framework of the Road
Map, which has a most relevant role to play.
But the Government of Israel must put an end to
its settlement policies and accept East Jerusalem as the
Palestinian capital.
My Government firmly supports the Palestinian
Authority State-building programme. Here, we are
against the closures in Gaza and of other border
crossings, because they are a violation of international
humanitarian law. It is striking that, although on the
one hand the Government of Israel has advocated a
two-State solution, on the other it announces the
construction of homes on Palestinian territory for the
Israeli occupiers. In clear violation of international
humanitarian law, Israel has engaged in the
persecution, detention and deportation of any
Palestinian residing in the West Bank. Also, no less than
70,000 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip are now at risk of
being separated from their families, their land, their
livelihood and their social milieu.
On 24 March, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
addressing the Security Council (see S/PV.6292),
stressed that almost all recent disturbances between
Israelis and Palestinians have taken place in areas
where Israeli forces are present in Palestinianpopulated areas. I should make it clear too that the
Prime Minister of Israel has ignored the requests of the
United Nations and the international community to

10-31422

freeze settlement activity. The closure of Gaza
continues to be an unacceptable and inhumane
situation that must be rectified immediately. We also
support President Mahmoud Abbas’s demand that
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem be reopened.
The impediments placed in the way of Palestinians in
using their land to build homes and engage in
agriculture constitute an attack on economic
development, which results in a deteriorating situation
that poses an ongoing threat to the establishment of a
Palestinian State.
The repeated violations, acts of aggression and
other Israeli activities against Lebanon also constitute
an obvious destabilization policy by Israel in the
region. The permanent violation of air space, territory
and the territorial waters of Lebanon, as described by
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon on 3 March,
confirm that these new and continued threats are
clearly non-compliant with resolution 1701 (2006).
Similarly, we support the Government of Syria in its
demand for compliance with resolution 497 (1981) on
the Syrian Golan Heights.
International law prevents Israel from invoking
conquest and colonization, and to a lesser extent,
natural growth to the detriment of neighbouring
peoples. The expulsion of the Palestinian people from
their own lands is completely inexcusable and
constitutes a violation, unparalleled by any episode of
modern history, of the most basic principle of
humanitarian law. Our Government has, in this context,
insisted on the need to consider Chapter II, in
particular Articles 5 and 6, of the United Nations
Charter.
The Israeli Government has for some time now
acted outside the principles of the United Nations and
international law and cannot expect to develop its new
concept of so-called natural growth with impunity.
Finally, the Palestinian people should, in all
fairness, be recognized for their courage in the face of
adversity and the double standards of the international
community.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

17
