S/2001/1001

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 October 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 23 October 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 19 October
2001, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-59943 (E) 251001

*0159943*

S/2001/1001

Annex
Letter dated 19 October 2001 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088, I attach the monthly
report on SFOR operations (see enclosure). I would appreciate your making this
report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

2

S/2001/1001

Enclosure
Monthly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 30 September 2001), there were just over
19,500 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions
from all the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Allies and from 15 nonNATO countries.
2.
During the period under review, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remained relatively calm. SFOR continued its mission to ensure a safe and secure
environment throughout the area.
3.
Some violent incidents did take place, including the destruction of the car
belonging to the Serb mayor Serbsko Orasje, which was blown up by a bomb in
what is believed to have been a politically motivated act; a grenade attack which
damaged a Bosniac bakery in Doboj; and a grenade explosion under a car in Gacko
which injured two people.
4.
SFOR monitored the public school integration process involving Bosniac and
Bosnian Serb students in the Brcko district. School started for 7,000 primary and
3,200 high school pupils on 3 September. No incidents were reported.
5.
SFOR troops continued to conduct reconnaissance and surveillance operations
using ground and air patrols. Other operations included providing area security,
monitoring the Entity Armed Forces, conducting weapons storage site inspections,
providing support to the international organizations in theatre, and collecting
weapons and ammunition in the framework of Operation Harvest.
6.
SFOR also prepared contingency plans in case of any terrorist incidents
following the attacks on the United States on 11 September and, during a two-day
period from 28 to 30 September, increased search operations in the area of Visoko.
As a result, some individuals were detained and weapons confiscated.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
7.
The situation in theatre remained relatively calm throughout the reporting
period, with the entities in substantial compliance with the military provisions of the
Peace Agreement.
8.
Inspection and verification of weapons storage sites continues to be one of
SFOR’s priority tasks. The Bosnian Croat component of the Federation Army has
now resumed its normal activities. Responsibility for the weapons storage sites
guarded by SFOR since spring 2001 was handed back to the Bosnian Croat
component of the Federation Army during this reporting period. On 3 September,
the Multi-National Division (South) began relocating weapons and ammunition from
Republika Srpska and Bosnian Serb Army weapons storage sites which did not
conform to safety measures for storing ammunition and explosives.
9.
During the period under review, SFOR troops conducted 77 weapons storage
site inspections: 19 Bosnian Serb; 26 Bosniac; 13 Bosnian Croat; and 19 Federation.
On 12 September, SFOR discovered a bunker belonging to the Bosnian Serbs near
Han Pijesak in Multi-National Division (North) and confiscated a small amount of
ammunition.

3

S/2001/1001

10. SFOR troops monitored 250 training and movement activities during the
reporting period: 68 Bosnian Serb, 114 Bosniac, 10 Bosnian Croat and 58
Federation.
11. Over the period, a total of 706 mine-clearing activities were monitored: 231
Bosnian Serb, 252 Bosniac, 95 Bosnian Croat, 123 Federation and 5 Federation
Army Department.
Cooperation with international organizations
12. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), the International Police
Task Force, the Office of the High Representative, the International Criminal
Tribunal for former Yugoslavia, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).
13. SFOR continues to support the efforts of the Office of the High Representative
to establish common institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to protect the
Administrator of the Office during her auditing activities at the Herzegovacka Banka
in Mostar. With regard to assistance to the Office in opening up airfields, Bosnia and
Herzegovina resumed control of lower and middle airspace on 14 September, and
was granted authority by SFOR to negotiate the use of higher airspace with the
international organizations concerned.
14. SFOR supported local police and the International Police Task Force during
religious ceremonies in several locations, including Bugojno on 14 September
involving 10,000 people, Otaka (Sarajevo) on 22 September involving 4,000 people,
and Jelic on 29 September involving 1,000 people, as well as during a reburial
ceremony in Visegrad on 29 September attended by more than 400 people. All these
events took place peacefully.
15. SFOR provided a safe and secure environment in support of the work of the
Tribunal in areas near Ozren-Podcjelovo, Miljkovac and Cancari during
exhumations of mass graves, and in Sarajevo, Foca, Prijedor, Kozarac, Gorazde and
Jakarina Kosa, where other remains were discovered.
Displaced persons and refugees
16. SFOR continues to support UNHCR as displaced persons return to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and is reviewing UNHCR plans for the winter. In the first half of the
year, 46,802 people returned to their homes, an increase of 80 per cent compared to
the same period in 2000. Progress in the return of displaced persons to the
Republika Srpska is, however, slower in comparison. On 3 September, several
hundred persons demonstrated in front of the UNHCR office in Sarajevo because
their homes had still not been reconstructed. There are daily reports of low-level
intimidation of Bosniacs who have returned to their homes in the Sepak area in
northern Bosnia and Herzegovina, and incidents included damage to property and
hand-grenade attacks.

4

S/2001/1001

Outlook
17. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains under
control. SFOR is continuing to monitor the situation in Kotorsko near Doboj, where
construction on 178 disputed land plots allocated to Bosnian Serbs was ordered to
cease by the local municipality following a court ruling.
18. The Government is in the process of putting in place a series of measures to
counter any terrorist threat.

5
