10

General Assembly -

efficiency and co-ordination of activities of participating
organizations in order that the fullest benefits of the
programmes of technical assistance may be brought to
the countries served ;
3. Expresses its confidence that all pertinent comments made by Member States in the General Assembly
concerning the nature, operations and other aspects of
the regular and expanded programmes of technical assistance will be kept in mind when any comprehensive
review of these programmes and their possibilities is
undertaken;
4. Invites Governments to give the fullest support
to the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance
and to announce their pledges for the year 1956 at the
forthcoming Sixth United Nations Technical Assistance
Conference, in order to ensure the continued growth of
the Programme.
537th plenary meeting,
25 October 1955.
922 (X). Question of the establishment of an
International Finance Corporation

The General Assembly,
/faving received the report9 of the Economic and
Social Council on the establishment of an International
Finance Corporation submitted in response to General
Assembly resolution 823 (IX) of 11 December 1954,
Noting that a substantial number of Governments
have taken steps towards acceptance of membership, or
have declared their intention of acquiring membership,
in the Corporation in order to further economic development by encouraging the growth of productive private
enterprise in member countries, particularly in the less
developed areas,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development for :
(a} Preparing the draft Articles of Agreement for
the International Finance Corporation ;
(b} Bringing about agreement by a large number of
its members to join in the establishment of the International Finance Corporation ;

2. Looks to the early establishment of the International Finance Corporation and to successful results
from its operations.
539th plenary meeting,
3 November 1955.

923 (X). Question of the establishment of a Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of the economic development of the under-developed countries as an essential
condition for promoting such international relationships
as are propitious for the strengthening of peace and
the attainment of world-wide prosperity,
Considering the real need of the under-developed
countries for additional means for accelerating the development of their economic-social infra-structure,
which is basic to the substantial expansion of their production and to the well-being of their peoples,
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Suppfeme11t No. 3 (A/2943), chapter III A, paras. 178 to 190.

Tenth Seuion

Recalling its resolutions on the establishment of a
Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development and, in particular, reaffirming its unanimously
adopted resolutions 724 A (VIII) and 724 B (VIII)
of 7 December 1953,
RecaUing further its appeal to Governments to review
their respective positions as regards extending their
material support to such a Fund in accordance with
changes in the international situation and other relevant
factors, both national and international, as expressed
in its resolution 822 (IX) of 11 December 1954,
Having examined the further report10 of Mr. Raymond Scheyven, assisted by the Secretary-General and
a Committee of Experts, the comments 11 thereon of the
Economic and Social Council, included in the Council's
report at the request of the General Assembly under
resolution 822 (IX), and the statement12 made by Mr.
Scheyven on 3-1 October 1955,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 583 A (XX) of 5 August 1955,
1. Expresses its great appreciation of the work performed by Mr. Scheyven, assisted by the SecretaryGeneral and the Committee of Experts ;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies in the economic and social sphere,
to transmit to him, not later than 31 March 1956, their
views, as definitely as possible, relating to the establishment, role, structure and operations of a Special United
Nations Fund for Economic Development, bearing in
mind particularly the questions enumerated in the annex
attached hereto, in order that such views and replies
may provide material for the statute of the Fund when
it is decided to establish such a Fund ;
3. Requests further that the Secretary-General, in
addressing Member States as indicated above, provide
them with all the relevant documents, including the records of the discussions on the subject at the tenth session
of the General Assembly;
4. Establishes an Ad H oc Committee composed of
representatives of sixteen Governments, to be appointed
by the President of the General Assembly, to analyse the
replies and comments of Governments received under
paragraph 2 above, with a view to submitting to the
Economic and Social Council at its twenty-second session and to the General Assembly at its eleventh session
such interim report as it may be in a position to make,
and its final report to the twenty-third session of the
Council, it being understood that in making such reports,
it would not commit any Member Government;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to provide the Ad
H oc Committee with all the necessary facilities;
6. Expresses the hope, in view of the increased support for the proposed establishment of a Special United
Nations Fund for Economic Development, that conditions more favourable to the establishment of an international Fund will be created in the near future, and
that savings from internationally supervised world-wide
disarmament will provide additional means for financIbid., Supplement No. 17 (A/2906).
lbid., Suppleme11t No. 3 (A/2943), chapter III A, paras.
142 to 177.
12 lbid., Tenth Session, Second Committee, 366th meeting.
10
11

Reaolutions adopted on the reporh of the Second Committee

ing the economic development of under-developed countries, and will further the aims and objectives of such
a Fund.
553rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1955.
ANNEX

11

ernment of Libya, could furnish additional assistance
to the United Kingdom of Libya with a view to fmancing its fundamental and urgent programmes of economic
and social development, giving consideration to the possibility of opening a special account of voluntary contributions to that end, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its seventh session,

1. What, in the expectation of your Government, will be the
role of a Special Fund in the economic development of your
country?
2. What is. the opinion of your Government as regards the
nature of contributions to the operational budget of the Special
Fund?

Recalling further its resolution 529 (VI) of 29 January 1952 on the -problem of war damages in Libya,

3. What is the opinion of your Government as to the initial
sum which should be collected before the Special Fund starts
its operations?

Having noted the communication18 dated 1 September 1955 from the Prime Minister of Libya, addressed
to the Secretary-General,

4. What does your Government think as to the Special Fund
making grants-in-aid and loans and under what terms and
conditions?
5. What is the opinion of your Government about the relationships between the Special Fund on the one hand and the
United Nations and the specialized agencies on the other?
6. What, in the opinion of your Government, should be the
structure (governing bodies and management) of the Special
Fund?

7. What, in the opinion of your Government, should be the
methods and mechanism for the appraisal of projects submitted
by Governments?
8. Any other suggestions your Government may have regarding the structure and functions of the Special Fund.

*

*

*

At the 553rd plenary meeting on 9 December 1955,
after the adoption of the resolution, the President proposed the following States Members to be represented
on the Ad Hoe Committee: CANADA, CHILE, COLOMBIA,
CUBA, EGYPT, FRANCE, INDIA, INDONESIA, NETHERLANDS, NORWAY, PAKISTAN,"POLAND, UNION OF SOVIET
SocIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA and YUGOSLAVIA. The General Assembly

agreed to this proposal.
924 (X). Question of assistance to Libya

The General Assembly,
Recalling the part played by the United Nations in
the creation of the independent State of the United
Kingdom of Libya, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949 recommending that Libya, comprising Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and the Fezzan, should be constituted as an independent and sovereign State, and that this independence
was achieved on 24 December 1951, in accordance with
that resolution,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 515 (VI) of
1 February 1952 by which the Assembly requested the
Economic and Social Council to study, in consultation
with the Government of the United Kingdom of Libya,
ways and means by which the United Nations, with the
co-operation of all Governments and the competent
specialized agencies, and upon the request of the Gov-

Recalling its resolution 398 (V) of 17 November
1950 which recognizes the special responsibility assumed
by the United Nations for the future of Libya,

Having noted the reportu of the Secretary-General
on the question of assistance to Libya,
Noting with satisfaction the technical assistance given
to Libya under the United Nations technical assistance
programmes, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 726 (VIII) of 8 December 1953,
Noting that there has been no material response to
the invitation in paragraph 1 of resolution 726 (VIII),

1. Invites anew all Governments willing and in a position to do so to provide financial assistance to the United
Kingdom of Libya through the appropriate mechanisms
within th~ United Nations Organization available for
receiving voluntary contributions, in order to assist
Libya in the financing of its fundamental and urgent
programmes of reconstruction and of economic and
social development ;
2. Recommends that, if and when further means
become available for assisting in the financing of the
development of under-developed areas, due consideration be given by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies to the specific development needs of Libya;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies concerned to continue to waive local costs
and to give all possible favourable consideration to the
requests of Libya for technical assistance, taking into
account t~ special needs of Libya and the principles
of the tedmical assistance programmes of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies enumerated in
Economic and Social Council resolution 222 (IX) of
15 August 1949;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the Governments of
Member States and to take the necessary measures to
facilitate the implementation of paragraph 1 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make a special
report on the question of United Nations assistance•
to Libya in time to be placed on the provisional agenda
of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly.
553rd plenary meeting,
9 December 1955.
13
lbid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document
A/l969.
14 Ibid., document A/2968.
