UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECQRDS

FORTIETH

25
NEW

COUNCIL

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

31 MAY 1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agen.W2582)

.. . ... .. ... .. ... .. .. ... . ... ... .. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . ..*..........*.........................

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17228)

1

WPV.2582

NO-I-E
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with &u-es. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
‘document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol !V . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the O@kiul Recordsof the SecurityCow& The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
andDecisions
of the
SecurityCorcRcu. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2582nd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 31 May 1985, at 6 p.m.
ptesidenl: Mr. Birabhongse

KASEMSRI

tions of the Council on the item entitled ‘The situation
in the Middle East’, in accordance with the Council’s

(Thailand).

Prcsenr: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India. Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Rovis&aal
I.

Adoption

agenda (WAgeoW2582)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 30 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17228)
l%e meeting was calh?d 10 or&r at 6.40 p.m

T%e age&

wos adopted.

lliesituatleaintheMid&Eask
Letter dated 30 May 1985 from tba Pemaaent RePresentatlva of Egypt to tke Uniti Natloas a&as&
to
the t+l?ddeetof tlM2 seuaity catltcu (wlnzs)

usual

practice.”

3. The proposal by Egypt is not made pumuant to rule 37
or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if
approved by the Council, the invitation to participate in
the debate would confer on the Palestine Liberation
Organi.zation the same rights of participation as those conferred on Member States pursuant to rule 37. Does any
member of the Council wish to speak on this proposal?
4. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America): The
United States opposes extending to the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights to participate in
the proceedings of the Security Council as if that organization represented a Member State of the United Nations.
We have consistently taken the position that, under the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council, the only
legal basis on which the Council may grant a hearing to
persons speaking on behalf of non-governmental entities is
rule 39. For 35 years the United States has supported a
generous interpretation of rule 39, and would certainly not
object in this case. We are, however. opposed to special ad
/a~ departures from orderly procedure.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members 01
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Lebanon and Malta, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

5. When the time comes, we shall vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us, and we certainly believe in listening to all points of view. But none of that requires
violating the rules. In particular, the United States does
not agree with the recent practice of the Council, which
appears selectively to try to enhance the prestige of those
who wish to speak in the Council through a departure
from the rules of procedure. We consider this Special pmctice to be without legal foundation and to constitute an
abuse of the rules. For those masons. the United States
requests that you, Mr. President, put the terms of the proposed invitation
to the vote. Of course, the United States
will vote against the proposal.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury (Lebonon) und Mr. Gauci (Molto) took the places reserved for
rhem at rbe side of rhe Council chamber.

6. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the Council
wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it that the Council
is ready to vote on the proposal by Egypt.

7__

nc

PRFWllFNT*
_ _.--_-.

the Council that
the representative
follows:

! &+ki

lake

!n infnrm

members

of

I have received a letter dated 3 I May from
of Egypt [S/17234,
which reads as

“I have the honour
to request the Security
Council to
extend
an invitation
to the Observer
of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
to participate
in the delibcra-

n

A ..^. ^ ...^.. .A.^”
.“LC

nw

LUIC‘,,

A.. A^.., ,c L.M,f.

u,

a,,“*.

v,

l .UIaw...

Infavour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, India. Madagascar. Peru. Thailand,
Trinidad
and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic,
Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics.
Aguinsr: United

States

of America.

Abslainhtg: Australia, Denmark, France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The proposal
abstentions.

was adopted by 10 votes IO 1. with 4

At the invitation of the President. Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation Organization) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.
7. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today in
response to the request contained in a letter dated 30 May
from the representative of Egypt to the President of the
Council [S/‘/17228].
8. Members of the Council have before them document
S/17232, which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations. It is my
understanding that members of the Council are ready to
vote on the draft resolution. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put it to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
Ihe draft resolution was adopted unanimousiy [resolution
564 (1985)J.

Mr. KI-IALIL
(Egypt) (interprets/ion from Arabic):
With a heavy heart, the delegation of Egypt speaks today
out of feelings of brotherhood and solidarity. We must put
an end to the bloodshed, put the worst behind us, and look
ahead to a future of peace and tolerance.
9.

IO. The Government and people of Egypt have followed
with deep concern the bloody events in fraternal Lebanon
and the bloody conflict in and around Beirut between our
brothers, the Palestinians and the Lebanese. Egypt reaflirms in the strongest terms its support for the sovereignty
and unity of Lebanon and its full support for the national
objectives of the Palestinian people.
Il. Egypt’s course has always been based on a position
of historical and national responsibility and a deep belief
in the unity and destiny of all the Arab peoples. including
the Palestinians. as they engage together on the historical
path towards a better future in which international legitimacy and justice will prevail.
12. The delegation of Egypt speaks today with a heavy
heart about the war between brothers who until recently
had stood in one line, fighting together in defence of
Lebanon.
13. On 24 May [S/17215], the members of the Council,
through you, Mr. President, expmd
their serious conrcrn
. . . . . ,,-.

,I.,-...

hPinhtm,oA
....w..-..‘-

.r;rrlour
. .Y.“..C..

;..
-C IUWll”ll
A----1.1 -e.rL.
.s. ub1.I u-c
pa. w “1

preceding days and reaflirmed and supported
the call made by the Secretary-General on 22 May to the
Lebanese Government and to all parties concerned to
make every possible effort to put an end to the violence.
The Secretary-General, in that call, not only expressed his

during

the

deep concern
at the increase in the hostilities,
which had
led to heavy casualties on all sides, but also referred partic-

ularly to the destruction befalling the camps of the Palestinian refugees. As stated by the Secretary-General on 12
April this year, the United Nations bears a clear historical
responsibility for the safety and welfare of the Palestinian
refugees. All of us today must measure up to that
responsibility.
14. It is well known that., despite all these calls and despite all these clear-cut positions, the blood of innocent
Palestinians and Lebanese continues to be shed inside and
around the Palestinian camps. Our only possible course
today is to be unanimous and thereby strengthen the will
of the international community to put an end to this
tragedy and to stop the bioodbath in Lebanon. That wellestablished unanimity has been expressed today in the
Council.
15. -I-he subject before us now can be summed up in this
way: the need to look for practical means, in accordance
with the mandate of the Council, to ensure the protection,
security, tranquillity and welfare of the Palestinian people,
in the context of the full, unprejudiced, undiminished sovereignty of Lebanon-and
Egypt is the first to respect and
defend that sovereignty and to stand against any attempt
to undermine it under any pretext.
16. -I-he suITering being endured by the Palestinian refugees in Lebanon now not only causes deep concern but
requires that we seek in all seriousness the ways and means
to provide protection and security for them, in accordance
with resolutions adopted by the Council: in similar
circumstances.
17. This formal meeting of the Council today and the
unanimous adoption of the resolution before it are clearcut evidence, in our view. that the Council has measured
up to its responsibility. -I-he resolution also takes into
account the cooperation
of the Lebanese Government
and the need to give it effective assistance in order that a
cease-fire may be attained immediately and that all the
clashes may be brought to an end, and in order to ensure
that all parties show restraint so that the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) may be able to render
the required relief and humanitarian assistance to all the
victims and so that RII material and moral support may be
given to all the efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA).
18. Egypt is aware that the reaching of a common understanding and a practical formula to ensure and strengthen
hbanon’s
soverergnty and independence and also to
ensure the security, protection and welfare of the Palestinian refugees in the context of mutual trust between Lebanon and the PLO-the
legitimate representative of the
hkiifiiii~

pXyir

-is

ihr

key io ensuring

srabiiiry,

peace

and security as well as mutual respect between all parties.
19. All the peoples of the world have expressed their
determination to have their own entity by establishing
States
rights,
except

and thereby
tinding
the means to protect
their
welfare,
stability
and dignity-all
peoples. that is,
the Palestinian
people
in the occupied
territories

and in the Diaspora, in the camps in which they live. The
only thing they have is the international conscience and
the intematinnal community, the United Nations and the
collective responsibility which we all share. Therefore
the responsible step taken by the Council today, through
the unanimous position it has taken, is clear evidence of
the continued commitment of the United Nations to the
search for a comprehensive and just settlement of the
Palestinian question, in all its political and humanitarian aspects.

27. First, the Palestinian camps are located on Lebanese
territory. Lebanon cannot possibly agree to give up its
sovereignty over a single inch of its territory. We air confident that any other State in a similar situation would
refuse to give up its sovereignty.
28. Secondly, the fact that the Council has been convened without Lebanon’s consent to consider a situation in
hbanese
territory constitutes blatant interference in
Lebanon’s internal affairs. We believe that the position we
have taken would be takrn by any State that might be
faced in the future with the sort of situation confronting
Lebanon today.

20. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon. 1 invite him to take a place at the
Cou&l table and to make his statement.

29. Thirdly, the convening of the Council in the manner
in which it has been done today constitutes a dangerous
precedent that could at any time, without its consent,
affect any State in whose territory conflicts between local
groups took place.

21. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) (interpretorion from
Arabic): Since ;his is the first time that I have spoken in the
Council under your presidency, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of that post-even though
my congratulations are expressed to you on the last day of
this month. Your very well-known experience has been
amply and admirably demorstrated during the contacts
and consultations.

30. Fourthly, notwithstanding the fact that any State has
the right to request the convening of the Council, it is
taken for granted that the Council’s mandate is confined
to situations that threaten international peace and security.
Thus it has no right to consider internal matters.

22. I wish also to express to your predecessor, Mr. Arias
Stella, the representative of Peru, our appreciation of the
role he played during his presidency of the Council last
month and of the ability and wisdom he showed in guiding
the work of this Council.

31. Fifthly. it is not useful for the Council to consider
internal situations that are being dealt with on both the
regional and the internal level. On the contrary. the Council must encourage all etrorts in keeping with Article 52 of
the Charter of the United Nations.

23. It is with great pain that we Lebanese have been
forced to take the position we are taking in the Council. It
is as if the Council had forgotten the plight that has
amicted and continues to afflict our motherland, Lebanon.
It is as if the Council had forgotten the sacrifices made by
the Lebanese people and the tragedies which that people
has endured for the past 10 years. and particularly the past
seven years, as a result of its commitment to the Palestinian question and its protection of its Palestinian brothers residing on its territory. It was all of that which led
Israel to invade Lebanon in 1978 and irr 1982.

32. We regret that we have to place on record our opposition to the Council’s meeting without our conseni. We also
oppose and reject any decision on a matter that we consider
to be an internal matter-and
that really is an internal
matter.
33. In accordance with the instructions of my Govrmment, I wish to place on record, and ask the Council to
note. Lebanon’s opposition to the Council having dealt
with an internal Lebanese matter without Lebanon’s consent. Naturally, it follows that we oppose any resolution
adopted by the Council in this regard.

24. We are not recalling all that because we think that we
did our Palestinian brothers a favour, or because we hope
for words of thanks and appreciation. Indeed, we regard
this commitment that we have undertaken as a national
duty.

34. We regret even more deeply the fact that the Council
has ignored the point of view of Lebanon, a founding
Member of the United Nations, at a time when the United
Nations is celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the signing of the Charter, the aim of which is the consolidation of
the principles of right, justice, equality and mutual rspect.

25. Nevertheless. against our will we have had to remind
the Council of the words of senior Palestinian officials,
who will testify that what we are saying is true. The bloody
armed hostilities now taking place in our capital. Reirutthat is, on Lebanese soil-can cause no one more sorrow
than rhe Lebanese themselves, and no one could work
harder to end them than the Lebanese Government and
people. Efforts to put an end to the clashes are continuing
internally and regionally. We have great hope that those
efforts will soon bear fruit.
26.

35.
from

Mr.
de KfiMOULARIA
(France) (inrerpretorion
French):
Once again the Council
is meeting
to con-

sider the tragic situation in Beirut and in various other
harts

of Lebanon.

Since

1975. the suffering

people

of that

country have been subjected without respite to the most
severe trials. In particular.
the last three years have seen a
grievous
population.

In the past, we have

made it clear in no uncertain
terms that Lebanon
opposes the Council
dealing with the
situation
in and around
the Palestinian
camps, for the
following
reasons.

increase

in

th?

suffering

of

the

civilian

36.
We hardly need to recall tha: in the summer
of 1982
the Israeli invasion and the spiralling
violence it engendered
3

in southern Lebanon and then in Beirut caused the Council
to meet on frequent occasions and to adopt a number of
resolutions, including resolutions 508 (1982) and 509
(1982). which we hope will soon be fully implemented.
France hopes that the occupation of Lebanese territory by
the Israeli army will soon come to an end.

non and his concern to ensure respect for the principle of
non-interference in the internal atlaiairs of States.
41. When it comes to Lebanon and particularly to the
suckering visited upon its people and its inhabitants, indifference is a feeling alien to France. Let me recall the prolbund emotion that the tragedies of these past weeks in
southern Lebanon, in the region of Saida and in Beirut,
have evoked in the French people and Government.
Today, quite apart from the events that fully warrant our
meeting, we must dso think of what could happen tomorrow in certain settlements in the southern part of the country and in the Palestinian camps of Tyre and Saida.

37. Quite recently, on 24 May, the President of the Council, speaking on behalf of its entire membership, made a
statement [ibid.] expressing our deep concern at the recrudescence of acts of violence in certain parts of Lebanon.
That declaration followed a number of statements by the
Secretary-General. On I2 April and I and 22 May, hc
expressed his deep concern at the fate of the civilian population. both Lebanese and Palestinian, in various parts of
Lebanon such as southern Lebanon, the Saida area and
the city of Beirut.

42. In recent weeks, the French authorities have made
several unambiguous statements on the subject. Thus, on 2
May, the Prime Minister, Laurent Fabius. expressed
before the National Assembly “France’5 anguish at the
situation in Lebanon and in particular that of the Christians”. The Prime Minister went on to say clearly that
“France is in total disagreement with the mass displacement of populations, which could have a lasting and detrimental effect on the unity of the country.” On 29 May, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Roland Dumas. stated, referring to the situation in the camps of Sabra. Shatila and
Burj Al-Barajneh, that the French Government shared the
deep emotion that had been aroused by information about
what had happened to the inhabitants of those camps. I
myself, on instructions from my Government. was called
upon to approach the Secretary-General on several occasions to express our feelings as well as to ask that the
Organisation,
and particularly
the Security Council,
assume its responsibilities. For France, as our Minister for
Foreign Affairs said at the Council of Ministers held last
Wednesday, “It is urgent to put an end to the sufferings of
the civilian population, Lebanese and Palestinian, Christian and Moslem, both in Beirut and in the south.”

38. Because of the fine long-standing relations between
France and the Lebanese people, the recent drastic intensification of the conflict that has been eroding Lebanon
cannot leave us indifferent. These are of course domestic
aflairs on which the international community should not
have to pass judgement, Nevertheless, in the light of the
human tragedies stemming from the Lebanese conflict, the
international community has, for humanitarian reasons, a
particular responsibility which it cannot shirk. No one
seated around this table can have forgotten the Council’s
debates at the time of the Sabra and Shatila massacres in
1982. Today, once again, the victims are piling up inside
and around those same camps.
39. I should also like to recall that the United Nations is
directly involved in very important humanitarian activities
relating to the civilian population of Lebanon. At Beirut
and in the south, the members of the observer group at
Beirut and of the observer group in Lebanon which are
attached to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) are providing their assistance to the Lebanese authorities in order to alleviate the suffering of the
population and to contribute to a reduction of violence.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
which is the on-thespot embodiment of the international
community’s concern for Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, also received a humanitarian mandate in
resolution 523 (1982). It is discharging that mandate under
very dificult circumstances and with commendable devotion. Finally. everyone in this chamber must be aware that
one of the most important activities of the United Nations
in Lebanon, be it the financial contributions that have
been made or the number of refugees concerned, is carried
out by UNRWA. Indeed, its Commissioner-General
is
directly responsible to the SeeretaryGeneral.

43. France cannot forget that it was itself sorely affected
by the events taking place in Lebanon, whether in the
framework of the multinational force which was placed at
the service of the Lebanese Government or of its involvement in UNIFIL. to which it is the main ccntributor. or
because of the white-helmeted observers requested by the
Lebanese Government, a number of whom gave their lives
in the search for peace in Lebanon. Our compatriots are
also present in considerable numbers in Beirut as part of
the UNTSO observer group. We recently had occasion to
deplore the kidnapping of two diplomats, a university
instructor and a journalist. The French Government is
most concerned about those indescribable acts.
44. In such circumstances, it is fortunate. in our view,
that ihe Security Council has just appealed for an immediate end to all acts of violence against the civilian populations of Lebanon, particularly in the Palestinian refugee
camps, and for unrestricted freedom of movement for
humanitarian
and medical organisations, both governmental and non-governmental. such as UNRWA and the
ICRC. whose role is not only IO alleviate present suffering
but also to promote respect for human rights-a funda-

40. Naturally, the United Nations obvious humanitarian
responsibilities in Lebanon should not damage the sovereignty and authority of the Lebanese Government. France
has shown that no one is more attached than it is to
defending and restoring the unity. sovereignty. independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon. It is precisely
for that reason that my country understands the concerns
expressed a few minutes ago by the representative of Leba4

mental requirement
peace alike.

for individual

security and public

45. France al! J hopes that the Secretary-General will
report forthwith on UNIFIL. describing the situation in
Lebanon. Perhaps it might be a good idea if he were to
visit Lcbandn himself,
46. It is our fervent wish to see in Lebanon negotiations
between all par!ics concerned-something
we have constantly advocated-and
a search for national consensus
which will make it possible to r-tab&h
the necessary
conditions for a return to peace. France earnestly seeks the
lasting peace which is more and r3ore impztiently called
for by a!l the people of the region, who have been so sorely
tried by the events that have occurred over so many years.

53. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): It is precisely because of the
tremendous bond of brotherly affection and solidarity that
we feel for the people of Lebanon, whose ancestors
molded our civilizetinn thousands of years ago, and for the
Palestinians living inside their camps, that we are compelled to trespass on the valuable time and the many concerns of the Council, and to add our own earnest voice in a
heartfelt appeal to all to desist from further lighting, from
which innocent civilians, including women and children,
are suffering homelessness and even death. We fervently
hope that the worst is over; we fervently hope that reconciliation will follow. We offer our deepest sympathy to the
unfortunate victims and our readiness to assist in any
humanitarian way within our modest means, with the consent of the Lebanese Government. We are close to Lbanon in many ways. In brief and in truth, we suffer mentally
whenever they suffer physically.

47. Aware of the international implications of the situation, France is pleased by the adoption of this resolution,
which attests to the determination of the Council and its
concern fully to assume its responsibilities.

$4. We have spoken in the past on the general question
of the hapless Palestinian people. Our position is on record
in the statement I made before the Council on 30 August
last year [2553h meeting] and in the statement of our Minister for Foretgr Affairs in the General Assembly on 28
September.’ I strongly reaflirm it t&y. Its validity today
is perhaps only brought out more starkly by the current
tragic events. We will continue to work assiduously to
convince all concerned that an overdue solution, regrettably, can only be delayed at the expense of the chances for a
lasting peace in the Middle East.

48. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrerprelotlon from Russfun):There is serious
concern in the Soviet Union over the events at Beirut that
have led to substantial material destruction and loss of life
among the civilian population. A few days ago, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko.
at a meeting with a delegation from the League of Arab
States, emphasised the need for an immediate halt to the
bloodshed and conflict between the Arabs in Lebanon.

55. It only remains ior me to thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council for having permitted me to speak today. I should also like to welcome the
new permanent representatives of France and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and to congratulate the IRW
members of the Council on their election.

49. The Soviet delegation, proceeding from this humanitarian position. voted for the resolution which we have just
adopted and which was submitted by the President of the
Council.
50. At the same time, we cannot fail to take account of
the position of the Government of Lebanon, which
objected to the convening of an official meeting of the
Counci:. ?‘!z! was just stated quite definitely by the representative of !abanon. The Soviet delegation therefore
regrets the fact that the position of the Lebanese Government was not duly taken into account by those who
initiated the holding of today’s meeting of the Council.

56. I have already had the pleasure of extending my personal and oflicial greetings to you when we exchanged
notes only a few days ago on the establishment of diplomatic relations between our two countries, and it is therefore memorable for me to have made my first, and
hopefully my last, intervention in the Council this year
under your distinguished presidency, which has merited
the admiration of all.

51. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like to
emphasise that the situation in Lebanon is an integral part
and a direct result of the Israeli occupation and the general
continuing cordlict in the Middle East. The key element of
that contlict is the Palestinian problem. Events in Lebanon
once again confirm the urgent need to attain a just and
comprehensive Middle East settlement within the context
of which the Palestinian people would be able to exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination and establish
their own State. ihe Arabs Wouici have rciuI&
iu &iii
all the lands seized i;om them, and all the countries and
peoples of the region would finally obtain that longawaited peace.

57. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America): Mr.
President, as we approach not just the final day but the
final hours of your presidency, my delegation would like to
thank you and to congratulate you. It has been a very
heavy month, and your responsibilities have been continuous. But it has also been a very constructive month, in that
the Council took a number of actions in a very constntctive spirit. The skill you displayed as Presideni has had
fnu& to do with that outcome.
58. My delegation is pleased that the Council has been
able to agree unanimously on a resolution in a timely
fashion, The urgncy of this tragic situation at Beirut
demands no less of the Council. The Council and you
deserve recognition for having assumed their proper
responsibilities.

52. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Malta. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
5

59. WL share the anguish of most of the oth.-r council
members at the violence that has erupted anew m the Reirut area. We earnestly hope that all parties will exercise the
utmost restraint and bring the fighting to an early and
complete halt. The people of Lebanon deserve no less.

67. At this juncture, we recall the statement of the representative of the Government of the United States in this
very chamber on 26 June 1982. In trying to justify his
resort to the veto, he said:
“the draft resolution, while containing many elements
we support, fails’ to call for the essential requisite for the
restoration of the authority of the Government of J&anon, that is the elimination from Beirut and elsewhere
of the presence of armed Palestinian elements who
neit.her submit to nor respect the sovereign authority of
the Lebanese Government” [238M meeting, paru. 14.

60. We welcome this new expression of concern by the
Council and hope that its humanitarian calls will be
heeded. In particular, we urge the parties involved to
comply with the Council’s call to facilitate the work of
UNRWA, the ICRC ard other organizations in providing
immediate help to the suffering civilian population. We
also join the other members of the Council in again reaffirming the need to honour the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Lebanon. The Council has too
long called-in vain for respect for this key principle. We
hope the day will soon come when it will be upheld
.throughout Lebanon.

68. So it is very clear that the aim of the United States
Government at that time, and that of the Israelis, who had
invaded Lebanon. was to eliminate the Palestinian presence in Beirut and elsewhere. It is correct to assume that
the whole exercise that is taking place now is designed to
eliminate not only the armed elements but all Palestinians.
And, as we all know, the elimination of human beings,
regardless of their status and whether or not they are
armed, is tantamount to an act of genocide.

61. The United States has made these and similar appeals
in the past, and we make them again today. We have
consistently urged for many years now that J&anon’s sovereignty be respected and that humanitarian.attention
be
given to the civilian population. We have consistently
urged that all foreign troops leave Lebanon and that the
Manese be allowed to take steps to restore unity to their
country.

69. Scores of thousands of Palestinians in the Beirut area
and probably in the other Palestinian refugee camps in the
rest of Lebanon are yet again without shelter. The latest
information we have received is that 80 per cent of the
Shatila refugee camp has been demolished, and bulldozers
are still bulldozing houses, huts and tents in the Sabra
refugee camp. So what the criminals failed to accomplish
in September 1982 under the protection of the occupying
Power, Israel, is being accomplished now-1 cannot say
with certainty under whose protection.

62. In conclusion, I would hoJe that we do not discriminate among civilian victims of violence and that our
expressions of grief go out equally for the victims of today
as they did for the victims of yesterday. Beyond that, I
would hope that we make equal efforts today to end the
violence and suffering, as we have done on earlier
occasions.

70. The immediate task before the Secretary-General
and the United Nations, at least in our opinion, is to
rebuild the destroyed houses and places of the Palestinian
refugees on the sites where they have been forced to live for
more than two decades. The task of the United Nations is
not to abandon them and throw them into the wilderness.
UNRWA has rebuilt wrne of the houses destroyed during
the first Sabra and Shatila massacre, and we believe that
the United Nations is under an obligation to rebuild those
camps which have been destroyed again recently. I appeal
to the members of the Council to authorize the SecretaryGeneral and the other United Nations agencies to take
immediate action to provide shelter for the Palestinian
rpfugees on the sites where they have been forced to live for
,h,: past two decades or more.

63. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the Observer
of the Palestine Liberation Organisation. J invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
64. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation OrganizationL. Mr.
President, at the outset let me thank you and the members
of the Council for having invited the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian peaple, to take part in these deliberations. Sad as they are, they are of direct relationship and
relevance to us.
65. Thailand has always unreservedly supported the
Palestinian people in their plight and the need for them to
exercise their inalienable rights in their own country, Palestine. Thailand has made it very clear that it supports the
convening of an international peace conference to arrive at
a just solution of the Palestine problem. We highly appieciate the wisdom and leadership that you have personally
demonstrated. Sir.

71. We appreciate ihat the draft resolution has been
unanimously approved and has become yet another resolution of the Council. In paragraph 3, it calls on all parties to
take ~~pre-fv , _.
,,,c~c,,~PE
. ..a-~A..-...- - -. _” ta
.” .oUou;ora
..*...a...- rha
.*.- abs....I. b’ I..
.L. “U.
opinion, the best way to alleviate the suffering is to enable
those same people to go back to their homes and to live in
peace once again, in accordance with their destiny, and to
provide those camps with guarantees and assurances that
they will not be attacked again. Their safety is the responsibility of the United Nations. This has already been admitted by the Secretary-General.

66, While we deliberate and discuss here, the refugee
camps hosting scores of thousands of Palestinians are
being subjected to vindictive bombardment, shelling and
burning. Atrocities are being com,nitted with the clear aim
of eliminating the Palestinian presence in the Beirut area
and probably in the rest of Lebanon.

fi

72. Concerning the appeal to all Interested piutles to cooperate with the Lebanese Government. 1 am aftthorized
to say that :he PLO extends the hand of brotherhood to
Lebanon and that we shall work together for the welfare of
the Palestinian and Lebanese people until such time as the
Palestinians return to their homes in Palestine.

We are all aware of those records of Moshe Sharett and of
thoss plans.
80. Finally, does the Security Council need to meet every
now and then to disc= more tragedies and more tragic
events, while the people sufrer, or will the Council decide to
take definite action? Such action has been proposed by the
General Assembly--namely. to facilitate emotis and endeavours to implement those resolutions and to convent an
internatiotal pace conference under the auspices of the
United Nations in order to achieve peace in the region
through a just solution to the question of Palestine, by
enabling the Palestinian people to return to their homes in
Palestine, where we shall exercise our right to selfdetermination freely and without external interference and
establish our sovereign State in our own country.

73. To take advantage of the present plight of our refugees in order to alter the demographic structure of the area
would be immoral and inhuman and would Serve the interests of the enemies of humanity and of peace in the area.
The mass displacement of our people will only exacerbate
the situation. What is happening around Beirut could
encourage further action against other refugee camps in
J&anon.
74. Our men, women and children stood firm and held
their ground. They were neroes in the struggle for survival
and dignity, and they are determined to continue their
struggle until they are able to return to their homes-from
which they were displaced by force-to return and live in
peace.

81. At this juncture, 1 think that the Council should act to
ensure a more global, more comprehensive approach.
82. Mr. WOOLCOn
(Australia): The Australian delegation would like to add its voice to those of other renresentatives who have rightly praised you, Sir, for your tactful,
courteous and very skilful handling of the considerable and
often complex work of the Council during this month of
May.

75. The PLO wishes to recall here that in January 1985 I
addressed a letter to the JVesident of the Council, which
read, in part:

83. The Australian Government believes that this urgent
meeting of the Council is an appropriate response to the
sombre and saddening situation produced by recent events
in Lebanon. The events of the past few weeks in that country have been tragic, and indeed. have caused widespread
loss of life and property. Faced with humanitarian prob
lems of this magnitude, the Council, we believe, could not
remain silent.

“I am fufther requested to recall that on I9 September 1984, a letter was addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by Chairman Arafat [s/16749, (~~vlex]. in
which he expressed grave concern regarding the outcome of such an Israeli move, particularly in the bitter
memory of the Sabra and Shatila massacre of I7 Sep
tember 1982. It should be recalled that the SecretaryGeneral suggested a course of action which would make
more effective the mandate of UNIFIL. specirtcally in
southern Lebanon [see S/16900, cmx].

84. The tragic situation in Lebanon has caused particular
grief in Australia because of the large number of people of
Lebanese descent who have made their homes in Australia, but who none the less retain close and affectionate ties
with their former homeland. In recent statements, the Australian Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
have emphasised my Government’s deep concern over tJte
recent events and lighting in Lebanon.

76. What Chairman Arafat envisaged was not of the
magnitude of what is happening now. What is happening
now far exceeds our fears then. We still believe that the
Council should have author&d
the Secretary-General to
deploy more concrete methods to prevent the recurrence of
the crime of genocide. We still believe that the observer
group at Beirut should have kept the Secretary-General
apprised of the sad happenings in the area.

85. We have listened with the greatest sympathy and
attention to the representative of JAbanon. We have noted
with special sympathy his account of the grave situation
confronting his country, and our hope is that the resolution just adopted, which explicitly calls for respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. will contribute to strengthening the hand of the Lebanese Govemment in dealing with its difficulties.

77. We know that the Lebanese Government and the
PJD can reach an agreement, as we have done in the past.
Our main concern now is the security and safety of the
inhabitants, including those in the Palestinian refugee
camps.
78. What is happening at Beirut is not strictly a domestic
issue. It affects the fate of Palestinian refugees, whose
snfeiy arni w&arc are a i&Xii
it5piXGGVj
of ik
United Nations, and we maintain and insist that that is
why the Council is called upon to meet and to adopt the
necessa~ mmures to fulfil its functions and responsibilities.

86. In formulating its approach to the situation in J&a..,...
hoe km
.I”.., *I..a.* 1d‘,nrm,;n..
.u....-..L.. Crruamwa.rr
U”,” . . .. ..-.a. ..Y
Y-v.. weSW., ,v8ncriruu
-4.._ -.-of respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. Our appioach has, therefore. concentrated on the humanitarian
aspects of the
situation.

79. The Jsraeli invasions were carried out in 1978 and 1982
not because the Palestinians were there but in pursuance of a
policy of the Zionist movement and the Israeli Government.

87. It is the hope of the Australian Government that the
resolution will attract respect and will be adhered to. Only
7

with the cessation of hostilities can there be progress
towards removing the basic causes of violence in Lebanon.
Only with the restoration of peace can Lebanese of all
persuasions and creeds turn their attention towards reconstructing their country and securing a better way of life for
themselves and for their children. That must, after the
events of recent years, be the aspiration of all Lebanese,
and indeed of all of us.

94. The consideration by the Council of an internal Leb
anese question is interference in the alfairs of a sovereign,
independent State which fmds itself in difficulty because of
Israeli invasion and aggression and the policy of hegemony
pursued by the United States in the area and because of
this amression against the Arab nation-aggression
coupled with conspiracy against the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples.

88. We voted in favour of the resolution in the hope that
it will assist in that process.

95. In the light of Lebanon’s objection, the convening 01
this meeting of the Council is in direct contravention of
Article 2, paragraph 7. of the Charter of the United
Nations, because the Council is meeting against the will of
a country which is capable of settling its internal disputes,
and particularly in view of the fact that all the parties are
convinced of the need for cooperation and reconciliation.
Also, the Council has convened a meeting without taking
note of the sincere efforts made by the Syrian Arab Republic to conclude an agreement and restore stability and security to fraternal Lebanon. This was made very clear in the
summit meeting between Lebanon and Syria which took
place during the past two days at Damascus.

89. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite him to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote in
conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so &ci&do

90. The PRESIDENT
I invite the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
91.

Mr. ELFAITAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interprefrom Am&):
I thank you for calling on me, Sir, and
I congratule
you on completing your period as IVesident
of the Council so successfully and on having been able to
contact all delegations that have anything to do with the
subject under consideration.
tuth

92. The Syrian Arab Republic supports the position
taken by the Lebanese Government and explained by its
representative, Mr. Fakhoury, some time ago. We regret
that the Council has failed to abide by the will of Lebanon,
expressed by Mr. Fakhoury before the meeting and during
the meeting. We regard the Egyptian request for a meeting
of the Council as a manoeuvre clearly motivated by political considerations that are no secret to anyone. The most
important motive is to divert attention from the surtender
agreements impcued by Washington, from Israeli practices
in the occupied Arab territories and from the fact that
Israel is trying to perpetuate its occupation of the Arab
territories. persecuting the Arabs in the West Rank, the
Gaxa Strip, the Golan Heights and southern Lebanon.
..

93. The resolution just adopted will not help Lebanon. If
the Council really wants to maintain the sovemiantv and
mdependence of Lebanon, it will find that the resolution
will do exactly the opposite. It may even lead to the escalation of the fighting in the camps, which has coincided with
-A:*.!.:-c.i-dn
re=jii
ocu*n~ss
Ztd
&k
uhkb
brriween
Washingon and certain capitals in our region.

96. The Egyptian move is not in the Council’s interest, it
is not in Lebanon’s interest, nor is it in the Palestinian
people’s interest. It aims at thwarting the efforts of the
Syrian and Lebanese Governments to restore peace and
security to fraternal Lebanon. since Egypt has tried to
internationalire
an internal Lebanese problem. In so
doing, the Egyptian delegation seeks to row more seeds of
discord among the Arab ranks-in
Israel’s interest of
course-and
to embarrass the Arabs in diplomatic circles
and undermine their issues in international forums. to the
detriment of the Palestinian question. This runs counter to
our demand that Israel should withdraw completely and
unconditionally
from all the occupied Arab territories.
Those Egyptian manoeuvres will deceive nobodv. The
Syrian Arab Republic will stand firm against Israel and all
its allies in all international forums and on all matters.
97. Mr. KHALIL (Egypt) (htterpretationf
Arabic):
I
should like to say only a few words and I shall not add
anything new. I thank the Council again and express my
satisfaction and that of the Egyptian delegation at the fact
that the resolution was adopted unanimously.
98. The PRESIDENT: The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting

rose at 7.55 p.m.

NOTE
1 Of~rial
Records
of rhe General
Pfmary
Meetings.
13th meeting.

Assembly.

Thirlyrinrh

ScrJion.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United

Nationa

UNITED

publications

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained

from bookstorer

and diitributon

throughout

the

wutld. Comult your bookstom or write to: United Nations, Sales Section.New York or Oencva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DRS NATIONS

Les publications
dcc Nations
On&r writ en vente dans les librairiei
et lo
du monde entier.
Infomra-vous
euprh
de vare librain
ou adre&u-vow
Satii
des ventsa.
New Yark w Genkvc.

KAK

IlOAYYMTb

H’)LLAHCIR

0PrAHH’)AUHH

M3natW
0pr~n11utw1
O~~C~HHCIIH~IX
Hauwtl
w arcnlm~ax
80 BEUI paROHPx nmpa. Hawnwre
Maraswe
am II~IIIIIT~ no anpccy:
Opraw3awa
nponazue
ttYnaWt(I.
HbMJ-~WK
I&W lik~~KPa.

COMO

CONSECIAA

PUDLICAClONLS

LA publicacianu
de tas Nacioncr
t&s
par&s de1 mundo. Cons&e
Nueva York o Gincbra.

UNIRS
agenccr dfpnsitaircr
0 : Nutiuns
Unicr.

uonuio

ODbELUWEHHMX
KynIwb B IwwHbIX

cnpiiera

~6 R3naHHaX

D WCH

O~SCJXIHCHIIWI

Haul.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

HAUtitl
Mara3HHax
KH~YHOM

Cevun

no

Unidas atAn en venls en libnrias
y casus distribuidaru
en
a su librero o dirfjw
a: Nacioner
Unidan. SecciQ
de Ventas.

-.Lf

.Y

-

Litbo

io United

Nations.

New

York

00300\
.i
‘

,

. .

..

1
--.i

:
{
;
