S/2019/147*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 February 2019
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2448 (2018), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2019 and requ ested me to report
on its implementation on a quarterly basis. The present report is submitted pursuant
to that resolution.

II. Political situation
Peace process
2.
During the reporting period, important progress was made in the peace process
under the auspices of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation. Following
the high-level event on the Central African Republic held in New York in September
2018, considerable efforts were undertaken by stakeholders at various levels to
revitalize the political process, in particular the holding of direct talks between the
Government and armed groups. Meanwhile, there was growing frustration among
Central Africans with the repeated delays in convening the direct dialogue, with the
grave security incidents in recent months blamed for the delays.
3.
The Government of the Central African Republic intensified its preparations for
direct dialogue with the armed groups, with support from the panel of facilitators of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation. The President, Faustin Archange
Touadera, continued outreach efforts to Central African stakeholders, including
political parties and civil society, to strengthen national ownership and popular
support for the peace process. Opposition political parties and civil society
organizations issued a joint memorandum on 12 November calling for the prompt
launch of the African Initiative and the inclusion of political parties and civil society
organizations in the process. My Special Representative for the Central African
Republic and Head of MINUSCA intensified his engagement within the panel as a
member and with regional and international partners.
4.
At the forty-seventh meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, held in N’Djamena from 6 to
8 December, Member States from the region agreed on the imperative of reviving the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, including through more strategic
* Reissued for technical reasons on 20 February 2019.

19-01570* (E)

200219

*1901570*

S/2019/147

regional consultations, emphasizing in the final communiqué the need to launch the
direct dialogue as soon as possible. Several neighbouring countries expressed their
readiness to re-establish bilateral mixed commissions with the Central African
Republic. On 14 December, the National Assembly issued a declaration supporting
the African Initiative and recommending the launch of a dialogue with armed groups
in Brazzaville and Khartoum without delay.
5.
After months of consultation on the venue for the direct talks, the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union, my Under-Secretary General for Peace
Operations and senior officials, including ministers, from Angola, Cameroon, Chad,
the Congo, Gabon and the Sudan, as well as the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), visited the Central African Republic together from 8 to
11 January to revive the peace process and ensure sustained regional and international
commitment to a political solution to the crisis. The delegation met a wide range of
actors, including President Touadera, government officials, the diplomatic community
and civil society. On 10 January, all stakeholders agreed to convene a direct dialogue
between the Government and armed groups in Khartoum on 24 January under the
auspices of the African Union and supported by the United Nations. Following that
high-level visit, President Touadera again engaged with political parties and civil
society representatives, inviting them to participate in the government delegation to
the Khartoum talks in an observer capacity. The regional consensus to launch the talks
in Khartoum and hold any final signing ceremony in Bangui provided new hope for
progress towards an agreement.
6.
From 24 January to 6 February, a delegation of the Government of the Central
African Republic, led by the State Minister and President Touadera’s Chief of Staff,
Firmin Ngrebada, and the representatives and leaders of 14 armed groups held direct
talks in Khartoum. The talks, which were facilitated by the African Union and
supported by the United Nations, also saw the participation of representatives from
political parties, religious institutions and civil society, including women. Following
intensive negotiations, the parties reached consensus on 2 February on all major
issues on the agenda, including on justice and reconciliation, a more transparent and
inclusive governance system and transitional security arrangements. On 5 February,
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
was initialled by the parties in Khartoum during a closing ceremony hosted by the
President of the Sudan, Omer Al-Bashir, in the presence of President Touadera, as
well as the diplomatic corps and officials from countries of the region, the African
Union and the United Nations. The Agreement was formally signed in Bangui on
6 February.
7.
Of note, the parties agreed to establish a follow-up mechanism as a means to
oversee the effective implementation of the Political Agreement. On the highly
sensitive issue of justice, the parties set up a commission comprising the signatory
parties tasked with reviewing all issues pertaining to conflict -related issues of justice.
The commission will submit its recommendations to the Commission on Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, the National Assembly and the follow-up
mechanism. The parties also agreed on the creation of mixed brigades, comprising
former armed group members and national defence forces, mandated to protect the
borders of the country and transhumance activities, among other tasks. Established as
a temporary security measure, the mixed brigades should be operational for a
maximum period of 24 months. At the political level, President Touadera agreed to
accommodate additional representatives of former armed groups in the national
administration, including in the Government. Two important documents were also
negotiated and annexed to the Agreement, namely, detailed transitional security
arrangements and an implementation plan of the Agreement.

2/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

Political developments
8.
Domestic political developments were marked by tensions between the
executive and legislative branches of the Government. On 26 October, the National
Assembly voted to remove its President, Abdou Karim Meckassoua, with the
two-thirds majority required under article 70 of the constitution. His dismissal did not
have a significant impact on national stability or security, notwithstanding his being
the highest-ranking Muslim in an official position. Within the three -day time frame
established under the constitution, the Assembly elected Laurent Ngon-Baba, a
representative from the coalition loyal to President Touadera and a Muslim, as the
new President of the Assembly.
9.
On 29 October, during a debate in the National Assembly on the selection of its
new President, former anti-balaka commander and parliamentarian Alfred “Rambo”
Yekatom shot a firearm during the proceedings and was subsequently arrested. On
11 November, the International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant against him
for alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity committed between December
2013 and August 2014. Yekatom surrendered to the Court on 17 November. On
12 December, French authorities arrested former anti-balaka coordinator PatriceEdouard Ngaissona in Paris on the basis of an arrest warrant issued by the Court for
alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity. He was transferred to the Court in
The Hague on 23 January. In reaction to those arrests, on 14 December, the Maxim
Mokom faction of the anti-balaka issued a communiqué in which it announced its
withdrawal from the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, the Government
and the national disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process.
In protest against the arrest of Ngaissona, anti-balaka members in Bossangoa threatened
to carry out reprisal attacks against MINUSCA, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and civilians. Notwithstanding those threats, Mokom and representatives of
Ngaissona participated in the Khartoum talks. The Assembly also continued to p ass
key legislation throughout the second ordinary session of 2018, including the national
budget for 2019, notwithstanding tensions surrounding the dismissal of Meckassoua.
10. Political competition in preparation for the elections has already begun. In the
second week of November, following three months of countrywide preparatory
consultations, the new political coalition in support of President Touadera, the
Mouvement coeurs unis, held its founding general assembly in Bangui. In addition to
President Touadera, several high-ranking members of national institutions
participated in the general assembly, including the newly elected President of the
National Assembly, the President of the Constitutional Court and ministers and
members of the Assembly. The Government and the national election authority
continued preparations for the elections slated for 2020–2021, with the support of the
good offices and technical expertise of MINUSCA. In December, the Government
officially submitted the draft electoral code to the Assembly for adoption.
11. In December, the Mouvement coeurs unis played a prominent role alongside
President Touadera in organizing large-scale public ceremonies throughout the
country to commemorate National Day. Several opposition parties, as well as the
Catholic Church, boycotted the festivities in protest against the perceived inadequate
response by the Government to recent attacks by armed groups against displaced
populations in the towns of Alindao and Batangafo.

19-01570

3/20

S/2019/147

Local dialogue and reconciliation
12. Closely linked to the peace process led by the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation, the Government, with MINUSCA support, continued to lead local
peace and dialogue processes to advance reconciliation between communities, reduce
violence, improve social cohesion and build support for the deployment of State
institutions. In Bangassou, the follow-up committee created by the local peace
agreement has been conducting joint awareness-raising activities to prepare for the
safe and voluntary return of Muslims who were forced to flee their neighbourhood in
May 2017. The prefect, with MINUSCA support, launched a dialogue and
reconciliation initiative between the nearby villages of Gambo and Pombolo, which
has witnessed recurring cycles of intercommunal violence since 2017.
13. In many areas, however, armed groups strongly resisted local dialogue
processes, resulting in a resumption of violence. In Bambari, local dialogue intended
to build collaborative relations between the local police and ge ndarmerie and the
Muslim community was obstructed when the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique
kidnapped youth leaders participating in the dialogue and launched violent attacks
against Central African armed forces and MINUSCA. A local ceasefire agreement i n
Batangafo, which had maintained relative calm for several months, deteriorated when
the local follow-up mechanisms were unable to cope with violent robberies and
assassinations by anti-balaka associated militias, the Mouvement patriotique pour la
Centrafrique and the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique, which
began with the onset of the dry season. In Bouar, the Government and community
leaders celebrated the one-year anniversary of the 15 December 2017 peace
agreement that reduced violence and restored freedom of movement. The progress
made, however, has been recently threatened by renewed military movements by the
armed group, Retour, réclamations, réhabilitation, one of the agreement ’s signatories.
14. On 16 November, the Ministry of Humanitarian Action and National
Reconciliation and MINUSCA signed a partnership framework setting out activities
to foster peace and sustainable development in the country. This includes the
provision of technical expertise and financial resources for th e establishment and
operationalization of local peace and reconciliation committees.
15. To help to rebuild relations between communities following violence in
November, MINUSCA deployed surge teams to Alindao and Batangafo in December,
which remain there, to relaunch intercommunal dialogue with the aim of de-escalating
tensions and creating stronger mechanisms for conflict prevention.

III. Security situation
16. Violent clashes between armed groups and exactions committed by criminal
militias continued to fuel intercommunal tensions and remain the primary source of
insecurity and threats against civilians, especially women and children and
humanitarians, mostly with impunity. Armed groups and their factions continued to
hold sway in vast parts of the territory, establishing parallel administrations,
notwithstanding their stated commitment to the peace process.
17. The reporting period coincided with the resumption of the dry season in the
country, allowing for an expansion of transhumance movements, commercial trucking
and trafficking in extracted resources. As in previous years, the period was also
marked by a corresponding increase in violent clashes and attacks on civilians. The
movement of natural resources continued to fuel violent competiti on between armed
groups for access to and control of strategic sites such as mines, markets and key
roadways. Notwithstanding the increase in incidents in the final months of 2018, the
4/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

overall number of civilian deaths in 2018 linked to the conflict was si gnificantly lower
(697), compared with the same period in 2017, when it had reached 1,571.
18. The most serious incidents occurred in the centre and east of the country, where
retaliatory attacks between the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique and anti -balaka
associated militias persisted along the Alindao-Bambari and Ippy-Bambari axes.
Following the killing of two Muslim civilians on 14 and 15 November, as well as
numerous previous attacks on the Muslim population by suspected anti -balaka in
2017 and 2018, Union fighters and Muslim civilians attacked a camp for internally
displaced persons, located next to the Catholic Church, in Alindao on 15 November,
claiming that the camp was a safe haven for anti-balaka elements. The assailants
burned down the church during a violent, prolonged attack, which claimed the lives
of at least 70 individuals, including 2 priests.
19. In Batangafo, at the end of October, Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique
and Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique figh ters, along with armed
young Muslim men, launched a violent attack on a camp for internally displaced
persons, targeting civilians and burning much of the camp to the ground, in revenge
for the wounding of three Muslim civilians the day before. Eleven pers ons were killed
and 37 wounded in the attack, which also targeted the local church. Anti -balaka
fighters have frequently used such camps as a hiding place from which they attack
Muslim civilians or traders. Mouvement, Front and Union leaders have repeatedl y
threatened to attack the camps in Alindao and Ippy to forcibly evict the anti -balaka
fighters residing in them.
20. The Union pour la paix en Centrafrique continued to conduct destabilizing
activities in Bambari, including by establishing barricades aime d at impeding the
movement of MINUSCA patrols, and threatening to attack recently established police
and gendarmerie posts. The Union also continued to use violence to prevent
cooperation between the Muslim community and the national internal security forc es.
In November, the Union kidnapped several community leaders in Bambari to prevent
their dialogue with the local authorities and to prevent Muslim young people from
competing in the recruitment drive for the Central African armed forces.
21. On 10 January, coinciding with the announcement by the Government that peace
talks would commence on 24 January in Khartoum, the Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique launched an attack on a Central African armed forces position in PK0
and against a MINUSCA patrol in Bambari, with the aim of preventing the
commemoration of International Agriculture Day in Bambari, in which President
Touadera was expected to participate. The violence prompted MINUSCA to launch a
robust operation on January 10 against the Union, with a vie w to protecting civilians
and restoring security in and around Bambari. MINUSCA extended its operation to
Bokolobo, where the Union leader, Ali Darassa, has his base. Two national police
officers were killed in the initial Union attack. As a result of the clashes in the days
that followed, several civilians were wounded and more than 40 Union fighters were
killed. Over the course of the operation, which is ongoing, MINUSCA seized and
dismantled all Union bases in Bambari and in Bokolobo.
22. On 31 December, the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique
advanced to take the mining town of Bakouma in the sparsely populated area of
Mbomou prefecture, causing some 18,000 local residents to flee the area. The Front
looted most of the houses in the town and stole a vehicle belonging to humanitarian
agencies. Although the Front had threatened to continue the offensive towards
Bangassou, it withdrew from Bakouma on 16 January 2019. During the Front ’s
occupation of Bakouma, 32 people, including 5 women, were killed, many homes, a
hospital and a school were looted and 30 houses in Fatama village were burned down.
Violent clashes between the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique and anti -balaka
19-01570

5/20

S/2019/147

associated militias and attacks on civilians also occurred along t he Djema-Zemio and
Djema-Dembia axes. On 20 October, MINUSCA documented a massacre of several
Fulani families, including 5 women and 12 children, north of Zemio. Union and Front
fighters also opened fire on a funeral procession in Ippy on 25 January, killi ng
10 civilians and wounding 17.
23. Compared with prior reporting periods, the number of security incidents in
Bangui and the west of the country remained steady, notwithstanding expansion
efforts by Retour, réclamations, réhabilitation and related incide nts in north-west
Ouham-Pendé prefecture. In October, Retour, réclamations, réhabilitation sought to
formalize alliances with other armed groups active in the region, including
anti-balaka, the Sayo and Belanga factions of Revolution et Justice and the Fro nt
démocratique pour la paix en Centrafrique, to form a new coalition: the
Rassemblement centrafricain pour la paix. Notwithstanding their increasing attempts
to control and tax transhumance and mines, the coalition reaffirmed, in its initial
declaration, its commitment to the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation and
the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process. In
November, Retour, réclamations, réhabilitation moved into the south -west, along the
Cameroonian border, where the Siriri armed group is active, disarmed Siriri fighters
and forcibly integrated them into Retour, réclamations, réhabilitation ranks. In the
north-west, owing to the joint presence of the Central African armed forces and
MINUSCA troops, Retour, réclamations, réhabilitation unsuccessfully attempted to
establish a foothold in Ngaoundaye ahead of the transhumance season.
24. In the PK5 neighbourhood of Bangui, isolated security incidents occurred after
a prominent leader of a criminal gang, Mohammed Appo, was killed following an
altercation with a shop owner, which stemmed from the unsuccessful attempt by Appo
to enforce a “ville morte”. The increased presence of internal security forces and
MINUSCA forces within and around PK5 was instrumental in managing the
destabilizing impact of his death and subsequent rumours of the death of criminal
gang leader “Force” and effectively averted a deterioration in the security situation in
Bangui.

IV. Humanitarian situation
25. Civilians, in particular women and children, continue to suffer from the
consequences of conflict and are increasingly exposed to protection risks and acute
humanitarian needs. More than 1,000 protection-related incidents were recorded on
average every month. Attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure continued
unabated.
26. During the reporting period, the number of people in need of assistance and
protection increased from 2.5 million to 2.9 million, representing a 16 per cent
increase, compared with the same period in 2017. Of those people in need, more than
half are children and 1.6 million are in acute need. One child in three suffers from
severe malnutrition, and 13 per cent of the population is at level 4 of food insecurity
in a country where agriculture should be able to feed the entire population. One in
two people does not have access to safe drinking water.
27. There are record levels of displacement. More than one in four Central Africans
has fled his or her home. As at 15 January 2019, more than 648,000 people were
internally displaced throughout the country and more than 575,000 refugees were
registered in neighbouring countries. Meanwhile, more than 249,000 internally
displaced persons have returned since 2017, primarily in the Mbomou, Nana Grébizi,
Ouham-Pendé and Ouaka prefectures. Some 25,000 refugees have returned (either
spontaneously or facilitated) since 2017.
6/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

28. Humanitarian actors continue to work and deliver basic services in an
increasingly dangerous environment. In 2018, 6 humanitarian workers were kil led
and 23 injured, while a total of 396 security incidents against humanitarian actors
were recorded (more than 1 incident per day on average), compared with 301 in 2017.
This led to the suspension in operations of nearly 20 per cent of all humanitarian
organizations (25 organizations of 137 present) in the country. Notwithstanding the
challenging environment, MINUSCA continued to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance as one of its priority tasks, and humanitarian actors delivered
aid to nearly 1 million people in 2018.
29. The 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan launched on 7 January requires
$430.7 million to respond to the needs of 1.7 million people. It is currently 3 per cent
funded.

V. Protection of civilians
30. The protection of civilians from violence and exactions remains a central
priority for MINUSCA. The Mission continued to provide physical protection, ensure
a protective environment and facilitate dialogue in accordance with its new mandate
and its protection of civilians strategy, the latter of which was adopted in April 2018.
Physical protection from imminent threat of violence remained the most visible and
sought-after form of assistance by communities. In line with the new mandate and the
focus on prevention, dialogue and local peace processes continue to be an important
prevention tool, although their sustainability is hampered by the limited presence of
State institutions in most areas outside Bangui.
31. MINUSCA military operations have reduced threats by armed groups in several
areas, including in Ouham-Pendé prefecture, where Operation Mbaranga reduced
armed group activities and enabled the return of displaced civilians to their villages,
and Operation Bekpa II, which dislodged the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique from
Bambari.
32. MINUSCA also strengthened its early warning system with the recruitment of
an additional 26 community liaison assistants. A total of 78 community liaison
assistants now work closely with uniformed and civilian personnel throughout the
country to improve the Mission’s situational awareness, understanding of emerging
threats and prevention efforts. In areas of particularly high risk to civilians, such as
Alindao and Batangafo, the community liaison assistants were joined by civilian
surge teams tasked with promoting intercommunal dialogue and establishing local
ceasefires and conflict prevention mechanisms.
33. MINUSCA strengthened internal coordination with the establishment of a
coordination platform between the Bangui coordination cell and the joint task force
in Bangui to ensure an integrated approach to respond to protection of civilian
concerns in Bangui.
34. MINUSCA is expanding the training of uniformed personnel on approaches to
the protection of civilians. A training of trainers was held for officers who will
replicate the training for their relevant contingents. The Mission has also reinforced
the capacity of the Central African armed forces by conducting predeployment
training sessions using an integrated protection of civilians training module
developed by the Mission.

19-01570

7/20

S/2019/147

VI. Extension of State authority and the rule of law
Extension of State authority
35. Notwithstanding progress achieved in the redeployment of prefects, subprefects,
armed forces and internal security forces, the projection of State authority outside
Bangui remains minimal and with only limited impact. Government performance is
hampered by weak capacity, underresourced State institutions and the legacy of
decades of poor governance, poverty, inequality in the distribution of resources, low
levels of education and limited public services, underlining the continuous need not
only to strengthen the State presence outside Bangui, but also to develop the
capacities of the central Government.
36. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team continued to support the
Government in implementing the national strategy for the restoration of State
authority. The Mission and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
supported the Ministry of Territorial Administration, Decentralization and Local
Development in conducting verifications to map the presence of civil servants in
prefectures throughout the country and to collect data to highlight the gaps for review
by the Prime Minister, as Chair of the coordination and monitoring committee for the
implementation of the strategy.
37. The absence of banks outside the capital and resulting difficulties in the payment
of salaries remain an important obstacle to the deployment of local administration.
MINUSCA, UNDP and the World Bank continue to work with the Government to
review banking institutions’ proposals and to advocate with telecommunication
companies to offer Internet banking solutions to address this challenge.
Operationalization of national armed and internal security forces
38. As at 15 January 2019, 1,358 of the 7,087 soldiers of the Central African armed
forces were deployed outside Bangui. A total of 896 members of the Central African
armed forces, trained by the European Union Training Mission and Russ ian military
experts, have been deployed in seven locations working alongside MINUSCA. An
additional 248 soldiers are currently being trained by Russian military experts. The
Mission enhanced its planning and technical assistance to those units in the seve n
locations, including through joint planning and tactical cooperation. It also enhanced
its limited logistical support to the armed forces, including in the form of casualty
evacuation and fuel supply in more remote locations. The field collaboration betw een
Central African armed forces and MINUSCA continues to be critical in improving the
protection of civilians and reducing the threat of armed groups and criminal activity.
39. The Government continued to make progress in monitoring and following up on
misconduct committed by defence and internal security forces as part of broader
efforts, supported by MINUSCA, to improve accountability, discipline and respect
for human rights within these institutions. Numerous individual cases of misconduct
were observed in Bambari, Obo and Paoua during the reporting period, including
cases of physical assaults against civilians and among elements of the Central African
armed forces. The Military General Inspector and the Military Prosecutor ’s Office,
with MINUSCA support, are conducting investigations into these cases.
40. During the reporting period, 97 gendarmerie and 106 police officers were
deployed to the regions, mainly to the west of the country, bringing the total number
of national internal security forces currently deployed outside Bangui to 1,100
(729 gendarmes and 371 police).

8/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

Security sector reform
41. On 19 December, the National Assembly adopted a military appropriation bill
for the period 2019–2023, forecasting $374 million in expenditure to implement the
garrison army concept, as laid out in the national defence plan. In line with the latter,
which is aimed at building a 9,800-strong army by 2023, on 5 November, the
Government launched the first nationwide campaign for the recruitment of 1,023 new
soldiers throughout all 16 prefectures, using objective selection criteria. MINUSCA
continued to provide technical and logistical support to the authorities to ensure
inclusive recruitment through the application of quotas for recruits from all the
prefectures and for women (15 per cent).
42. MINUSCA continued to coordinate the provision of technical assistance and
training by international partners. On 20 November, 300 soldiers of the third and fifth
infantry battalions completed a two-month refresher training in advanced infantry
skills delivered by Russian instructors. On 6 December, the European Union Training
Mission concluded the training of 330 soldiers of the amphibian battalion. MINUSCA
convened periodic meetings of the International Coordination Gro up on the Central
African defence and internal security forces to better coordinate the provision of
support to the defence and internal security forces, with the participation of China,
France, the Russian Federation and the United States of America, as well as the
African Union, ECCAS and the European Union.
43. On 19 December, 248 gendarmerie and 250 police officers, recruited with
MINUSCA support, concluded their training, including specialized modules, to
prepare for future deployment in crowd control units. Their deployment remains
limited owing to a lack of logistics, infrastructure and equipment.
44. MINUSCA, through the Mine Action Service, continued to support weapons
and ammunition management by assisting the national defence and internal securi ty
forces in infrastructure planning. The Mission also delivered specialized training on
the management of ammunition and weapons storage facilities, weapons marking and
self-sustained ammunition disposal to selected members of the national defence forces.
Justice and the rule of law
45. The capacity and functioning of national judicial and penitentiary structures
outside Bangui remained limited, with 15 of 27 first instance and appellate courts
beginning to be operational, including 13 outside Bangui. The Bangui Court of
Appeal, with MINUSCA support, heard 16 cases during its second criminal session
of 2018, from 19 November to 20 December, 6 of which were related to the conflict,
resulting in the conviction of three ex-Séléka and four anti-balaka defendants.
46. MINUSCA continued to provide technical support to judicial authorities
investigating different cases relating to the crisis and violations of human rights. The
Special Criminal Court marked a milestone with its inaugural session on 22 October,
signalling the start of investigations, followed by the publication of the Court’s
prosecution strategy on 4 December. The Mission continued to use its urgent
temporary measures, apprehending 54 individuals suspected of committing various
crimes, including murder, kidnapping, armed robbery, torture and looting and the
illegal detention of weapons, during the reporting period.
47. On 9 January, the Government endorsed a national strategy on the
demilitarization of the penitentiary system, alongside prisoner health and social
reintegration policies, developed with the support of MINUSCA. The recruitment of
150 new civilian prison officer was completed on 22 November and is pending the
approval of the Government to begin training. MINUSCA continued enhanced
mentoring and training on prison security, resulting in the resolution of at least four
19-01570

9/20

S/2019/147

significant security incidents, including an attempted escape and riot. MINUSCA also
delivered training to the first national prison intervention team, which will deploy
alongside the MINUSCA corrections team for on-the-job training.
Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration
48. On 17 December, the Government launched the national disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration programme in the western part of the
country, starting in Paoua, with MINUSCA support. Disarmament and demobilization
operations in Bozoum and Paoua were completed on 18 January. A total of
137 ex-combatants, including 2 women, from the two Revolution et Justice factions,
Sayo and Belanga, and anti-balaka/Ngaissona were disarmed and demobilized. In
addition, 103 war weapons, 93 grenades, 7 rockets, 2 mortar shells and 3,199 rounds
of ammunition were collected. The Government planned to continue such operations
in Bouar and Koui in late February.
49. To complement these efforts, MINUSCA continued to expand its community
violence reduction programme in eight locations, in partnership with the International
Organization for Migration and the United Nations Office for Project Services
(UNOPS). As part of the programme, to date, a total of 3,190 combatants, young
people and community members, including 1,049 women, have been engaged in
rehabilitation works and social cohesion and income-generating activities implemented
in partnership UNOPS. From 15 October 2018 to 28 January 2019, 205 weapons of
war, 4,466 artisanal weapons, 132 unexploded ordnance and 14,506 small arms
ammunition were collected through those programmes. The national community
violence reduction strategy, developed with MINUSCA support in consultation with
the United Nations country team and national and international partners, was
transmitted to the Government for endorsement on 30 November. The strategy
provides an overarching framework for harmonizing approaches among all national
and international partners involved in the design and implementation of community
violence reduction programmes.

VII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
50. During the reporting period, grave violations of human rights, including
arbitrary killings and conflict-related sexual violence, continued to be reported as a
result of clashes between rival armed groups and of targeted attacks against civilians.
MINUSCA recorded 431 violations/abuses of international huma n rights law and
breaches of international humanitarian law affecting at least 871 victims, 844 of
whom were victims of armed group violence, mainly by the Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique and the anti-balaka. The clashes and targeted attacks caused at least
258 civilian deaths. The violations reflect a cycle of attacks and reprisals in which
camps for internally displaced persons, health centres and places of worship have
been repeatedly targeted.
51. National authorities, with MINUSCA support, continued to vet existing and new
personnel (through the recruitment process) in the defence and internal security
forces. During the reporting period, MINUSCA supported the Government in vetting
655 existing soldiers and 17 active members of the internal security forces. MINUSCA
continued to condition its support to national security forces on compliance with the
human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United Nations
security forces. During the reporting period, the secretariat for the p olicy received
and processed 32 requests to support internal security forces and Central African
armed forces through technical cooperation, training and logistical support, and in
this connection screened 1,438 Central African armed forces and internal se curity

10/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

forces personnel. As a result, 20 internal security forces personnel were refused
United Nations support, 3 were arrested and 2 were dismissed from the police service.
52. MINUSCA continued to support national authorities in the efforts to combat
incitement to hatred and violence by establishing a working group, developing an
online monitoring tool with the support of the United Nations Global Service Centre
and establishing a civil society platform for a systematic response to this issue.
MINUSCA has also engaged the national High Council on Communication to combat
this scourge through the implementation of a national action plan to prevent public
incitement to violence and hate speech. From 14 to 19 October, MINUSCA and the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
provided capacity-building training to media practitioners on preventing religious and
ethnic hatred and incitement to violence in the Central African Republic.
Transitional justice
53. In December, the mandate of the steering committee tasked with establishing
the truth, justice, reparations and reconciliation commission was extended for six
months. The committee continued to prepare its plan for national consultations, with
United Nations support. It has undertaken assessment missions to 16 prefectures and
noted security challenges that might impede the effective participation of the
population in the consultation process.
54. The National Human Rights Commission received 10 human rights-related
complaints. MINUSCA provided technical support to the Commission to adopt
complaint procedures and inform the public thereof.
Conflict-related sexual violence
55. Government efforts to combat conflict-related sexual violence have continued to
expand. The mixed unit for rapid intervention and repression of sexual violence against
women and children, with MINUSCA police support, including women officers,
launched investigations into the mass rape case that had occurred in Kiriwiri in February
2018. The case represents the first time that the unit has conducted investigations
outside Bangui. It interviewed 150 victims during its investigation mission.
56. During the reporting period, 134 cases of judicial investigations were recorded
by MINUSCA, involving 149 victims. A total of 62 suspects were referred to the
national authorities. Moreover, 13 awareness-raising sessions by MINUSCA on
sexual and gender-based violence reached 675 people, including 285 women.
Children and armed conflict
57. With the launch of the national disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration programme in January 2019, 119 children (34 girls and 85 boys) were
separated from the Revolution et Justice armed group and are being profiled for
reintegration programming. Since January 2018, a total of 923 children (264 girls and
659 boys) have been separated from armed groups. Thirty-nine children were killed
in various incidents during the reporting period, including 12 Fulani children killed
by anti-balaka at an isolated transhumance camp in Haut-Mbomou prefecture in
October and 6 on 15 November during an attack on the Alindao camp for internally
displaced persons by the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, supported by armed
Muslim young people.

19-01570

11/20

S/2019/147

VIII. Socioeconomic situation
58. In December, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Executive Board completed
its fifth review under the Extended Credit Facility arrangement for the Central African
Republic, enabling the disbursement of $31.6 million approved i n July.
59. The economic growth rate was estimated at 4.3 per cent in 2018 and, according
to IMF, could increase to 5 per cent in 2019. The absence of banks outside the capital,
weak public revenue (representing approximately 10 per cent of gross domestic
product) and issues linked to governance and the efforts to combat corruption
continue to constitute challenges to economic growth.
60. With a Human Development Index value remaining at 0.367 for 2018, the
Central African Republic ranks 188 of 189 countries.
Implementation of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the
Mutual Engagement Framework
61. The disbursement of funds for the implementation of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan for the period 2017–2021 continued to accelerate during 2018. Of
the some $2.6 billion pledged by donors since November 2016, more than $1.4 billion
had been disbursed by 31 December 2018, bringing the financial delivery rate to
54 per cent, an increase of 38 percentage points, compared with September 2017, due
in large part to the mapping of projects and more effective tracking of disbursements.
Efforts to increase national ownership continued, with the annual review of the Plan
and the Mutual Engagement Framework being conducted through a series of
discussions with national stakeholders, including the Government, the National
Assembly and the University of Bangui.

IX. Mission capacities
A.

Military
62. As at 1 February, MINUSCA had deployed 11,170 military personnel, 3.3 per
cent of whom were women, representing 95.88 per cent of the total authorized
strength of 11,650 personnel. A total of 480 are staff officers or military observers, of
whom 43 are women, or 8.9 per cent. The force currently comprises 10 infantry
battalions, 2 high mobility battalions, 1 reserve battalion, 1 special forces company,
1 quick-reaction force company and several enabling units, including 1 military police
company, 5 engineering companies, 1 heavy transport company, 3 level II hospitals
and 1 level I plus forward surgery module, and 3 helicopter units, including 1 attack
helicopter unit. The Mission’s three attack helicopters, however, were not operational
during the reporting period, significantly limiting its ability to maintain an effective
robust, flexible and mobile posture and negatively affecting its ability to conduct
operations. The helicopters were to be replaced in February through the planned
rotation programme of the contingent-owned equipment. The Mission, with guidance
from Headquarters, is reviewing its capabilities and response procedures to improve
its casualty evacuation support.
63. The additional 900 peacekeepers that were deployed are using specialized
equipment, including reconnaissance and high mobility armoured vehicles, and
enablers such as engineering vehicles, logistics and medical equipment. MINUSCA
has reinforced its military posture with two highly mobile battalions, designed as joint
task forces composed of three companies, capable of deploying simultaneously and
operating autonomously, with integrated force multipliers. They will focus on
medium-term field missions and have been successfully deployed in Bambari and Bria.

12/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

B.

Police
64. As at 1 February, MINUSCA had deployed 2,049 police officers, comprising
382 individual police officers (including 57 women, or 14 per cent) and 1,667 formed
police unit and police support unit personnel (including 126 women, or 7.6 per cent),
representing 98.5 per cent of its authorized strength of 2,080 police officers (including
400 individual police officers and 1,680 formed police unit and police support unit
personnel). Two police support units and six formed police units are operating in
Bangui under the joint task force and four formed police units are deployed in
Bambari, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro.

C.

Civilian personnel
65. As at 1 February, MINUSCA had deployed 1,359 civilian personnel (1,161 staff
members and 198 United Nations Volunteers), representing 89 per cent of a total of
1,524 authorized positions. A total of 347 women constituted 26 per cent of civilian
personnel, with 27 per cent of that total in positions at the P -5 level and above.

D.

Status-of-forces agreement
66. During the reporting period, the Mission continued to engage with the
Government on violations of the status-of-forces agreement. Several outstanding
issues were resolved, including the signing on 26 December of the customs
exoneration to cover MINUSCA fuel supplies and an agreement with the directorate
of the customs services to improve communication between MINUSCA and the
customs office regarding custom clearances for the Mission.

E.

Efforts to optimize performance
67. The Mission’s dedicated joint task force continued to implement the
recommendations of the report of the independent investigation by Brigadier General
(Retired) Amoussou to improve the Mission’s response to the protection of civilians,
as well as the action plan to reduce peacekeeper fatalities following the report by
Lieutenant General (Retired) dos Santos Cruz, 1 in the wider context of the Action for
Peacekeeping agenda. The Mission has undertaken seven robust operations
countrywide, successfully restoring order and clearing cities from armed groups. It
has improved its capacity in terms of training, intelligence surveillance and
reconnaissance, constructed eight helicopter landing sites capable of supporting night
operations and reinforced its military capacities in emerging hot spots. It is also
reviewing its footprint and reducing the number of temporary operating bases, where
the situation allows, in order to improve the efficacy of its forces and reduce the
support burden. The Mission has also sought to enhance accountability by conducting
evaluation audits and tabletop exercises. In addition, two innovations are being
piloted to strengthen the Mission’s efficacy: (a) an integrated technology platform in
support of decision-making, operations coordination and crisis management known
as the Mission Common Operation Picture; and (b) the Comprehensive Performant
Assessment System, which will assist Mission leadership in analysing the Mission’s
impact. Lastly, the Mission has set up a joint structure with the Central African
internal security forces, which has led to the arrest of high -profile criminals.

__________________
1

19-01570

Available at https://peacekeeping.un.org/sites/default/files/improving_security_of_united_nations
_peacekeepers_report.pdf.
13/20

S/2019/147

68. During the reporting period, MINUSCA also took important action to improve
its overall environmental performance. That action included the ongoing finalization
of the procurement process for the acquisition of incinerators to manage solid waste
generated Mission-wide, as well as a financial agreement with UNOPS for the
remediation of the Kolongo landfill in Bangui. As at 22 January 2019, the Mission
had installed 39 of 41 planned wastewater treatment facilities to help to significantly
reduce any risk relating to wastewater. As part of reducing its emissions, MINUSCA
is increasing the use of renewable energy, including by installing photovoltaic
systems for some information and communications technology equipment in Bangui
and will extend this to field locations. Furthermore, solar street lights have been
installed at the MINUSCA logistics base in Bangui, while the installation of them is
under way at Mission headquarters. Lastly, the Mission has made progress with
respect to the synchronization of generators, which has contributed to reducing its
fuel consumption and carbon emissions.

F.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
69. During the reporting period, the number of allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse declined, with two new allegations recorded by MINUSCA, compared with
nine allegations during the previous reporting period. These new allegations are under
investigation. The two alleged victims, both adults, were referred for services,
including medical and psychosocial assistance, through the United Nations
Population Fund and its implementing partners.
70. MINUSCA continued to implement my zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation through robust preventative measures, including training for all
categories of personnel and regular risk assessments of military camps, including
permanent and temporary operating bases. MINUSCA conducted outreach activities,
including awareness-raising for local community and youth groups and community
and religious leaders. In addition to its toll-free reporting line, the Mission
consolidated its alert system by establishing a new community-based complaint
mechanism in PK11 in Bangui and by strengthening the capacity of the 20 other
existing community-based complaint mechanisms throughout the country.
71. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team continued to address sexual
exploitation and abuse in a coordinated manner through mee tings of the sexual
exploitation and abuse task force and the implementation of the sexual exploitation
and abuse information-sharing protocol. These two tools, in addition to the new
incident reporting form being piloted in the Central African Republic, h ave
contributed to ensuring synergy and consistency in the collection and sharing of
information and in reporting allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
72. Following my report to the General Assembly on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and abuse (A/72/751), the MINUSCA field victim’s rights
advocate, along with relevant stakeholders, mapped victims’ rights approaches and
services available system-wide in the country. Furthermore, the Mission continued to
explore ways of addressing the issue of paternity claims and child support resulting
from sexual exploitation and abuse in relation to United Nations personnel, through
support from the trust fund in support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

14/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

G.

Safety and security of United Nations personnel
73. Security remains a serious challenge for United Nations personnel. During the
reporting period, 158 security incidents were recorded, including 47 attacks and
ambushes by armed groups and criminal gangs targeting United Nations personnel,
premises, equipment and convoys, which resulted in the death of one peacekeeper in
Gbambia (Mambéré-Kadéï prefecture) on 17 November. One peacekeeper died in a
road traffic accident in Ouanda Djallé (Vakaga) on 6 November. A total of 13 cases
of death threats against and harassment of United Nations civilian personnel were
reported, attributed to armed and criminal groups. A total of 28 civilian and military
personnel were injured, of whom 6 were injured in ambushes and hostile attacks by
armed groups and 8 in road traffic accidents. Nine demonstrations against the United
Nations took place in Bangui and other towns.

H.

Financial aspects
74. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/290, appropriated the amount of
$930.2 million for the maintenance of MINUSCA for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019. As at 25 January 2019, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for MINUSCA amounted to $555.9 million. The total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$3,921.3 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for
the period up to 31 October 2018, while reimbursement of the costs of contingentowned equipment has been made for the period up to 30 September 2018, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

I.

Observations
75. Since taking office, I have been unequivocal and steadfa st in my conviction that
the only path out of crisis for the Central African Republic must be forged through
political dialogue. Now, two years later, we can point to important strides towards that
end with the direct talks held in Khartoum between the Central African government
and armed groups, under the auspices of the African Union, within the framework of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation and supported by the United Nations.
76. The Political Agreement, signed in Bangui on 6 February, represents an
important milestone towards a durable political solution for the Central African
Republic. The Agreement has laid a foundation upon which all national, regional and
international stakeholders must now come together to build an inclusive and
sustainable peace, placing at its heart the deeply rooted concerns of the people. I
welcome the participation, as observers, of members of parliament, political parties,
religious leaders and civil society, including representatives of victims, women and
young people, in those talks. Their participation is key to ensuring that the Central
African people, the main victims of these recurring cycles of violence, especially
women and young people, are at the heart of the peace process.
77. As with many agreements elsewhere, the implementation of the Political
Agreement will be challenging, in particular regarding the operationalization of
transitional security arrangements. Sustained, constructive dialogue between the
Government and the former armed groups will be necessary, with support from the
United Nations, regional partners and the broader international community, to prevent
a relapse into cycles of violence and help to rebuild trust among all Central Africans.
78. The cost of conflict is too high. I am outraged by the egregious acts of violence
against civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. I condemn in the strongest

19-01570

15/20

S/2019/147

terms such unacceptable attacks, some of which may constitute war crimes. I reiterate
my calls to the Central African Republic authorities to investigate swiftly those
attacks and prosecute the perpetrators.
79. Peace can succeed only if all parties honour their commitment in good faith. I
welcome the public pledge of President Touadera to address the root causes of the
crisis in his country, including by eradicating marginalization policies that have
excluded some minority groups from political participation and socioeconomic
benefits. Armed groups must act on their commitment to abandoning irrevocably and
halting the campaigns of violence and intimidation that have destabilized so many
communities throughout the country for far too long, traumatizing generations of
Central Africans. It is unacceptable that certain armed groups, in the weeks and days
before traveling to Khartoum to discuss peace, escalated their violent activity,
including horrific attacks on the country’s most vulnerable populations in Alindao
and Ippy. The announcement of the date of the peace dialogue in Khartoum was
marred by attacks perpetrated by the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique and the Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique in Bambari and Bakouma, prompting
a robust response by MINUSCA to protect civilians. I commend MINUSCA for its
action and its continued use of a robust posture to protect civilians and support the
peace process, in line with its mandate. Armed groups participating in the peace
process must demonstrate their good faith and commitment to peace through their
actions and cease hostilities without preconditions or sunse t clauses. They must be
held to account whenever and wherever they engage in illegal activity or acts that are
contrary to the pursuit of peace. MINUSCA will continue to do its utmost, in line with
its mandate to support peace and stability in the country.
80. Taking into account experience with past peace agreements, I stress the need for
timely implementation by all parties without delay. In order to build mutual trust and
confidence in the peace process, I count on the national authorities to do their pa rt in
accelerating necessary legislation and reforms and adhering to their commitments.
While current national authorities inherited a legacy of cyclical crises, they can set
an example and leave a legacy of peace, stability and development. At the same ti me,
prospects for peace and the rule of law require that the provisions for peace respect
the constitution and international law. I would also call upon national, regional and
international stakeholders to uphold their commitments to and active participati on in
the follow-up mechanisms, which are critical to keeping peace on track.
81. The choice is clear. Power and authority through guns and violence have no
place in the Central African Republic. State authority must come through
constitutional means, including the ballot box, and through political parties with
platforms addressing the needs of their country and people. I would therefore strongly
encourage eligible armed groups to move from violence to votes and evolve as
legitimate political parties or movements, with a view to the 2020–2021 elections as
provided for in the Political Agreement.
82. The upcoming elections of 2020–2021 will be a formidable test of the
commitment of national stakeholders to political coexistence and inclusive
governance, which remains fragile after years of intercommunal conflict. In this
regard, the Government of the Central African Republic, with support from the United
Nations and international partners, must mobilize quickly to ensure that national
authorities have the technical, logistics, security and financial assistance required.
83. Peace without justice is not sustainable. The United Nations supports efforts to
end impunity. How to address this in the context of the Central African Republic has
been the subject of intense division and debate. The Central Africans themselves need
to chart a path of peace, justice and stability that resonates with them and addresses
their call to end impunity and work towards reconciliation. Accordingly, a
16/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

comprehensive and victim-centred framework for transitional justice must be at the
heart of a peace process, together with other means of redress and reconciliation and
the efforts to combat impunity, in compliance with international human rights norms
and standards. I call upon Member States to continue to prioritize and invest in justice
sector reforms and the work of the Special Criminal Court.
84. Since my last report, there have been a number of important milestones in the
efforts to combat impunity in the Central African Republic. These include trials by
national ordinary courts, the launch of investigations by the Special Criminal Court,
continued progress in trying conflict-related crimes in the Bangui and Bouar Courts
of Appeal and the recent surrender of two suspected Central African war criminals
pursuant to requests by the International Criminal Court. These developments mark
the collective determination of the Government of the Central African Republic and
the international community to bring perpetrators of the gravest crimes to justice. The
Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation must be established as
a matter of priority and without further delay. If justice is to bring about peace and
healing in the country, it must reach beyond courthouses to touch t he lives of all
Central Africans, in particular those who have faced forced displacement and
violence. For this reason, the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes must be prioritized and supported politically and
financially. I am encouraged by progress towards legislation ensuring respect for
housing, land and property rights. I call upon the Government of the Central African
Republic to be resolute in pursuing all measures necessary to achieve this, including
through the operationalization of the local peace and reconciliation committees and
the involvement of civil society in reconciliation and social cohesion initiatives.
85. The long-awaited launch of the national disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme in December 2018 marks a milestone
towards reintegrating ex-combatants back into society. I call upon all armed group
elements to immediately and fully demobilize and disarm, in line with the Political
Agreement, and urge the region and the international community to encourage them
to do so. To be sustainable, it must also form part of the transitional justice strategy
and offer a perspective to eligible former armed group elements to serve their country
in its security services. Seeing them disarming, returning to civilian life or joining the
defence and internal security forces will reassure the population and build public
confidence in the peace process.
86. While the demobilization and disarmament of armed groups would relinquish
their hold on communities, long-term stability will require a much greater presence
of State institutions, and an inclusive civil service, outside of the capital to prev ent
violence and criminality from thriving and to provide equitable basic services. I
welcome the progress made in deploying civil servants throughout the territory and
in establishing mechanisms to improve their sustained presence. The international
community must significantly scale up its financial and technical assistance to support
the capacity of Central African institutions and the expansion of essential infrastructure
throughout the country so that the dividends of peace can be bolstered and consolidated.
87. The redeployment of the national defence and internal security forces
throughout the country continues to be a key element of the restoration of State
authority. Clearly, a key component of sovereignty is the reoperationalization of the
national army and police. I commend the progress made to date, as well as the
coordinated support from international partners. The objective is not simply to equip
and deploy armed units throughout the territory, but rather to support the Government
of the Central African Republic in building a corps of professional, accountable and
regionally balanced defence and internal security forces that respect and protect the
rights of all Central Africans. To this end, I welcome the launch in November 2018
of the first-ever nationwide recruitment campaign for the Central African armed
19-01570

17/20

S/2019/147

forces. The Government must now uphold its commitment to transparent, representative
and merit-based recruitment standards in order to increase the diversity of the armed
forces. More international assistance, however, is urgently needed to accelerate the
operational deployment of the army, police and gendarmes, and the Government must
ensure that these deployments are sustainable and accepted by the local population.
88. As the Government of the Central African Republic increases the presence of
State institutions, it must accelerate progressive decentralization of State authority,
including with respect to resources. An inclusive approach to decentralization is at
the heart of the peace process and will be instrumental in empowering marginalized
communities in charting their own course towards stability and prosperity. It will also
be essential to ensuring that the wealth of the State benefits the people. I commend
President Touadera for his commitment to decentralization and hope that the National
Assembly will pass a decentralization bill in the first half of 2019. I call upon
international partners to work with national authorities to ensure that the Government
has the technical, logistical and resource capacities required to implement the
associated reforms in a timely manner.
89. I am alarmed by the continued dire humanitarian situation. Continued attacks
against those providing aid leading to the suspension of their activities are particu larly
unacceptable, and I call upon all armed groups to facilitate the delivery of aid and
development.
90. To be sustainable, peace must be met with equal investment in development. I
commend the progress made in the disbursement of funds and in the natio nal
ownership of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. The Political Agreement
offers a unique opportunity to expand economic recovery activities and provide the
population with concrete peace dividends, as well as to ensure good governance.
Serious consideration should be given to prioritizing development in historically
marginalized areas of the country. These efforts will be sustainable only if the security
environment improves, which requires armed groups to lay down their weapons and
for the State to ensure the legitimate exercise of force within the rule of law. This will
lay the groundwork for improving the security and well -being of the population and
enabling recovery and development activities to expand and progressively replace
humanitarian assistance.
91. I also call upon the Government of the Central African Republic to continue its
efforts in strengthening institutional and structural reforms in key sectors, while
improving governance and the business climate, and combating corruption. The
support of the United Nations and of international partners, especially the European
Union and the World Bank, will be key to launching strategic recovery and
development initiatives to foster stabilization and sustaining peace.
92. I am particularly pleased to highlight the excellent cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations in our unified support for the Central African
Republic, which is one of my key priorities. Together, we have demonstrated that our
institutions share a common vision for an inclusive and sustainable peace in the
Central African Republic. It is imperative that we have the full and unified
engagement of the region as we move forward to support a definitive end to conflict.
Notwithstanding progress made in this regard, we are only at the beginning of a long
road. The cohesion and unity of purpose between the African Union, the United
Nations, the region and the broader international community will be essential as we
walk the path of peace with Central Africans, in particular throughout the
implementation of the Political Agreement.
93. I call upon the international community, in close coordination with MINUSCA,
the African Union and the International Support Group on the Central African
Republic, to support the implementation of the Political Agreement and to actively
18/20

19-01570

S/2019/147

participate in the inclusive follow-up mechanisms established in the Agreement and
provide adequate resources to ensure that all agreed measures have a transformative
effect on the lives of ordinary Central Africans.
94. I am very grateful to my Special Representative, Parfait Onanga -Anyanga, for
his unwavering dedication and leadership. I am immensely grateful to the resolute
commitment of the personnel of MINUSCA, the United Nations country team and t he
troop- and police-contributing countries, often in extreme and challenging conditions.
I am also grateful to my Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, François Louncény Fall, for hi s
role in the subregion in support of the Central African Republic. I thank the African
Union, ECCAS, the European Union, the World Bank, bilateral and international
partners, including through the International Support Group on the Central African
Republic, and NGOs for their continued efforts to help the Government of the Central
African Republic and all Central Africans to realize a peaceful and stable country.

19-01570

19/20

S/2019/147

20/20

19-01570
