United Nations

S/PV.6422

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6422nd meeting
Friday, 12 November 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2010/562)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-63455 (E)

*1063455*

S/PV.6422

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2010/562)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremić
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.
It is so decided.
I invite Mrs. Çitaku to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/562, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Zannier: The report before the members of
the Council details the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
from 16 July to 18 October 2010. Today, I wish to
highlight the major challenges and successes of the
reporting period, as well as the principal challenges
that lie ahead and how we believe they can best be met.
There has been one major development since the
publication of the report. On 2 November, the
Assembly of Kosovo supported a no-confidence
motion against the Government, and the Acting
President issued a decree for early general elections, to
be held on 12 December. Those developments follow
the resignation of President Sejdiu and the collapse of
the Government coalition on 18 October.
Since the issuance of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, in July, there has been
growing unease on the part of the Kosovo authorities in
cooperating with UNMIK in two areas of our mandate
implementation, namely, the facilitation of regional
cooperation and the administration of northern
Mitrovica. Although concerned that UNMIK’s
facilitation of their presence at regional forums
undermines their declared sovereign status, Kosovo’s
institutions have so far continued to take part in most
regional mechanisms in which their participation
currently requires such facilitation.
Regrettably, however, during this reporting period
they stopped participating in the Regional Cooperation
Council. The Council deals with issues of importance
for the development and long-term stability of the
region — including those of economic and social
development, energy and infrastructure and justice and
home affairs — as well as cooperation in the security
sector. By choosing not to participate during the
reporting period, the Kosovo institutions lost valuable
opportunities to benefit from regional cooperation on
issues ranging from education to digital media. More
opportunities will be lost should they decide not to
re-engage with the Council.

10-63455

S/PV.6422

While the choice to participate in such initiatives
is one for the Kosovo authorities, we have steadfastly
discouraged them from choosing the path of isolation.
Kosovo’s long-term stability and prosperity is
inextricably linked with that of its neighbours.
Participation in structures fostering regional cooperation
is key to the development needed to ensure longlasting peace in the region, and to the hope of a better
future for its people. That is a common goal of both
Pristina and Belgrade. The challenge has been, and
remains, finding practical solutions to political
obstacles.
With the requisite goodwill, Pristina and Belgrade
can find such solutions. UNMIK will continue to
provide its assistance and to propose practical ways to
overcome political obstacles. But we believe that such
solutions can be sought most effectively through a
dialogue between the parties. In that regard, the Central
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) presents an
impending opportunity for Belgrade and Pristina to put
politics aside in pursuit of a fundamental stepping
stone towards the European perspective of the region.
The Kosovo institutions have recently resumed
attendance at CEFTA meetings, in spite of the
continuing refusal of some CEFTA members to accept
the new Kosovo customs stamps endorsed by UNMIK.
That is a step in the right direction, and one that I hope
signals that Pristina will ultimately choose to continue
on the path of regional cooperation. I also hope that all
CEFTA members will accept without further delay the
Kosovo customs stamps endorsed by UNMIK.
During this reporting period, we also encountered
a serious challenge to our management of the
Administration of northern Mitrovica. The publication
of an inaccurate report on the UNMIK Administration
in Mitrovica (UAM) by the coordinator of the “Office
for Implementation of the Strategy for the North of
Kosovo”, blaming the UAM for lack of progress in the
implementation of the strategy, was followed by an
intense media campaign against the UAM and, more
worryingly, against my staff in northern Kosovo in
their individual capacities. For my part, I swiftly and
firmly took issue with the potential endangerment of
my staff by their being singled out in the press,
including immediate steps to ensure their safety.
While the Kosovo authorities have nevertheless
continued to channel municipal funds to the UAM for
the benefit of the inhabitants of northern Mitrovica,
regrettably representatives of the Kosovo Albanian

10-63455

villages in northern Mitrovica and the Kosovo Albanian
authorities at the municipal level have been reluctant to
engage with us recently, making it more difficult for us
to facilitate contacts between the communities.
Indeed, inter-ethnic relations in northern Kosovo
appear to be deteriorating. While overall the situation
remained stable during the reporting period, continuing
incidents in northern Kosovo have highlighted the
strong potential for instability there and the urgent
need to address the issues that continue to create
friction between the communities. Since the end date
of the report, low-level interethnic incidents have
persisted, and with them the danger of igniting widerspread violence.
Our key challenge in northern Kosovo remains to
mediate between the communities, as well as to serve
as a bridge between northern Kosovo and the Pristina
authorities. To improve our ability to meet this
challenge in northern Mitrovica, we are reviewing the
way the UAM operates in order to enhance its ability
to serve as a link between the communities. To that
effect, we are engaging with the European Union (EU)
and other international partners in order to develop a
shared understanding of the policies required to
address the challenges in northern Kosovo. In addition,
we are coordinating our actions with the United
Nations Kosovo team, within the context of our
recently completed Integrated Strategic Framework.
Nevertheless, our overall assessment is that the
tensions in northern Kosovo and the attempt to
scapegoat UNMIK for the lack of progress there are
reminders of the pressing need for the dialogue called
for by the General Assembly. We also believe that two
other key issues regarding which progress is falling
short of expectations — those of missing persons and
returns — can also be most effectively addressed
through dialogue between the parties. I am encouraged
that the recent internal political events in Pristina have
not created an obstacle to the preparations for the
dialogue, and that the preparatory phase is under way
in Brussels. For our part, we are working with the EU
to provide the United Nations support and contribution
to this important process.
There has been other encouraging news that I
wish to highlight. On 1 October, in a coordinated
action with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mercy Corps International
and Roma and other residents of the Česmin Lug camp,

3

S/PV.6422

the UAM finally closed and sealed off the camp so that
it cannot be reinhabited. With the support of the
Mitrovica municipality, its former residents relocated
to homes newly constructed by the United States
Agency for International Development in the Roma
Mahala area, or to Osterode camp to await the
construction of additional homes funded by the EU.
While not forgetting that the closure of Česmin Lug,
with its unhealthy conditions, was too long delayed, I
am heartened to finally be able to report concrete
progress in the living conditions of some of Kosovo’s
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian residents.
In that context, I must bring to the Council’s
attention the prospect of increased forced returns to
Kosovo of Roma and other vulnerable groups,
following the conclusion of readmission agreements
between Kosovo and Western European Governments
that host significantly large numbers of displaced
persons from Kosovo. These returns, if unmanaged,
will further strain Kosovo’s already limited absorption
capacity and increase the risk of secondary
displacement and further marginalization. That has real
potential to derail progress, not only in the overall
returns process but in improving inter-ethnic relations
and securing long-term stability in Kosovo. I therefore
urge repatriating countries and the Kosovo authorities
to ensure that those returns are managed prudently and
do not result in a humanitarian crisis.
In conclusion, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I
wish to thank the Council for its support and to assure
it that we will continue to perform UNMIK’s mandated
functions to the best of our ability. UNMIK will
continue to offer its facilitation and good offices. We
hope that both Belgrade and Pristina will take advantage
of that offer. Our goal remains to consolidate the peace
that the people of Kosovo and so many in the
international community have worked so hard for so
long to keep.
The President: I thank Mr. Zannier for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): This afternoon, we meet
again for a regular meeting of the Security Council on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMMIK) pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier.

4

The United Nations remains an indispensable
actor in the province. We believe that it is critical for
all responsible stakeholders on the ground, together
with the Security Council, to reaffirm support for
UNMIK as a strong pillar of peace and stability. It is
equally critical for stakeholders to fully cooperate with
UNMIK at all times, including in the work it does at
the municipal level through the UNMIK Administration
in Mitrovica.
The status neutrality of the United Nations — and
that of all organizations that operate under its overall
authority, such as the Kosovo Force (KFOR), European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission in Kosovo (OMIK) — remains the
only acceptable framework within which all of us can
work together to improve the lives of ordinary people
in Kosovo, irrespective of their ethnicity.
Serbia highly appreciates the unwavering
commitment of the United Nations to maintaining the
external representation function of UNMIK, which is
its obligation under resolution 1244 (1999). However,
we are deeply concerned by the fact that the province’s
ethnic Albanian authorities have actively resisted such
a role by the United Nations of late, as the report under
discussion points out. That situation is highly
regrettable, for “should this policy continue over time,
it might result in increasing isolation of Kosovo”, to
quote the report (S/2010/562, para. 54). We hope
Pristina will come to embrace the more constructive
approach offered by UNMIK and supported by this
Council.
The report highlights the fact that there has been
no significant change in the consistently low numbers
of returns of internally displaced persons to the
province — only 233 Kosovo Serbs in three months, to
be exact, out of a total of 205,835 expelled since June
1999, according to figures from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In addition, the report refers to the 3 October
enthronement of our Patriarch Irinej in the spiritual
home and administrative centre of the Serbian Orthodox
Church for the past eight centuries, the city of Peć. In
his enthronement address to the faithful, His Holiness
emphasized the importance of reconciliation when he
said:
“Appealing in this solemn moment from this
sacred place with love and respect not only for

10-63455

S/PV.6422

the Serbian Orthodox in Kosovo, but also for the
honourable Albanian people and all other local
inhabitants here, we invite them to peace and
unity, always predicated upon divine and human
justice”.
For some, the words of His Holiness were
overshadowed by the stoning of buses full of pilgrims
on their way back from the holy site and by what
today’s report mentions in passing as “posters placed
prior to the ceremony along the road to the Patriarchate
depicting the Patriarch as a war criminal” (ibid.,
para. 49). The posters also portrayed the Patriarch as a
demonic figure. That kind of incident can only serve to
enflame the passions of extremists on both sides. It is
deeply regrettable that no international or local officials
condemned that act and that no investigation was carried
out to uncover the perpetrators of that hate crime.
The report draws attention to continuing efforts
by the authorities in Pristina to unilaterally alter the
complex reality on the ground, especially in north
Kosovo. It underlines the fact that the situation “has
remained unstable, and tensions have grown” (ibid.,
para. 59). One event that triggered tensions, according
to the report, was the insistence by the ethnic
Albanians to try to alter the status quo in north Kosovo
by authorizing a construction project without approval
by the UNMIK Administration in Mitrovica.
Another event, according to the report, was the
deployment of Kosovo Police Regional Operations
Special Units to north Kosovo without agreement with
EULEX. The unsanctioned act of sending those
paramilitaries, the vast majority of whom are ethnic
Albanians from south Kosovo, is perceived by the
majority that lives in north Kosovo as a provocation
and an incitement to violence.
During this reporting period, the authorities in
Pristina unfortunately resorted to unilateral action
against Serbian targets in other parts of the province as
well. For example, in late September, armed teams of
ethnic Albanians brought down Serbia Telecom’s
mobile and fixed telephony network in south Kosovo,
including equipment located in isolated enclaves and
monastic communities. Aside from the significant
material damage that resulted, the destruction of that
network immediately affected approximately 100,000
south Kosovo Serbs, disrupting their ability to
communicate beyond their enclaves. That is a serious
breach of contemporary humanitarian norms.

10-63455

As the report underscores, that carefully
orchestrated operation disrupted the normal functioning
of several licensed Kosovo Serb media outlets. It also
affected access to emergency services, with hospital
officials in Gračanica ascribing several fatalities to the
inability of patients to call for help.
The report informs us that the ethnic Albanian
authorities in Pristina called their elections, which,
according to news reports, may take place next month.
Unfortunately, those elections are not being held in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Since the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General did not
call them, the OSCE will not monitor them and the
United Nations will not certify them. Under such
circumstances, it is plainly impossible for the
Government of Serbia to invite any of our citizens to
participate in them.
The world has supported by acclamation the fact
that dialogue is the only road to peace in Kosovo —
the only way both dignity and stability can be delivered
to Serbs and Albanians alike.
The European Union’s facilitation role and its
capacity to act as an honest broker could play a
decisive role in moving us towards a new, more
promising moment. We hope that our differences may
now be readdressed in less adversarial circumstances.
For us, the dialogue means negotiating and being open
to compromise. It is about overcoming prejudices and
taming passions.
A fair and balanced process could become the
catalyst for harnessing the forces of moderation — an
instrument for those seeking to rebuild bridges and
begin reconciliation in earnest. It could also provide a
critical boost to securing a peaceful European future
for the entire Western Balkans. Serbia wants this
dialogue to begin as soon as possible, and we expect it
to focus on the least controversial issues first. Early
successes should be able to be leveraged as a way to
build momentum for further achievements when we
proceed to other, more delicate topics.
The journey to creative solutions will require
political imagination, respect for our democracy and
great skill. We hope we can enter a phase in which all
parties will leave behind anachronistic analyses and
diplomatic ambushes and instead concentrate on the
task at hand.

5

S/PV.6422

Serbia has always maintained that Pristina’s
attempt to secede unilaterally is a violation of the basic
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
Helsinki Final Act, as well as of resolution 1244 (1999).
Our principled position, enshrined in our Constitution,
remains unchanged: we shall not recognize Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence, explicitly or
implicitly. As we would for any other place in the
world, we believe there can never be a sustainable
solution to an issue of such magnitude without the
consent of all stakeholders.
We hold the firm view that the continued pursuit
of recognitions of the unilateral declaration of
independence is futile and counterproductive. Everyone
who wanted to make a point has already made it, and
we still do not have a settlement. A vast majority of
States Members of the United Nations have refrained
from recognizing the unilateral declaration of
independence. On behalf of the Republic of Serbia,
allow me once again to sincerely thank those countries
for their support and solidarity. We appeal to them to
stay the course throughout the dialogue process.
We believe it is critically important that no
impediments be placed on the road the stakeholders
have committed to take. It would be equally harmful if
someone tried to alter realities on the ground while
discussions are under way. Any attempt to change
those realities unilaterally or through the use of force
would dramatically, and perhaps fatally, undermine the
dialogue.
That is one of the many reasons why the
reporting function of the United Nations remains
indispensable. Serbia welcomes the Secretary-General’s
commitment to report all developments in the dialogue
to the Security Council. Its centrality and leading role
in determining and providing legitimacy to a
comprehensive settlement remains paramount in
accordance with its resolution 1244 (1999) and the
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security assigned to it by the United Nations
Charter.
No one in this Chamber should doubt our
readiness to be a true partner in forging a transformative
peace. But we cannot do so alone, for in the twentyfirst century no side can ever triumph by demanding
unilateral concessions or seeking to maximize narrowly
conceived objectives. Win-win solutions are impossible
to find with zero-sum attitudes. Serbia, for its part, will

6

spare no effort; we will neither tire nor lose our nerve.
Without denying either the good or the ills of the past,
we shall confidently continue to pursue our vision of
the future.
Out of respect for our ancestors — but even more
because of the generations that will follow — we shall
leave no stone unturned in our quest to achieve a
legitimate compromise. But this we shall seek not out
of fear or under duress. Rather, we shall do so on the
basis of our belief that, if we act together in good faith,
we can finally transform that plot of land, so rich in
history and dear to both peoples, from one of
contention to one of harmony.
The President: I now give the floor to Mrs.
Çitaku.
Mrs. Çitaku: It is an honour for me to address
the Council during a period of paramount importance
for the establishment of long-term prospects for peace
and prosperity not only in the Republic of Kosovo, but
also in the rest of the Balkans.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for their
efforts deployed in Kosovo during the period under
review. These efforts, in the context of broader
assistance from the International community, have
contributed to stabilizing our region after the dreadful
wars of the 1990s and to building democratic
institutions in Kosovo.
We continue to pledge our unreserved support to
all efforts to build peace and security in the Western
Balkans, and we are happy to report that these
continued efforts of the international community have
been brought to fruition. After the atrocities committed
by the regime of Slobodan Milošević in Bosnia,
Croatia and Kosovo, the independence of the Republic
of Kosovo has brought lasting peace and stability and a
brought the new European integration agenda to the
forefront.
Today in the Balkans, all States are governed by
democratically elected Governments, yet we all face
similar transitional challenges and support is still
needed to help us overcome the last obstacles to
becoming full members of the European Union.
I am particularly pleased to address the Security
Council at a time when developments in the Republic
of Kosovo reflect the significant progress achieved in

10-63455

S/PV.6422

building strong democratic institutions and sound
constitutional framework.
In September, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo
ruled that the President of the Republic could not
exercise the function of President of Kosovo while
maintaining the leadership of his political party.
President Sejdiu, in honouring the decision of the
Court, resigned. Following a vote of no-confidence,
Parliament was dissolved and extraordinary elections
are scheduled for 12 December. As on previous
occasions, the December elections will be fair and free,
and will reflect the will of Kosovo’s citizens. The
Government has called for and welcomes international
observers for these elections. The recent political
developments in the Republic of Kosovo proved yet
again the political maturity of our established
democratic system. Throughout this period, the
Constitution and parliamentary rules and procedures
were strictly followed and observed.
Kosovo is a multi-ethnic society and its
Government remains fully committed to the greater
social, political and economic inclusion of minorities
in the mainstream of Kosovo society. In our most
recent address to the Council (see S/PV.6367), we
reported that all minorities, including Kosovar Serbs,
have taken an increased interest in participating in
democratic processes and local elections. We are in the
process of completing the entire decentralization plan
of President Ahtisaari, which guarantees unprecedented
legal protection and affirmative rights to minorities.
All minorities, including Kosovar Serbs, enjoy
direct and undisputed benefits by participating in the
democratic life of the State they live in. This is more
imperative in the view of the forthcoming parliamentary
elections. Therefore, we consider that this is the best
time for the international community to reaffirm its
commitment to the stability of Kosovo by calling on
Kosovar Serbs to participate in forthcoming elections
and on the Serbian Government not to obstruct their
participation in the elections.
New Serbian municipalities in Kosovo recorded
the participation of over 50 per cent of local Serbs in
the most recent local elections. Regrettably, the same
does not hold true for the North of Kosovo, where the
influence of Belgrade is still preventing the process of
integration into Kosovo’s public and institutional life.
It is with great regret that I report that, over the past
three months, there have been more than five armed

10-63455

attacks in the North of Kosovo against Kosovar Serbs
who had decided to participate in Kosovo’s public and
political life. We have noted that these developments
still go unreported in Serbia.
Having said that, we are proud to report that
Kosovo Serbs and other minorities have now submitted
over 20 electoral lists for the upcoming elections, and
we are pleased that members of civil society, as well as
several parliamentary parties in Serbia, are asking for a
change of the Serbian Government policy to boycott
everything representing the Republic of Kosovo, even
after the International Court of Justice concluded that
Kosovo’s declaration of independence did not violate
international law.
While local constitutional and political
developments have occupied the minds of local and
international actors, as well as the agenda of our State
institutions, other positive developments have been
recorded in regard to the process of the formal
recognition of Kosovo’s independence. Seventy-one
countries have now recognized Kosovo, and over 100
Members of the United Nations are now recognizing
Kosovo’s documents. However, we regret that the
Government of Serbia completely ignores and does not
recognize any document issued by the Republic of
Kosovo. Our license plates, customs stamps, passports,
school diplomas and bank statements are recognized by
the entire European Union (EU), and even by those
countries that have not yet formally recognized our
independence, but are not recognized by Serbia. This
policy not only hampers student exchanges, family
visits, normal trade and business relations, but also
prevents and delays the reconciliation process among
our peoples.
We are also glad to report positive progress in
terms of the return process. By the end of this year, we
expect a record 1,300 returnees, a process facilitated
greatly by our Government jointly with United Nations
agencies and donors. We are aware that more needs to
be done, and we are fully committed to successfully
completing this process. But while we continue to
maintain a welcoming policy for all Kosovo citizens
who want to return to their homes, we wish to remind
the Council that, if we are to achieve tangible progress,
we need the support of our partners in Belgrade. Again,
I would like to emphasize that the active participation
of the Serb minority in the upcoming elections will be
crucial for them, as it will ensure further integration,

7

S/PV.6422

which will translate into more opportunities, stronger
representation and increased living standards.
Religious freedoms and dialogue have been
further strengthened, and the best examples of this are
the successful organization of the enthronement of the
Serbian Patriarch in the territory of the Republic of
Kosovo, the opening of a new Catholic cathedral in
central Pristina, and the increased efforts to improve
communication among all communities and religions.
The Kosovo Police have done a great job in
securing Kosovo’s religious sites following the
departure of the International Security Force in
Kosovo. While we regret the incidents that have
occurred in some locations, we will respectfully point
out that these isolated incidents have been mostly of a
non-ethnic nature.
The most important development that strengthened
our young country unfolded here in New York. After
the International Court of Justice issued an opinion on
the legality of Kosovo’s declaration of independence,
in September we regretfully witnessed another Serbian
attempt in the General Assembly to call for
negotiations on the status of Kosovo. Considering that
Kosovo’s independence and borders cannot be subject
to any negotiation and that such a controversial
proposal would undermine the progress achieved so
far, the international community mobilized in an
unprecedented manner and called on Serbia to change
its policy. As a result, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 64/298, welcoming with respect the opinion
of the Court. It also welcomes the readiness of the EU
to facilitate a dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
I am confirming yet again that our Government
was very pleased with the outcome of that General
Assembly debate. The resolution gives us a platform to
start a technical dialogue with Serbia on issues of
importance for the well-being of communities and for
regional cooperation. The Government of the Republic
of Kosovo and the principal international sponsors of
the resolution have made it clear that the dialogue is
about the future and not the past. We will not return to
closed chapters of history. We are ready to talk about
missing persons from the war, cooperation against
crime and corruption, mutual recognition of documents
and phone networks, rail lines, airspace and every
other issue of mutual interest to and shared benefit for
our citizens, our societies and our countries. But let me
be clear. We will not talk — ever again — about

8

Kosovo’s right to exist as a free nation after everything
that has happened in the past. The independence of
Kosovo is not and will not be an issue for discussion.
Hence, following a round of discussions with the
European Union and other partners, we are preparing
our teams and agenda for talks with the Republic of
Serbia, with the facilitation of the EU. We welcome the
readiness of the United States to contribute to this
process.
Let me conclude my remarks with the plea of
19-year-old Majlinda Kelmendi, who is the most
honoured sportswoman of Kosovo today. She has won
European and world championships in judo, one of the
few Olympic sports that recognize her right to compete
as a Kosovar. Unfortunately, even after more than
20 years, Kosovo’s young athletes and artists remain
isolated from such international activities. It is of great
importance that Majlinda and other young Kosovars
have the same opportunities as their friends throughout
the world.
Enormous challenges remain for young
generations of Kosovars and Serbs in the years ahead
and many issues will have to be resolved through
dialogue, but I believe that I am not the only one who
acknowledges that after the Vienna process, the
Ahtisaari proposal, the International Court of Justice
opinion and the General Assembly resolution, we are
finally ready to move on.
The President: I thank Mrs. Çitaku for her
statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremić of
Serbia and Acting Foreign Minister Çitaku of Kosovo
to the Council and to thank them for their comments.
Let me also thank Special Representative Zannier for
his briefing and his service.
I have three points to make today. First, as
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton recently said in
Pristina, the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice turned the page on questions of Kosovo’s
status. In the words of the Court, “the declaration of
independence of 17 February 2008 did not violate
general international law”. The International Court of
Justice opinion also stated that the declaration was not

10-63455

S/PV.6422

in violation of resolution 1244 (1999). It is now time to
move ahead.
For this reason, the United States welcomed the
consensus General Assembly resolution 64/298, adopted
on 9 September, which points to a new era of pragmatic,
neighbourly relations between Serbia and Kosovo as
they embark on their respective paths towards a EuroAtlantic future. We welcome and support the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. It will help both countries improve the
quality of life for their citizens and increase security
and stability in the region.
Let us be clear. This dialogue is not about
Kosovo’s status or territorial integrity. Kosovo is a
sovereign, independent State and its borders are
inviolable. Seventy-one countries have now recognized
Kosovo. We call upon States that have not already done
so to help contribute to stability in the region by
welcoming Kosovo into the international community
through formal recognition.
Secondly, we must support the Government of
Kosovo in its efforts to build a multi-ethnic and unified
democratic State governed by the rule of law,
accountable to all of its citizens and fully integrated
into the international community. Kosovo has already
made strides in increasing overall security, building a
culture of inclusive democracy and strengthening the
rule of law, but a great deal more remains to be done.
The United States looks forward to free, fair and
peaceful general elections in December as Kosovo
builds on its encouraging track record in developing a
vibrant multiparty democracy.
We stand ready to support Kosovo’s efforts to
administer the elections in a manner that lets all of the
people of Kosovo exercise their right to vote. Now is
the time for all citizens of Kosovo, regardless of their
ethnic background, to make their voices heard in the
democratic process. We regret that the Government of
Serbia has missed the opportunity to play a
constructive role in the process and has not encouraged
Kosovo Serb participation. The Kosovo Serb community
can only be disadvantaged by this decision.
Strong economic growth rooted in the rule of law
is key to ensuring the long-term prosperity and security
of the Balkans. We encourage Kosovo to create the
conditions needed for sustainable, private sector-led
growth by aggressively pursuing judicial reforms and
tackling crime and corruption. Kosovo’s continued

10-63455

cooperation with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) is critical here. Kosovo’s
entry into the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank last year and, we hope, its eventual entry
into other regional and multilateral institutions, such as
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
will help promote reforms that ultimately benefit the
people of Kosovo. We encourage all of our fellow
Member States to support Kosovo’s full participation
in international forums, including the Central European
Free Trade Agreement.
We also support the Government of Kosovo’s
efforts to responsibly enforce its laws, including recent
measures taken by the Kosovo Telecommunications
Regulatory Authority. Authorities in Kosovo and Serbia
must work together to promote commercial activity in
the telecommunications and energy sectors while
respecting Kosovo law to meet the genuine needs of
Kosovo’s communities.
Further, the North Atlantic Council’s recent
decision to continue downsizing the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) reflects improvements in the security situation
and the professionalism of Kosovo’s security forces.
The two Governments’ cooperative approach to the
installation of the Patriarch of the Serbian Orthodox
Church last month in Pejë further contributed to
security and stability, in keeping with the shared
responsibility to protect and preserve the vital role of
the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo.
That brings me to my third and final point. As the
report (S/2010/562) makes clear, many challenges
remain in northern Kosovo. We strongly condemn acts
and threats of violence, including those reported against
ethnic Serbs in northern Kosovo that are intended to
intimidate those who would engage with Kosovo’s
legitimate institutions. Such attacks exacerbate divisions
and undermine security. We welcome the support by
EULEX of the Kosovo police’s efforts to improve
respect for the rule of law in northern Kosovo and we
call on authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to support
and contribute to those efforts.
The United States will continue to support
Kosovo as it works to build a stable, prosperous and
democratic country that is at peace with its neighbours
and more and more integrated into the Euro-Atlantic
community. Similarly, we will continue to support the
aspirations of Serbia and all the countries of the

9

S/PV.6422

Western Balkans to achieve their goals for European
and Euro-Atlantic integration.

the rule of law and governance are fundamental pillars
for all of Kosovo’s communities.

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia,
and Mrs. Vlora Çitaku, Acting Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and thank them for their statements. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his presentation of
the report before us (S/2010/562). We very much
appreciate the work the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) is doing to
promote dialogue and cooperation among all parties in
order to promote stability and reconciliation.

In that respect, Austria encourages all sides to
reach an agreement on a multi-ethnic court in Mitrovica
and on customs arrangements in the north. We welcome
the efforts undertaken by EULEX in that regard.

Austria welcomes the fact that the security
situation in Kosovo has been largely calm during the
reporting period. However, we have again witnessed
how recent developments have managed to increase
political tensions in northern Kosovo and have in some
instances triggered isolated acts of violence.
It is our firm conviction that the gradual
integration of the north into the rest of Kosovo would
be beneficial to all its inhabitants. At the same time, we
are convinced that that goal will be achieved only
through dialogue. Austria calls on all sides to exercise
restraint, to adopt a constructive and pragmatic
approach and to actively engage with the international
presence, including in northern Kosovo, in order to
avoid further violence and tension.
Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) have again demonstrated effective cooperation
and have succeeded in tackling violence and ensuring
stability. Austria continues to fully support the important
work of the KFOR and EULEX and will continue to
keep up its commitment in both these missions.
As it was pointed out in the recent progress report
of the European Commission, many challenges persist.
Improving governance and the rule of law in Kosovo,
for example, is essential, as are steps to fight
corruption and impunity. We commend the efforts by
the Government of Kosovo towards those ends.
In order to make further progress and consolidate
the gains made so far, it is important for the
international community to remain engaged in Kosovo
and to assist the local authorities by sharing expertise
and resources. Kosovo must remain committed to
carrying out the necessary reforms. Stability, security,

10

Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission in Kosovo
in the monitoring, protection and promotion of human
rights, including community rights, as well as the
Mission’s endeavours to improve conditions for the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
Likewise, Austria commends the OSCE Mission in
Kosovo for the continuous support to the development
of democratic institutions, such as the assistance
offered to the Central Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints and Appeals Subcommission.
We hope that all ethnic groups in Kosovo will
actively participate in the upcoming elections in
December, as they will be decisive for the future of
Kosovo. We hope that those elections will result in an
encouraging signal for the future of all inhabitants of
Kosovo. We appeal to both Kosovo and Serbia to
exercise pragmatism and self-restraint in order to make
the elections a success and to avoid increased tensions,
particularly in the north.
Austria welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
General Assembly, on 9 September, of a resolution on
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice delivered on 22 July (resolution 64/298). We
welcome, in particular, that that resolution was based
on agreement between Serbia and the European Union.
As others have already said, there is general
agreement, as we have seen in the General Assembly,
on the role of the European Union in facilitating a
process of dialogue between the parties.
We are encouraged by signals from both sides
showing their readiness to engage in a dialogue
facilitated by the European Union on practical
problems affecting the daily lives of people from both
ethnic backgrounds living in Kosovo. I was also
encouraged by what I heard from Foreign Minister
Jeremić on this subject and pleased that Deputy
Foreign Minister Çitaku told us about the Government
of Kosovo getting ready to participate in this process.

10-63455

S/PV.6422

This is an important opportunity to promote
cooperation, to achieve progress, as the resolution says,
on the path to the European Union, and to improve the
lives of the people. We hope for an early launch of this
dialogue, which can contribute to creating the conditions
for a shared future within the European Union. That is
a goal to which Austria has always been committed,
and we stand ready to continue lend our support to that
endeavour.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2010/562). We welcome the participation in
today’s Security Council meeting of the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Jeremić. We share the
assessments contained in his statement.
We carefully listened to the statement by
Mrs. Çitaku. We are disappointed by the unwarranted
views that she has expressed, which run counter to
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
Russia supports the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. We are of the
view that it is undeniable that resolution 1244 (1999)
remains fully in effect and remains the international
legal basis for a Kosovo settlement that is binding upon
all. Our position remains unchanged in respect to that
resolution, that is, we do not recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo.
We believe that it is important for the stakeholders
to resume dialogue in order to bring about a settlement
of the Kosovo issue. Here, we cannot condone unilateral
actions of Pristina and the international presence in
northern Kosovo that are aimed at changing realities on
the ground in order to impact the modalities and
outcomes of the dialogue ahead.
In that regard, we are concerned over the growing
activity of the Kosovo Albanian authorities north of the
Ibar river, and their plans, despite the negative view of
UNMIK on those plans, to build and restore destroyed
homes on land that is adjacent to Serbian towns, as
well as their plans to open a court without the consent
of the United Nations Administration in Mitrovica or
of the Serbian city council in northern Mitrovica.
The situation continues to be unsatisfactory with
respect to the return to Kosovo of internally displaced

10-63455

persons, including Serbian citizens. There are many
reasons for that, including the fact that returnees are
not confident about their security, nor are the rights of
return encouraged by actions such as those by the
Kosovo defence and security entities when, on
26 September, they removed transmitters of the Serbian
telecom company in the Serbian-populated areas of
Kosovo.
As a result of this, almost all the enclaves to the
north of the Ibar River have been left without mobile
communications
and
some
without
landline
communications. We believe that that is a blatant
violation of human rights as part of an unfair
competitive struggle. We believe that such intent is
fraught with additional tension in terms of security in
Kosovo and could spark growing mistrust of the
Serbian population with respect to the readiness of the
peacekeeping force to carry out its duties. This step
should also be seen as premature in the light of the
incidents, described today by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, that occurred in the town of Peć
during the enthronement ceremony of the Serbian
Patriarch.
The attempts of the Kosovo media to discredit
UNMIK are unacceptable. The campaign against
UNMIK jeopardizes its staff’s security and prevents
the Mission from carrying out its functions. We insist
that UNMIK carry out its duties with respect to the
external representation of Kosovo in regional and
international organizations and mechanisms. Attempts
to secure Pristina’s participation in international events
as a sovereign State are unacceptable. In that respect,
we maintain our position that the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo, on basis of its mandate from the
Security Council, must play as active a role as possible
in assisting the process of a Kosovo settlement. We
insist on the need to maintain the leading role of the
Security Council in resolving the issue of Kosovo, as it
remains the guarantor of compliance with international
law, the United Nations Charter and its own decisions.
Information on the substance and proceedings of
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina should be
reflected in the quarterly reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of UNMIK, with reports of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
attached thereto.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,

11

S/PV.6422

Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing. I also welcome Mr. Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
for his statement. I also thank Mrs. Çitaku for her
presentation.
Allow me to make the following comments. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the reasonably calm
security situation in Kosovo, although the situation in
northern Kosovo remains unstable. Security incidents
continue to cause concern and tensions. My country
therefore calls on all parties to exercise self-restraint
and to avoid any unilateral or provocative action that
could increase tension. At the same time, we believe
that the vigilance of the security forces, work to
achieve reconciliation and the prosecution of those
who commit violent acts play an important role in
spreading a sense of security among all citizens,
especially those of the northern Kosovo.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation between the
various communities and encourage it to pursue those
efforts. Lebanon appreciates UNMIK’s efforts to
maintain security and stability and to facilitate Kosovo’s
participation in various international and regional
forums. However, we share the Secretary-General’s
concern over the report issued by the “Office for
Implementation of the Strategy for the North of
Kosovo” and the media campaign against UNMIK. We
call on all parties to abstain from publishing inaccurate
information, which can only have detrimental effects
and create obstacles to UNMIK’s work.
We welcome the regular exchange of information
and coordination between the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and UNMIK, pursuant to the
principle of neutrality set out in resolution 1244 (1999).
A study conducted by UNICEF has highlighted
the fact that current return and repatriation practices
lack guarantees for safe and dignified returns. We
therefore stress the importance of the organic link
between national reconciliation and the strengthening
of economic and development activities in the various
communities, and of respect for human rights. Only
this will end discrimination and harassment, thus
creating a socio-economic environment conducive to
the return of the refugees.
Moreover, we express our appreciation for the
progress made by the Reconstruction Implementation

12

Commission in protecting Serbian Orthodox religious
and cultural heritage sites in Kosovo. We support the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that technical
support and funding be provided to the Commission.
We welcome cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina on the issue of missing persons through the
Working Group on Missing Persons. We hope that this
spirit of cooperation will also extend to other fields.
We also welcome General Assembly resolution
64/298, presented by Serbia to the Assembly and
adopted on 9 September. In our view, the resolution
constitutes an important point of departure for the
launching of a flexible and constructive dialogue
between the two parties as soon as possible. It is
encouraging in this respect that the United Nations and
the European Union have expressed their intention to
facilitate such a dialogue. However, it is extremely
important that all parties of influence also make
continuous efforts to re-establish trust and promote
reconciliation between the communities of Kosovo.
That will create an atmosphere of trust for the adoption
of agreements of mutual benefit to all communities.
We hope that the recent political incidents and the
anticipated early elections will not delay dialogue
between the parties and the elections will be fair and
transparent. In addition, we hope that the dialogue will
help to improve the living conditions of the people and
help to strengthen the basis for peace and
reconciliation in Kosovo, thus contributing to stability
in the region.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for his briefing. I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, to this debate and thank him for his
statement. I also thank Mrs. Çitaku for her statement.
Uganda commends the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its
continued efforts in promoting security and stability in
Kosovo and the region, particularly with regard to
continued coordination activities with relevant actors
and developing common approaches to the maintenance
of peace and stability on the ground. We are encouraged
that the overall security situation in Kosovo during the
reporting period remained relatively calm.
We are concerned, however, by the recurrent
clashes in northern Kosovo between Kosovo Serbs and

10-63455

S/PV.6422

Kosovo Albanians, which increase instability and
division between the communities. We urge all sides to
exercise restraint in order to avoid further escalation of
tensions.
We commend UNMIK for its proactive
engagement with all communities, as well as the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade and international
actors in furthering peace and stability in Kosovo. We
are convinced that UNMIK’s work in supporting
minority communities, encouraging reconciliation,
facilitating dialogue and regional cooperation is critical.
My delegation welcomes the cooperation and
coordination between UNMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) on issues of
mutual concern. This cooperation is vital, and we
encourage that it be strengthened within the framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). The Kosovo Force (KFOR)
plays an important complementary role in maintaining
an overall safe environment. In this regard, we salute
the efforts of UNMIK, in coordination with EULEX
and KFOR, in encouraging both sides to find a
sustainable and peaceful solution.
We commend UNMIK for facilitating the
activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), including intercommunal meetings, technical assessments of cultural
heritage sites and the implementation of projects
engaging Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs. These
activities are important because they build confidence
and create a better understanding among communities.
We therefore encourage UNMIK to continue, in
coordination and cooperation with local and relevant
international actors, its efforts to address critical social
services needs.
UNMIK is also playing an important role in
facilitating the work of the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission. It is important that the
Commission be availed the necessary financial and
logistical support to complete its work.
We welcome the progress made so far regarding
the return of displaced persons and the complementary
role place by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It is essential
in the spirit of reconciliation for recipient communities
to desist in any actions which may hinder intercommunal integration. It is also important for both
sides to devote more resources towards the location of
missing persons.

10-63455

Regional cooperation plays an important role in
enhancing development. We therefore encourage the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to work together in
pursuit of this goal. We call on the international
community to continue supporting UNMIK’s important
work, consistent with resolution 1244 (1999).
Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, and the staff of
UNMIK for their good work.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I, too, would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and to thank him for his
statement. I also thank Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier for his briefing and Mrs. Vlora
Çitaku for her remarks.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/562)
depicts a scenario of rising ethnic tensions, especially
in the north of Kosovo. Multiple clashes between
Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians and attacks on
places of worship and persons from minority
communities are expressions of a situation that requires
the attention of the Security Council. Current tensions
also reveal the depth of the mistrust and prejudice that
communities and individuals still have to overcome.
In such an atmosphere, it is imperative that all
authorities in Kosovo provide for the security of all
persons, regardless of their ethnic origin or religion. All
parties must also refrain from any acts that can create
further instability. Building a truly diverse and tolerant
Kosovo should be a common goal pursued by all.
My delegation deplores the publication by Pristina
authorities of an inaccurate report on the administration
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) of Mitrovica, which fuelled a
damaging media campaign against the Mission. UNMIK
was established by the Security Council and challenges
to the Mission’s authority are a clear violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).
We also remain concerned by the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that relations between the Mission
and Pristina continue to be at arm’s length. We reiterate
our call for both Belgrade and Pristina to cooperate
actively with UNMIK and Special Representative
Zannier, especially in advancing practical arrangements
that may benefit the ordinary citizen.
As resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force, it
continues to be the main parameter for the presence of

13

S/PV.6422

the United Nations in Kosovo and all those who
operate there under the overall authority of UNMIK.
The resolution also continues to offer the basis for
settling outstanding disputes through negotiations with
a view to reaching a legitimate solution under the
auspices of the Security Council, consistent with its
primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We therefore reiterate
our call to the parties to resume negotiations on all
outstanding issues as soon as possible and to cooperate
with each other in good faith. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the willingness of the European
Union to facilitate dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, as acknowledged by the General Assembly on
9 September 2010 (General Assembly resolution
64/298). We hope both parties will take full advantage
of this opportunity.
I also welcome the Secretary-General’s intention
to keep the Security Council informed of developments
in the dialogue supported by the European Union. A
solution to the dispute in Kosovo is a matter of concern
not only to the parties themselves but to the
international community as a whole.
Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): We would also like to
thank Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Ms. Çitaku for their statements. We also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Zannier, for his informative briefing on
the situation in Kosovo.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/562) and appreciate the progress made since
the last report. In particular, we note that the overall
security situation in Kosovo has remained calm,
although there are still pockets of violent incidents. We
are encouraged by the continued cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina on the problem of missing
persons. It is also positive that implementation of the
United Nations Strategic Framework for Kosovo is
under way.
We acknowledge the contribution of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in collaboration with regional and
international actors in facilitating the progress that has
been made in Kosovo. In particular, UNMIK’s role in
the rule of law and coordination among the various
actors, as well as in facilitating dialogue among the
communities, continues to enjoy our strong support.

14

We also appreciate its role in fostering cordial relations
with all the major actors in the region.
The situation in northern Kosovo remains a cause
for concern. Increasing political tensions and recurring
incidents and attacks of a political nature have
continued to raise the perception of insecurity in
Kosovo and undermine efforts to promote the stability
and development of Kosovo and the region. The
Secretary-General’s concerns about the absence of
significant progress in reconciliation between the
communities, as well as the consistently low number of
returns, are issues that deserve continued attention. In
this regard, we urge for greater efforts to be made to
help build confidence among the communities and lead
to the consolidation of peace, stability and
reconciliation in Kosovo and the region.
There is also a need to improve security
conditions and develop reintegration projects that will
encourage voluntary and safe returns. We are
particularly concerned about the lack of support to the
activities of UNMIK in the north. At this critical stage,
Kosovo more than ever needs the continued presence
of UNMIK in the territory. We are convinced that its
effective engagement with all the parties to promote
reconciliation and stability will bolster progress in
other areas of difficulty. We therefore call on all actors
to provide the necessary support to enable UNMIK to
fulfil its mandate.
We are strongly convinced of the importance of
dialogue in resolving the difficult issues relating to
Kosovo. In this regard, we urge the international
community to remain focused on Kosovo, especially
by promoting peace efforts aimed at reaching a
comprehensive and mutually acceptable solution to
issues in the territory and the region.
It is gratifying to note the efforts of the European
Union in facilitating a process of dialogue between the
parties. This is a major step forward. We urge the
parties to seize the possibilities that it offers. It is also
important, however, to ensure that any process involves
close consultation and coordination between all
relevant actors, and takes into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all the communities.
In conclusion, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team
for their unrelenting efforts in promoting peace and
stability in Kosovo and the region.

10-63455

S/PV.6422

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Kosovo situation has a bearing on peace, security and
stability in Europe as a whole, as well as in the Balkans
in particular. The overall security situation in Kosovo
is relatively calm at present, but tension in the north
remains a cause for concern. China hopes that the
parties concerned will exercise restraint, work together
to maintain stability in the north and avoid the
escalation of tensions.
We welcome the cooperation between the parties
concerned, with the assistance of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
on the issue of missing persons and religious and
cultural heritage sites. China hopes that all parties will
take concrete measures to promote reconciliation
between all of Kosovo’s communities and protect the
rights and interests of Kosovar Serbs and other
minorities.
China calls for efforts to meet the needs of the
most vulnerable groups, in particular efforts to provide
education and health services for children.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and appreciates the commitment and
efforts of the Government and people of Serbia to
achieve lasting peace, stability and development.
We continue to believe that the best approach to
the settlement of the Kosovo issue is for both parties to
negotiate a mutually acceptable solution within the
framework of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains in effect and is still
the legal basis on which solutions can be found to the
Kosovo issue. The advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice does not stand in the way of the parties
seeking a proper solution through negotiations.

Mexico recognizes the important work carried out
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the entities, fund and programmes
of the United Nations and the strategic partners.
We welcome the approval of the United Nations
Strategic Framework for Kosovo, as this instrument
will contribute to the planning and consistency of
international efforts aimed at reconstruction and
development in the region.
My delegation believes it extremely important
that the international community continue to support
the presence of UNMIK so that it is able to comply
with its mandate in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999). We call upon the parties to cooperate with
UNMIK and to avoid any actions that could affect the
presence of the Mission or endanger its personnel.
We welcome the cooperation between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force, the
international security force there. The cooperation
between UNMIK and EULEX is particularly important
for promoting the rule of law in Kosovo, particularly in
strengthening judicial and human rights institutions.
We note with concern the increase in acts of
inter-ethnic violence in the northern part of Kosovo,
particularly between young people, since the
International Court of Justice issued its advisory
opinion on 22 July with regard to the accordance with
international law of the unilateral declaration of
independence in respect of Kosovo.

China supports UNMIK in continuing to fulfil its
responsibilities, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We are concerned about acts and
speech that might endanger the safety and security of
United Nations personnel. We urge all the parties
concerned to continue their cooperation with UNMIK
to ensure its smooth functioning.

My delegation would like to reaffirm the
importance of the Security Council reiterating to the
parties their obligation to respect international law and
to avoid any acts of provocation that could lead to an
increase of tension or exacerbate the differences
between the communities. It is important that we
maintain the positive momentum for dialogue following
the adoption, on 9 September, of resolution 64/298 by
the General Assembly.

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing. I would also like to welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and that of Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.

We call for constructive dialogue that would lead
to peacebuilding, stability and reconciliation in Kosovo
while making use of the support and cooperation
provided by the European Union, in conformity with
the General Assembly resolution to which I have just
referred.

10-63455

15

S/PV.6422

The delegation of Mexico believes it crucial to
increase the cooperation of UNMIK with Pristina and
Belgrade in matters relating to investigations into
missing persons, the reconstruction of religious and
cultural heritage sites and support to minority
communities in the provision of public and civil
services.
The United Nations team in Kosovo should
strengthen its cooperation with regional and local
organizations in order to undertake actions aimed at
promoting reconciliation, tolerance and solidarity
between communities, particularly children and young
people. It is alarming to see how vulnerable children
belonging to repatriated minority communities are.
They live in poverty and have high dropout rates from
school and insufficient access to health care services.
This is also true for children with special needs or
chronic illnesses. We call on the parties to promote
conditions that allow for the secure and voluntary
return, free from discrimination, of those who wish to
do so.
It is important to promote the strengthening of
programmes for reintegration and development, as well
as for the construction and rebuilding of housing.
We consider it important that UNMIK work
closely together with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, local institutions
and other humanitarian bodies on the ground in order
to achieve those objectives, particularly bearing in
mind the planned repatriation of thousands of families
from minority communities that are living in other
countries in Europe.
Finally, my delegation would like to stress the
need for the parties and countries in the region to
cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia in order to fight the impunity of
those responsible for serious crimes committed in the
past, thus promoting peace, justice and national
reconciliation.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm to Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Çitaku, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. We are pleased to see both
of them, and we thank them for their statements. I
would also like to welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing. We
appreciate and support the work the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is

16

doing towards promoting security, stability and the
protection of human rights under his leadership.
We are pleased to note that the overall security
situation in Kosovo remains generally calm, with the
exception of northern Kosovo, where, unfortunately, a
certain number of inter-ethnic clashes occurred. We
strongly condemn all ethnic violence and see these acts
as attacks against the peace and security of all the
citizens of Kosovo. As such, we urge all sides to
refrain from escalating tensions, especially in northern
Kosovo, and stress the importance of continuing
cooperation with UNMIK.
We also call on the authorities of Kosovo,
particularly local-level institutions and the Kosovo
police, to make sure that they continue to take all the
necessary measures to prevent violent incidents, with a
special emphasis on those affecting minority
communities.
We attach great importance to the early elections
next month being conducted in an orderly and inclusive
manner in Kosovo, thus allowing all the citizens of
Kosovo to decide on the future of their country. We
believe those elections will further contribute to the
strengthening of democratic institutions and the rule of
law in Kosovo.
At our last meeting on the subject, I underlined
that, as one of the first countries that recognized
Kosovo as an independent State, we welcome the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
that Kosovo’s declaration of independence did not
violate any applicable rule of international law.
We also welcome the recent General Assembly
resolution 64/298, jointly sponsored by Serbia and the
European Union countries, acknowledging the advisory
opinion of the Court and expressing the readiness of
the European Union to facilitate dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade. It is our sincere hope that that
advisory opinion will open a new phase in relations
between Pristina and Belgrade. Both are close friends
and partners. We are confident that the dialogue will be
based on the Court’s advisory opinion and that the
General Assembly resolution will make important
contributions to sustainable peace, security and
stability in the Balkans.
We recognize that there are still problems on the
path towards reconciliation. The problem posed by the
issue of missing persons and the challenges encountered

10-63455

S/PV.6422

in the returns process in that respect cannot be
overlooked. Still, we are glad to see that with UNMIK
facilitation, Belgrade and Pristina continue to cooperate
on this issue through the Working Group on Missing
Persons.
Lasting peace and stability in the Balkans remains
our ultimate and overriding goal. As we stated in
yesterday’s debate (6421st meeting), we hope that the
general improvement of relations between the countries
of the region, illustrated by the reciprocal visits and
statements, will also have a positive impact on the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
The preservation of Kosovo’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty is essential for complete stability in
the Balkans, as well as for the peace and stability of
the Euro-Atlantic area. In that respect, Kosovo should
not be left isolated in the middle of Europe, and the
continued support of the international community to
Kosovo in such fields as the consolidation of
democratic institutions, rule of law and the fight against
corruption is needed. We are strongly committed to
Kosovo living in peace with its neighbours and
participating in regional cooperation in every aspect.
At the same time, Serbia, as an important player
in the region, can do much for the consolidation of
peace, democracy and prosperity in the Balkans and
the greater European space. We welcome and support
the developing relations between Serbia and the
European Union. The future of Kosovo also lies in its
integration into European structures. Accordingly, we
believe that that European perspective provides a
sound basis for cooperation and dialogue.
As indicated by our Prime Minister during his
recent visit to Kosovo, Turkey also stands ready to
assist Pristina and Belgrade. While such efforts are
under way, as the Secretary-General emphasizes in his
report (S/2010/562), it is imperative that the parties
avoid any unilateral steps that could derail the path
towards dialogue.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2010/562). Also, we express our
appreciation to Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the recent developments in Kosovo, and we
commend the staff of the United Nations Mission for
their hard work and dedication. We welcome the

10-63455

participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
as well as of Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.
Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), operating within the framework
of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), aimed at
implementing its mandate of maintaining peace,
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo. Furthermore, we appreciate UNMIK’s
contribution to the reconciliation process, facilitation
of constructive dialogue and regional cooperation, as
well as its focus on mediation between the
communities and its support to minority communities.
We also have taken positive note that the security
situation in Kosovo has remained relatively calm
during the reporting period, despite some incidents,
mainly in northern Kosovo, as stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Developments such as the International
Court of Justice advisory opinion triggered particular
tensions in an already sensitive and politically delicate
atmosphere.
As for the Court’s advisory opinion, we welcome
General Assembly resolution 64/298, adopted on
9 September 2010. Bosnia and Herzegovina extended
its full support to the adoption of that resolution,
sponsored by Serbia and the 27 member States of the
European Union. It calls for the initiation of a process
of dialogue between the parties, a dialogue that would
help promote cooperation and achieve progress on the
path to the European Union.
We consider that the efforts to improve
inter-community dialogue and confidence-building
among the parties are of particular importance in
creating an environment conducive to sustainable
return. Nonetheless, the number of voluntary minority
returns during the reporting period remains low. We
commend UNMIK and other United Nations agencies,
such as UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for their efforts to
defuse tensions and draw attention to the common
needs of returnees and internally displaced persons and
encourage them to continue their work.
Having in mind how important strengthening the
rule of law is, we stress the significance and welcome
the activities of UNMIK, as well as those of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), operating within the status-neutral framework

17

S/PV.6422

of the United Nations to that end. We also support the
existing practice of cooperation and coordination
between UNMIK, EULEX, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO — the
latter present through the Kosovo Force troops — and
express our hope that that practice will continue.
Furthermore, in light of our strong commitment and
support to the work of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we find the reported
strong cooperation between EULEX and the ICTY
encouraging.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
stability and security in Kosovo are important for
achieving lasting peace and prosperity in our region.
We also believe that the international community
should continue to play an important role in supporting
the aspirations of the region’s countries with regard to
their integration into European and Euro-Atlantic
structures. For their part, the countries of the region
should cooperate fully with the international community
if those goals are to be achieved.
I cannot conclude without emphasizing that
promoting good relations and cooperation with
neighbouring countries is among the top priorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s foreign policy.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
As we reiterate our congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Council this
month, we would also like to express our appreciation
to you for the holding of today’s debate, which gives us
another opportunity to address the developments in the
situation in Kosovo. We would also like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier for presenting both clearly and
briefly the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/562) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We once again reiterate to him and
the staff of UNMIK our unwavering support for their
efforts on the ground in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999).
Lastly, we welcome the presence in the Chamber
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and thank
him for his statement. We share his views, both in
terms of the prospects for dialogue with Kosovo and
with respect to resolution 1244 (1999). We note from
Mrs. Çitaku’s statement her acceptance of the offer of
dialogue made by the European Union.

18

On 9 September, the General Assembly adopted
its resolution 64/298 on Kosovo, sponsored by Serbia
and member States of the European Union. The text of
the resolution is historic, as it offers new prospects for
dialogue and cooperation between Pristina and
Belgrade, with a view to achieving lasting peace in the
Balkans region. We should like to commend the central
role played by the European Union in facilitating this
dialogue, so necessary to reconciliation between the
various communities living in Kosovo. Since dialogue
is so essential to any process of settling a crisis, we
urge all parties to take this new opportunity to jointly
seek solutions to the problems hindering peace,
security and stability in this region.
We welcome the latest developments in Kosovo,
in particular the recent implementation of the Strategic
Framework for Kosovo and the launch, this December,
of the common development plan of the United
Nations Kosovo team. Along these lines, the results of
the Reconstruction Implementation Commission, with
respect to cultural and religious heritage sites, seem to
be a genuine factor in effective cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina.
This progress does, unfortunately, present a
contrast to some of the realities on the ground. As the
report of the Secretary-General rightly points out,
reconciliation between the various communities in
Kosovo is confronting serious challenges. The situation
is worsened by escalating tensions in northern Kosovo.
We therefore call on all parties to refrain from taking
any unilateral action that could contribute to worsening
tensions and jeopardize the prospects for dialogue that
have emerged from General Assembly resolution
64/298.
The recent statements by Kosovar authorities
against the presence of UNMIK in northern Kosovo
seem very worrying. They could, in certain cases, have
an impact on the security situation for United Nations
staff, whose mission of neutrality is an integral part of
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo.
We would like to conclude by reiterating our
position, which is founded on respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia —
prerequisites for any constructive search for a
settlement of the question of Kosovo. We encourage
the parties to continue to address the outstanding issues
through dialogue and cooperation. Gabon believes that

10-63455

S/PV.6422

the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice (see A/64/881) should help to promote such
prospects.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank, for their presence here and for their
briefings, Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Çitaku, Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo. I would of
course also like to commend the work of Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as that of all members of his Mission.
Almost three years after Kosovo’s independence,
the institutions of this young country continue to be
consolidated. Democracy is under way. The vote, on
2 November, of no confidence in the Government has
led to the organization of early parliamentary elections,
which are expected to take place on 12 December. We
see that the political climate is allowing everyone to
express himself. We therefore hope that the elections
will permit democratic institutions to be strengthened
even further. In that context, we regret the calls to
boycott the elections. We urge everyone to support this
democratic process, in the interests of all the
communities of Kosovo.
Since our last debate, the General Assembly has
adopted a resolution (General Assembly resolution
64/298) that acknowledges the consequences of the
advisory opinion handed down by the International
Court of Justice (see A/64/881), requested by Serbia,
with regard to the question of the conformity with
international law of the unilateral declaration of
independence by the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment of Kosovo.
In taking note of this opinion, according to which
the declaration of independence of 17 February 2008
did not violate any applicable rule of international law,
the General Assembly therefore brought closure to a
debate that had weighed heavily on the political life of
both countries. Serbia received an answer to the
question it had asked. A chapter has been closed and a
new one, of dialogue between the two States, must now
begin.
The European Union has offered to facilitate
dialogue between the Republics of Serbia and Kosovo,
and the General Assembly has welcomed this initiative.
It should begin as soon as possible, and should touch
on various subjects that directly concern the lives of

10-63455

the peoples by promoting cooperation between the two
countries.
For its part, Serbia continues to make progress on
the road to European rapprochement. On 25 October,
the 27 Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the European
Union decided to entrust to the European Commission
the examination of Serbia for candidacy for Union
membership. France, which has strongly supported this
positive development, welcomes this development.
On the ground, as the Secretary-General notes in
his report (S/2010/562), the situation is relatively calm.
Although we welcome the improvement in the general
climate, France strongly condemns all violence,
whoever the victims and perpetrators may be. It is
important that the Kosovo authorities, supported by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
pursue the perpetrators of these crimes and step up
their efforts in this area.
Kosovo must continue to focus on its
fundamental priorities and to make progress towards
establishing the rule of law and good governance for
the benefit of all its communities. We hope that this
will be the chief goal that the next Government sets
itself.
France will continue to pay great attention to the
situation in Kosovo and to promote dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo and their joint and shared European
future.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Lamberto Zannier for his comprehensive
briefing. Of course, I would like to join previous
speakers in extending a warm welcome to Foreign
Minister Vuk Jeremić of Serbia and Acting Foreign
Minister Vlora Çitaku of Kosovo. Japan highly values
the contributions of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to ensuring the stability of
Kosovo and the Western Balkan region as a whole.
Japan welcomes the adoption by consensus of
General Assembly resolution 64/298 regarding the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 22 July. We appreciate the flexibility shown by all
concerned parties towards its adoption. We hope that a
direct dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade will
follow, addressing issues that affect the everyday lives

19

S/PV.6422

of all the people in the communities of Kosovo. It is
equally important that the dialogue should build
confidence and contribute to rapprochement between
Pristina and Belgrade.
As the Secretary-General aptly states in his
report, this dialogue will “open a new phase”
(S/2010/562, para. 57). We expect that the European
Union will facilitate the dialogue so that the entire
region can be stabilized irreversibly through its path to
integration with Europe. We hope that the recent
political ferment in Kosovo will not delay the launch of
the dialogue. We also hope that the new administration
will be established very soon. It is also important that
free and fair elections be held with the participation of
all eligible residents, including minorities.
We commend Kosovo’s efforts to improve its
State capacity. As previous speakers have noted, one
example of this is the handover of responsibility from
KFOR to the Kosovo Police for the protection of some
Serbian Orthodox monasteries, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report states. As for the humanitarian
situation, including the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, we are particularly concerned
about the stagnancy in the process of reintegration of
minority returnees. As a proponent of the policy of
human security, Japan continues to support the
activities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other institutions to
promote peaceful multi-ethnic coexistence and
sustainable development through various frameworks.
The President: I shall now make a brief
statement in my national capacity.
I join other Council members in thanking
Mr. Jeremić and Mrs. Çitaku for attending this
afternoon’s debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Zannier for his detailed briefing and for his hard
work and leadership. I also thank the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo for the role
that it continues to play in promoting stability and
reconciliation in Kosovo, and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force for
their important work.

20

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/562)
rightly highlights progress in a number of areas,
including the closure of the Česmin Lug camp near
Mitrovica. This is a particularly welcome step towards
the reintegration of the Kosovo Roma and will improve
the living and health conditions of the affected
families. The United Kingdom also welcomes the
cooperation among Belgrade, Pristina and the
international missions in Kosovo in making
arrangements for the enthronement of the Serbian
Orthodox Patriarch in Peć, and the prompt action of the
Kosovo Police against those suspected of violence
against pilgrims. The report also draws our attention to
areas of concern, such as the trend of targeting Serbs
working for Kosovo Government institutions and a
number of small but violent incidents in northern
Kosovo.
During the period covered by the report, the
International Court of Justice published on 22 July its
advisory opinion on Kosovo’s declaration of
independence, stating that the declaration did not
violate international law. On 9 September, the General
Assembly adopted by consensus resolution 64/298,
presented by Serbia and European Union member
States, which welcomed the prospect of a dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade, to be facilitated by the
European Union. We call on Serbia and Kosovo to take
advantage of this opportunity for both countries to put
their differences over status to one side and move
forward on cooperation over practical matters. I am
encouraged that both Mr. Jeremić and Mrs. Çitaku
underlined in their comments today that they will look
to the future, not to the past, in embarking on that
dialogue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

10-63455
