UNITED

NATIONS

ITY C
OFFICIAL

?

RECORDS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

2 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2349)
Adoptionoftheagenda

. . . . . , a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a. . . . . . . . , . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,....

. . . . q+.......,...

Letter dated I April I982 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14942) . . . . . . . . . . . . . a.

1
1

I

SIPV.2349

-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of*such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~ppletnents of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964. are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2349th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
P~si&~nt:

Mr. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

Pwscnt: The representatives of the following States:
China. France, Guyana. Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland. Spain, Togo. Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United KingcIom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. United States of America. Zaire.
Provisional

4. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpwtation
from Frrtwh):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/14947. which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom.
_5 .

LOUET
(France)
(int~~ipl.ct~rtion jbm
The matter before us is extremely serious
and fully justifies the urgent convening of the Security
Council. a body to which all States Members of the
United Nations have entrusted the major responsibility for the maintenance
of international
peace
and security.

agenda (S/Agenda/2349)

I.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated I April I982 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 14942)

Mr.

Fwnc~h):

of the agenda

Adoption

2 April 1982, at 9.15 p.m.

6. It cannot be denied that Argentina used armed
force last night in an invasion of the Falkland Islands
in the South Atlantic. The representative of Argentina
acknowledged
that himself before the Council this
morning 12346th lnrrtingl.

of the agenda

7. It is clear that this armed attack deserves condemnation and must be condemned. It is a glaring
violation of the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 4
of the Charter of the United Nations, which states
that: “All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force . . .”

Letter dated 1 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern lreland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/14942)

8. In taking the decision to carry out this totally
unjustified armed attack, the Argentine Government
has deliberately disregarded the appeals for moderation
made yesterday. both by the Secretary-General and
by the President of the Council [2345th mcrting,
ptrl-tr. 741 in a statement which, I should like to emphasize. the members of the Council had approved unanimously.

I . The PRESIDENT
(intc,pl.rttrtioll
flwn Frcrwh):
In accordance with the decision taken at the 2345th
meeting. I invite the representative of Argentina to
take a place at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(intop,.c’ttrtiotl
J-urn French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia.
Canada and New Zealand in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda.

9, Faced with this breach of international peace and
in order to prevent the situation from deteriorating.
the Council must act quickly and effectively. It must
demand an immediate cessation of hostilities and the
immediate
withdrawal of all Argentine forces from
the Falkland Islands. It must call on the Argentine
Government to heed forthwith the appeal made yesterday by the President of the Council that it renounce
the USC of force and seek a diplomatic solution.

3- . In csnformity with the usual practice, I propose.
with the consent of the Council, to invite those repre-

sentatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provibions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

IO, Mr. DORR (Ireland): The issue before the Council this evening is not that of the Falkland Islands, ot
Islas Malvinas,
dispute. That particular issue has
been discussed in the past in the General Assembly
and no doubt different views exist on its merits. Our
I

concern here tonight is not. however. with the rights
and wrongs of that question but with a different matter. The question we face is what attitude the Council
should take in view of the armed action taken overnight by Argentina in contravention
of a unanimous
call by the Council on all parties to refrain from the
use of force.

uphold its authority and to uphold the rule of law in
international relations.
17. For that reason my Government
believes that
the Council must respond firmly to what has been done
overnight by Argentina in taking over the islands in
dispute by force. I would add that it is not simply
a question of a single action now completed. There
must be a continuing danger in the present situation
since it appears that naval vessels of both countries
are in the general area and could conceivably come to
a confrontation.

1 I. This, I believe, is at once a narrower and a very
much wider issue. It is narrower because it focuses not
on the basii: problems between the two Governments,
but on a specific armed action taken since last evening.
It is. however. very much wider in another sense,
because it requires the Council to assert its position
on a very basic matter indeed. that is. the effort to
establish a rule of law rather than of force in international relations.

18. I repeat, with emphasis. that we are not concerned here with the merits of the basic dispute about
the islands, That question has been debated else.
where and we want to see it settled by negotiations,
vV/hat does concern us here is how to respond ta the
use overnight of armed action by one of the two GOVernments involved. since such use is in direct CORtravention of the call made last night by the Council,
On that issue we are not in doubt. We deeply deplore
this resort to armed action by Argentina. we think it
was
quite wrong and we believe that the Council must
be ready to respond firmly to this challenge to its
authority.

12. What was the situation yesterday evening? A
long-standing
dispute existed between two States
Members of the United Nations over those isInnds.
The dispute goes back, I believe. at least to the early
1800s. Last night, one of the parties to that dispute
brought urgently to the attention of the Council its
fear that the other party would use force to settle the
dispute in its favour.
13.
Earlier yesterday.
the. Secretary-General
appealed to both sides for restraint. Later yesterday
evening. the Council met here. We heard statements
from both parties. At the end of the meeting, you,
Mr. President. made an agreed statement on behalf of
the whole Council [ihi~i, I, In that statement, the Council called on both Governments to exercise the utmost
restraint. In particular.
we called on both Governments to refrain from the threat or the use of force
and we asked them to continue the search for a diplomatic solution.

19. The PRESIDENT
(i,ltcJ/prvflrtion
,fkon~ FwKAJ:
The next speaker is the representative of Australia,
I invite him to take a place at the Councif table and
to make his statement.
20. Mr. ANDERSON
(Australia):
Mr. President,
on behalf of my delegation I should like to thank YOU
for granting us permission to speak before the Council
this evening. We have every confidence that. under
your presidency, the Council will have wise and judi.
cious guidance in considering the important issues
on its agenda.

14. What has happened since? Overnight.
within
hours of the Council’s meeting, one of the two Governments concerned had recourse to force. in direct
disregard of that unanimous call by the Council. The
Government of Argentina, by armed action by its military and naval forces, took over the disputed islands,

2 I. My delegation has requested permission to speak
today because of the very serious situation that has
developed in the Falkland Islands. It is now abundantly clear that armed forces of the Argentine Re
public have invaded the Falkland Islands. This is 1
development
which can only aggravate an already
highly tense situation and one which constitutes a
threat to international peace and security.

IS. How. then. should the Council react? My delegation is not in doubt. The attempt to create a rule of
law among nations is one that has required great effort.
It is still imperfect, imperfect in many respects. But
what has been achieved is too important to all of us
to be cast aside lightly. If we here ignore this flouting,
by one of the parties to a dispute, of a unanimous call
by the Council to avoid the use of force in settling it.
then we have seriously weakened the whole effort
to establish law rather than force as the guide in international relations. We will also have weakened even
further the authority of the Council.

22. We have considered carefully the statements
made in the Council yesterday and this morni@
by the representative
of Argentina
12345t11 ((/id
2346th 1~7~rting,s].
Nothing contained in those state
ments could justify the act of aggression that has been
committed
by the Argentine armed forces in Clear
violation of Article 2. paragraph 3 and paragraph 4,
of the Charter of the United Nations.
23. Members will recall that the Secretary-General
yesterday issued an appeal for maximum restraint on
both sides {2345r/7 meeting, prr~~r. 74) and that last
night the President of the Council made a statemeflt

16. My country, I am glad to say, has good relations with both parties to the dispute. But beyond all
else. we have a duty as members of the Council to
2

which expressed the Council’s concern about the
tension in the South Atlantic region and which called
upon the Governments of Argentina and the United
Kingdom
“to exercise the utmost restraint at this
time and. in particular, to refrain from the use or
threat of force in the region and to continue the search
for a diplomatic solution” [i/>ic/. J.
24.

Mr.

29. Mr. President, my Government strongly supports
the statement made by you last night [,3345th meeting,
para. 741, in which, on behalf of the Council, you
called on the Governments
of Argentina and the
United Kingdom to exercise the utmost restraint and,
in particular, to refrain from the use or threat of force
and to continue the search for a diplomatic solution.
We also endorse the two appeals of the SecretaryGeneral, who has urged the two parties to exercise
greater restraint.

President,

my Government fully supports
which you issued last night on
behalf of all the members of the Council. The fact
remains, however, that the occupation of the Falkland
Islands by Argentine troops has escalated the tension
in the region and will make the task of finding a peacefu1 resolution of this dispute more difficult. My Government condemns the use of force by the Argentine
Government and supports the action proposed by the
Government of the United Kingdom in the draft resolution now before the Council [S//4Y47]. We urge
that the path of peace and negotiation by both sides
not be abandoned. As a first step in that direction,
we call upon the Argentine Government to heed the
appeals made by the Secretary-General
and by the
President of the Council and accordingly to undertake
an immediate withdrawal of its troops from the Falkland Islands.
that call for restraint

30. I should like now to express the hope that the
Council will exercise its prerogative in approving
rapidly a draft resolution along the lines suggested
this morning by the representative of the United Kingdom [2346th tmvting,
prrtw. 81. In that way, we hope
that an increasingly dangerous situation can be averted
and stability returned to the region.
3 I. The PRESIDENT
(intrrpt.rttrfion
.fiotn Fwnch):
The next speaker is the representative of New Zealand.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
32. Mr. FRANCIS (New Zealand): I appreciate the
opportunity
that has been given my delegation to
address the Council this evening. I should like to say,
too. how pleased I am to see you, Mr. President,
guiding the deliberations
of the Council at this very
difficult time.

25. The PRESIDENT
(intr,pt.ctaliotz
.fiotn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Canada.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

33. New Zealand views with the gravest concern the
situation that has arisen as a result of the invasion of
the Falkland Islands by Argentinian armed forces.
We deeply regret the Government
of Argentina’s
decision to break off negotiations with the United
Kingdom and to resort to the use of force. That is not
the way that this sort of problem should be handled.
There had, in fact, been every reason to expect that
the matter would be resolved without confrontation,
but what has happened is a clear violation of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is also
an action undertaken despite appeals by the SecretaryGeneral and by the President of the Council for all
parties to exercise restraint, to refrain from the use of
force and to continue the search for a diplomatic solution to the long-standing differences between the parties. It can only increase tensions in the region and
make the search for a peaceful resolution of the dispute more difficult.

26.

Mr. PELLETIER
(Canada) linlrtprctrrtinn
jkun
Mr. President, I should like to express the
appreciation of my delegation to you and to the members of the Council for permitting Canada to participate in the debate on this item. I should also like to
express my congratulations to you, Sir, as this month’s
President of the Council. The first days of your presidency have indeed tried your diplomatic skills and
experience.

Fwnrh):

27. My delegation has asked to be allowed to participate in the debate in order to express its shock and
deep concern at the precipitous action of Argentina
in resorting to force in its invasion and military occupation of the Falkland Islands. As a country of the
Americas, Canada has a particular concern in any
action which directly affects the peace and stability of
the hemisphere.
28. The Government
of Canada, publicly and in
private communication
with the Argentine authorities, has expressed its deepest regret that the Argentine Repllblic has resorted to the use of force rather
than following the path of discussion and negotiation.
The Argentine action in this regard is particularly
disturbing in the light of the consistent decisions of
the General Assembly over the past years endorsing
direct negotiations between the United Kingdom and
Argentina with a view to reaching a peaceful settlement of the dispute. The unilateral action by Argentina
is clearly inconsistent with those decisions.

34. New Zealand has always condemned the use of
force to resolve disputes between countries. The rights
of all nations and territories. and in particular those
which are small and defenceless, can only be assured
if the principles of the Charter are observed by all
countries. We urge the Government of Argentina to
demonstrate respect for those principles by undertaking the immediate withdrawal of its forces from the
Falkland Islands.
35. We fully support the call in the draft resolution
proposed this morning by the representative of the
3

United Kingdom [ihid.] for the immediate cessation
of all hostilities and for the two Governments
to resume the search for a diplomatic solution to this longstanding problem.
My delegation hopes that. as a
result of such negotiations.
a settlement
can be
reached, one that not only will be satisfactory
to the
two Governments
but will atso reflect the wishes of the
inhabitants of the islands. We believe it is important
that the Council should take urgent action on this
question.
34. New Zealand has close and friendly relations
with both the Governments
concerned.
We are confident that with good will on both sides a solution can
be found.
37. The PRESIDENT
linzcrprc’tlrticlrl
The next speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.
38. Mr.
Sprrhh):

ROCA
(Argentina)
I have listened with

,fhm

FwncA):

of Argentina,

fi,?rc~/,~/‘c’fotir,,~ .fionr
attention to the com-

ments made by representatives
who have spoken thus
far in this meeting. I do not wish to discuss their comments and statements, since the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Argentina is on his way to New York so as
personally to inform the Council of my country’s
position with regard to the item before it. Undoubtedly.
in his statement the Council will find replies to the
comments made this evening.
39. We hope that the Council will grant the Argentine Republic an opportunity
to speak in the debate
and that it will therefore postpone any decision on the
matter until the Foreign Minister has been heard,
40. The calm which must inform
the Council’s
actions justifies the request made by my delegation.
especially bearing in mind the fact that in this problem
one member of the Council and one non-member are
interested parties. I am grateful for the understanding
of the members of the Council with regard to the request I have just made.

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

ma) be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes.
New York ou Genhe.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nation\.

NW

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estln en venta cn librerias
a su librcro
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sont en vente dans les librairies
et Its agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
h : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de Ias Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccih
de Vmtas,

X8-60989-November

t989--?.oJD
