205

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in
order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential services to the refugees in their settlements;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation and
co-ordination with the High Commissioner and the
United Nations Development Programme, to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the
Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive report on
the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations of the inter-agency technical follow-up missions and of the projects submitted by the Government of
the Sudan to the Second International Conference on
Assistance to Refugees in Africa, as well as on the implementation of the present resolution.
JO 1st plenary meeting

I4 December 1984
39/109. Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/95 of 16 December 1983, in
which it, inter alia, requested the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to continue to organize and implement an
effective programme of educational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana,
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia,
Having considered the report of the High Commissioner
on the assistance programme to student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia, 89
Noting with appreciation that some of the projects recommended in the report on assistance to student refugees
in southern Africa have been successfully completed,
Noting with concern the continued influx into Botswana,
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia of student refugees from
South Africa, as well as from Namibia,
Convinced that the discriminatory policies and repressive measures being applied in South Africa and Namibia
have led and continue to lead to a further exodus of student refugees from those countries,
Conscious of the burden placed on the limited financial,
material and administrative resources of the host countries
by the increasing number of student refugees,
Appreciating the efforts of the host countries to deal with
their student refugee populations, with the assistance of
the international community,
l. Endorses the assessments and recommendations
contained in the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and commends him for his efforts
to mobilize resources and organize the programme of
assistance for student refugees in the host countries of
southern Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees, in spite of the pressure which
the continuing influx of those refugees exerts on facilities
in their countries;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the co89 A/39/447.

90 Resolution 217 A (Ill).

operation which they have extended to the High Commissioner on matters concerning the welfare of these refugees;
4. Notes with appreciation the financial and material
support provided for the student refugees by Member
States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations;
5. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to organize and
implement an effective programme of educational and
other appropriate assistance for student refugees from
Namibia and South Africa who have been granted asylum
in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges all Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to continue contributing
generously to the assistance programme for student refugees, through financial support of the regular programmes
of the High Commissioner and of the projects and programmes, including unfunded projects, which were submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 88 held at Geneva from 9 to 11
July 1984;
7. Also urges all Member States and all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to assist the
countries of asylum materially and otherwise to enable
them to continue to discharge their humanitarian obligations towards refugees;
8. Appeals to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as other international and non-governmental organizations, to continue
providing humanitarian and development assistance to
expedite the settlement of student refugees from South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana,
Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
9. Calls upon agencies and programmes of the United
Nations system to continue co-operating with the Secretary-General and the High Commissioner in the implementation of humanitarian programmes of assistance for
the student refugees in southern Africa;
I 0. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to keep the matter
under review, to apprise the Economic and Social C.ouncil,
at its second regular session of 1985, of the current status
of the programmes and to report to the General Assembly
at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present
resolution.

101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/110. Summary or arbitrary executions
The General AsscmNr
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 90 which states that every human being has
the right to life, liberty and security of person and that
everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal,
Having regard to the provisions of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 91 which states that
every human being has the inherent right to life, that this
91 See resolution 2200 A (''<Xl), annex.

206

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

right shall be protected by law and that no one shall be
arbitrarily deprived of his life,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ I 75 of 17 December
1979, in which it reaffirmed that mass and flagrant violations of human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations and urged the Commission on Human Rights to
take timely and effective action in existing and future cases
of mass and flagrant violations of human rights,
Recalling further its resolution 36/22 of 9 November
1981, in which it condemned the practice of summary or
arbitrary executions, and its resolutions 37/182 of 17
December 1982 and 38/96 of 16 December 1983,
Deeply alarmed at the occurrence on a large scale of
summary or arbitrary executions, including extra-legal
executions,
Recalling resolution 1982/ I 3 of 7 September I 982 of
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and

Protection of Minorities, 92 in which the Sub-Commission
recommended that effective measures should be adopted
to prevent the occurrence of summary or arbitrary
executions,
Taking note of the work done by the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control in the area of summary or
arbitrary executions, including the elaboration of minimum legal guarantees and safeguards to prevent recourse
to such extra-legal executions, 93 to be considered by the
Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, to be held from 26
August to 6 September 1985,
Convinced of the need for appropriate action to combat
and eventually eliminate the practice of summary or arbitrary executions, which represents a flagrant violation of
the most fundamc:ntal human right, the right to life,
1. Strongly deplores the large number of summary or
arbitrary executions, including extra-legal executions,
which continue to take place in various parts of the world;
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolutions
1982/35 of 7 May 1982, in which the Council decided to
appoint for one year a special rapporteur to examine the
questions related to summary or arbitrary executions, and
1983/36 of 26 May 1983, in which it decided to continue
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for another year;
3. Also welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/35 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council
decided to continue the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, Mr. S. A. Wako, for a further year and requested the
Commission on Human Rights to consider the question of
summary or arbitrary executions as a matter of high priority at its forty-first session;
4. Appeals to all Governments to co-operate with and
assist the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights in the preparation of his report;
5. Requests the Special Rapporteur, in carrying out his
mandate, to respond effectively to information that comes
before him, in particular when a su111mary or arbitrary
execution is imminent or threatened;
6. Considers that the Special Rapporteur, in carrying
out his mandate, should continue to seek and receive
information from Governments, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council;
92 See E/CN.4/1983/4-E/CN.4/Sub.2/l 982143 and Corr. I, chap. XXI,
sect. A.

7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur so that he may
effectively carry out his mandate;
8. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue to
use his best endeavours in cases where the minimum
standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 14
and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 91 appear not to be respected;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-first session, on the basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur to be prepared in conformity with Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1982/35, 1983/36 and
1984/35, to make recommendations concerning appropriate action to combat and eventually eliminate the practice
of summary or arbitrary executions.
10 I st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/111. Question of enforced
disappearances

or

involuntary

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/173 of 20 December 1978,
entitled "Disappeared persons", and its resolution 38/94
of 16 December 1983 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Deeply concerned about the persistence, in certain cases,
of the practice of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Expressing its profound emotion at the anguish and sorrow of the families concerned, who should know the fate of
their relatives,
Convinced of the importance of implementing the provisions of General Assembly resolution 33/ 173 and of the
other United Nations resolutions on the question of
enforced and involuntary disappearances, with a view to
finding solutions for cases of disappearances and helping
to eliminate such practices,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/23 of6 March 1984, 94 in which the Commission
decided to extend for one year the term of the mandate of
the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, and Economic and Social Council decision
1984/ I 35 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council approved
the Commission's decision,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances for the humanitarian work it has done and to those Governments that have
co-operated with it;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on
Human Rights to extend for one year the term of the mandate of the Working Group, as laid down in Commission
resolution 1984/23;
3. Also welcomes the provisions made by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 1984/23 to enable
the Working Group to fulfil its mandate with even greater
efficiency;
4. Appeals to all Governments to provide the Working
Group and the Commission on Human Rights with the
full co-operation warranted by their strictly humanitarian
objectives and their working methods based on discretion;
5. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to study this question as a matter of priority and
to take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of
93 See Official Records <>(the Economic and Social Council, 1984, Supplement No. 6 (E/1984/16), chap. VII.
q 4 lhid, Supp/emell/ /It> 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. 11, sect. A.
