VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

on national experience, which would include specific
information on projects related to these three fields,
Bearing in mind that women will not be able to play
an equal and effective role in the process of development unless they have equal opportunities for education and employment and have the health care facilities
and social atmosphere necessary for the utilization of
these opportunities,
Considering that the equal participation of women
in the development process and in political life will
contribute to the achievement of international peace,
Recognizing that intensification of international cooperation for accelerated economic and social progress
in developing countries, through the establishment of
the new international economic order, is an essential
means for the progressive integration of women in the
development process,
1. Decides upon the subtheme "Employment,
Health and Education" for the World Conference of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, whose purpose will continue to
be to review and evaluate the progress made in the
first half of the Decade and to recommend a programme of action, with necessary changes and readjustments in the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International
Women's Year, 124 for the second half of the Decade, in
order to attain its objectives of equality, development
and peace;
2. Recommends, therefore, that the Conference
should place emphasis on elaborating action-oriented
plans for integrating women in the development process, particularly by promoting economic activities and
employment opportunities on an equal footing with
men through, inter alia, the provision of adequate
health and educational facilities, and that the preparatory work for the Conference should take this into
account;
3. Invites the regional commissions, the International Labour Organisation, the World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the World Food Programme, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the United Nations Fund
for Population Activities and any other United Nations
agency concerned to review progress made as well as
constraints and specific problems encountered in their
technical and operational areas in the achievement of
the aims and objectives of the Decade, and to suggest
appropriate programmes for the second half of the
Decade, with special emphasis on the subtheme "Employment, Health and Education", in co-operation with
each other wherever feasible, to the regional preparatory meetings, if possible, or to the Conference;
4. Requests regional preparatory meetings to suggest appropriate programmes for the second half of
the Decade, through a review and evaluation of the
progress made and obstacles encountered in the first
half of the Decade, with special emphasis on the sub124 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year, Mexico, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV. l ), chap. II, sect. A.

165

theme "Employment, Health and Education", taking
into account the following broad approaches:
(a) Technical co-operation;
( b)
Research, data collection and analysis, including the strengthening of existing arrangements at
the regional level to collect qualitative and quantitative
data on the conditions and problems of women, especially relating to their employment and educational
status;
( c) Dissemination of information to eliminate
stereotyped concepts of masculine and feminine roles
and exchange of information about projects related
to the objectives of the Decade;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a)
To prepare a report for the Conference on
the problems encountered, and the status and future
role of both urban and rural women in the areas of
employment and participation in economic life, especially at the policy-making level, education and
technical and other kinds of training, and health,
nutrition and family planning, basing it on the information received in response to his questionnaire on
review and evaluation of progress in the first half of
the Decade and on any other information available to
him, including that received from Member States in
response to Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/32;
( h)
To take the above-mentioned information as
well as the recommendations of regional preparatory
meetings, the regional commissions and United Nations agencies into account in preparing documents
related to item 9 of the provisional agenda for the
Conference; 1 ~"
( c) To draw the attention of Member States to
the present resolution, and to circulate it also to the
regional commissions and relevant United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations having
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, and to regional preparatory meetings and seminars
held to prepare for the Conference.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/186.

Rationalization of the reporting system
on the status of women

The General Assembly,
Recalling the existing biennial reporting system on
the implementation of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women 126 and related
instruments under Economic and Social Council resolutions 1325 (XLIV) of 31 May 1968 and 1677 (LII)
of 2 June 1972,
Recalling further that, in accordance with its resolutions 3490 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, entitled
"fmplementation of the World Plan of Action adopted
by the World Conference of the International Women's
Year", and 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, reporting procedures have been established and are being
carried out for biennial system-wide reviews and appraisals of the implementation of the World Plan of
125 Resolution
126 Resolution

33/ I S9, annex.
2263 (XXII).

166

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of
the International Women's Year127 and of progress
made under the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 128
Reaffirming Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/28 of 5 May 1978, in which the Council,
inter alia, recommended an integration of the reporting
systems outlined in the aforementioned resolutions,
Recognizing the importance of such reports for the
review of the progress achieved in the promotion of
the full equality of women with men in all spheres of
life,
Noting with concern that the responses received to
the requests for information on the basis of the aforementioned resolutions have been insufficient in number and also often overlap in their coverage, as shown
in the reports submitted to the Commission on the
Status of Women at its twenty-seventh session, 129
Underlining the desirability that all Member States
should submit such reports,
Bearing in mind the burden placed upon Governments when complying separately with the requests in
the aforementioned resolutions,
Convinced that there is a need for rationalization
of the reporting systems referred to in the first and
second preambular paragraphs above,
1. Decides to integrate the reporting systems outlined in the aforementioned resolutions into a single
system and to review the new reporting system in the
light of further developments;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to review in
order to simplify, if possible, the contents of the questionnaires forwarded to Member States, United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, in the context of the integrated reporting system,
paying particular attention to regional requirements by
selecting evaluation criteria which take account of
regional disparities;
3. Urges Member States, when preparing their reports, to make use of national machinery established
to promote the advancement of women and of the
views of the appropriate national non-governmental
organizations;
4. Further requests that the Secretary-General, in
compiling reports based on governmental replies on
the progress achieved in the improvement of the status
of women, provide analytical comments on obstacles
encountered and policies for future action, including,
if possible, comparative surveys on development within
each region.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/187.

International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/135 of 16 December 1976 and 32/137 of 16 December 1977 concern1 2 7 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year, Mexico, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.l), chap. II, sect. A .
12s Resolution 2626 (XXV).
129 A/32/216 and Corr.1 and Add.l and 2; E/CN.6/611.

ing the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General130 submitted in application of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1978/25 of 5 May 1978 and the
preparations made by the Secretariat towards the establishment of the Institute at the administrative, substantive and financial levels,
Noting the results achieved by the 1978 United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, held at Headquarters on 7 November 1978, as
regards the Institute,
l. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General
for the efforts made towards the establishment of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue actively the necessary consultations concerning the agreement with the host country;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the appointment of the Director and the members of
the Board of Trustees of the Institute;
4. Decides that, as soon as the members of the
Board of Trustees are appointed, the Institute should
start functioning as a body of the United Nations
financed through voluntary contributions with the degree of autonomy necessary to ensure its efficient
operation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake and
pursue all appropriate initiatives to attract voluntary
contributions to finance the operations of the Institute;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of 1979 a report on the implementation of the
present resolution, including a proposed programme
of operations for the first two years together with the
outline of a budget for the same period;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/188.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976 containing the criteria and arrangements for
the management of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling also its resolution 32/141 of 16 December 1977, in which the Secretary-General was requested
to report annually on the management of the Fund
and to submit periodically to the General Assembly
progress reports on the execution of projects financed
by the Fund,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the Fund, 131
130 A/33/316; see also A/C.5/33/34.
1 3 1 A/33/198 and Add.1/Rev.1 and Add.2 and Corr.I.
