III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled '' Prevention of an arms
race in outer space''.
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982

37/84. Relationship between disarmament and de­
velopment
The General Assembly,
Recalling the conclusions contained in chapter VII of the
study entitled The Relationship between Disarmament and
Development, 66
Recalling also resolution 36/92 G of 9 December 1981 ,
in which the General Assembly, inter alia, commended the
study, its conclusions and its recommendations to the at­
tention of all Member States and decided to transmit the
report to the Assembly at its twelfth special session for its
substantive consideration and appropriate action,
Noting the proposals on the follow-up decisions regarding
the study, circulated as official documents at the twelfth
special session of the General Assembly, 67
Noting also that, in the Concluding Document of the
Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly, it is rec­
ommended that the items on the agenda on which the
Assembly had not reached decisions should be taken up at
its thirty-seventh session for further consideration, 68
Noting further that it has decided to include the question
of the relationship between disarmament and development
in its agenda as a separate item,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
administrative action in accordance with the recommenda­
tions of the Group of Governmental Experts on the Rela­
tionship between Disarmament and Development, as
specified in chapter VII of the study entitled The Relation­
ship between Disarmament and Development;
2. Urges Member States to consider appropriate meas­
ures in accordance with all relevant recommendations of the
Group of Governmental Experts;
3. Determines that the question of reallocation and con­
version of resources, through disarmament measures, from
military to civilian purposes should be included in the pro­
visional agenda of the General Assembly at intervals to be
decided upon, starting with its fortieth session, in I985;
4. Recommends that an investigation-with due regard
to the capabilities of existing agencies and institutions cur­
rently responsible for the international transfer of re­
sources--of the modalities of an international disarmament
fund for development should be undertaken by the United
Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, in consultation
with other relevant international institutions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the measures
taken in implementation of the present solution.
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982

37/85.

Immediate cessation and prohibition of nuclear­
weapon tests

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned over the continuing nuclear-arms race
and the growing danger of nuclear war,
66

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.IX.l .

67 A/S-12/18 and A/S-12/AC.l/49.

68 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Twelfth Special Ses­
sion, Annexes, agenda items 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13, document A/S-12/32.
para. 64.

69

Convinced that an immediate cessation of nuclear-weapon
tests by all States in all environments and the prohibition
of such testing in the future would be a serious obstacle to
the development of ever-new types and systems of nuclear
weapons, as well as to the emergence of new nuclear States,
Taking note of the "Basic provisions of a treaty on the
complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests'',
submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics at the
current session, 69 the text of which is annexed to the present
resolution,
I. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to proceed
promptly to practical negotiations with a view to elaborating
a draft treaty on the complete and general prohibition of
nuclear-weapon tests;
2. Refers to the Committee on Disarmament, for its
consideration, the basic provisions of such a treaty, sub­
mitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the text
of which is annexed to the present resolution, as well as the
proposals and observations made by other States on this
question in the course of the current session;
3. Calls upon all the nuclear-weapon States, as a gesture
of goodwill and with a view to creating more favourable
conditions for the formulation of a treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests, not to con­
duct any nuclear explosions, starting from a date to be
agreed among them and until the above-mentioned treaty is
concluded, after the appropriate declarations have been made
by them to that effect well in advance;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Immediate cessation
and prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests".
98th plenary meeting
9 December 1982
ANNEX
Basic provisions of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition
of nuclear-weapon tests

The objective of averting nuclear war, towards which the efforts of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and of other peace-loving States are
directed, makes it imperative to take such measures, inter alia. as would
impede the development of ever-new types and systems of nuclear weapons.
One such effective measure would be the immediate cessation and pro­
hibition of nuclear-weapon tests by all States and in all environments,
which at the same time would promote the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons.
Motivated by these goals. the Soviet Union is submitting to States
Members of the United Nations, for their consideration, the following
basic provisions of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of
nuclear-weapon tests.
A.

SCOPE OF THE PROHIBITION

1. Each State party to this Treaty shall undertake to prohibit, to prevent
and not to carry out any nuclear-weapon test explosions at any place under
its jurisdiction or control, in any environment-in the atmosphere, beyond
its limits, including outer space, under water or under ground.
2. No party shall cause, encourage or in any way participate in the
conduct of any nuclear-weapon-test explosions anywhere.
3. A moratorium shall be declared on nuclear explosions for peaceful
purposes, under which the parties to this Treaty shall refrain from causing,
encouraging, or in any way participating in carrying out such explosions
until the relevant procedure has been evolved.
4. Promptly after the entry into force of this Treaty, consideration shall
be given to the question of procedure for carrying out nuclear explosions
for peaceful purposes. Such procedure, to be agreed upon, may take the
form of a special agreement or agreements constituting an integral part of
this Treaty.
"

9

See A/37/24.1
