A/RES/77/267

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 January 2023

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 136
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 30 December 2022
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/673, para. 10)]

77/267.

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations: review
of changes to the budgetary cycle
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 72/266 A of 24 December 2017,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Shifting the
management paradigm in the United Nations: review of changes to the budgetary
cycle” 1 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 2
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
3.
Recalls paragraphs 6 and 7 of its resolution 72/266 A, in which it approved
the change from a biennial to an annual budget period on a tri al basis, decides to lift
the trial period effective from 2023, and requests the Secretary-General to continue
with the submission of the programme budget according to an annual cycle;
4.
Notes that the change from the biennial to the annual budget period on a
trial basis was not cost-neutral, and also notes the lack of an activity-based costing
system to account for the workload and associated costs of preparing programme
budget documentation;
5.
Recalls paragraphs 19, 28 and 38 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
and requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review on the annual
cycle, including its financial, administrative and procedural impact, its impact on the
__________________
1
2

23-00149 (E)

A/77/485 and A/77/485/Corr.1.
A/77/7/Add.20.

060123

*2300149*

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations: review
of changes to the budgetary cycle

A/RES/77/267

implementation of mandates across sections of the programme budget an d the
workload and the associated costs, and to submit a report for consideration by the
General Assembly at the main part of its eighty-third session, in 2028;
6.
Also recalls regulation 3.2, paragraphs 4 and 5, of the Regulations and
Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the
Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, 3 reaffirms that the
Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters, and stresses
the importance that the Fifth Committee make decisions on the programme budget in
a timely manner;
7.
Reaffirms that no changes to the budget methodology, established
budgetary procedures and practices or the financial regulations may be implemented
without prior review and approval by the General Assembly in accordance with
established budgetary procedures;
8.
Recalls paragraph 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
requests the Secretary-General to present any proposed changes to the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations 4 and the Regulations and Rules
Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the
Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation for the consideration
of the General Assembly;
9.
Also recalls its resolution 58/250 of 23 December 2003, reaffirms that
there should be no exceptions to the rule that documents must be distributed in all
official languages, emphasizes the principle that all official documents must be
distributed simultaneously in all official languages before they are made available on
United Nations websites, and reiterates its request to the Secretary -General to ensure
that documents are available in accordance with the six-week rule for their
distribution simultaneously in the six official languages;
10. Reaffirms that parts I and II of the proposed programme budget shall be
submitted through the Committee for Programme and Coordination and part III
through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for the
consideration of the General Assembly;
11. Also reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
as the main subsidiary organ of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council for planning, programming and coordination, as well as in verifying that the
programmes of activities of the Organization are implemented in line with the
legislative mandates and that the full implementation of regulations and rules is
ensured;
12. Recommends that the Committee for Programme and Coordination, in
accordance with its mandate, provide recommendations on all programmes of the
proposed programme budget;
13. Recalls that the Committee for Programme and Coordination shall
consider the proposed programme plans in accordance with its terms of reference, and
appreciates the continuous efforts of the Committee to reach consensus on all
programmes of the proposed programme budget;
14. Decides to extend the length of sessions of the Committee for Programm e
and Coordination to five weeks, starting from the sixty-third session of the
Committee;
__________________
3
4

2/4

ST/SGB/2018/3.
ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.
23-00149

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations: review
of changes to the budgetary cycle

A/RES/77/267

15. Recalls paragraph 12 of its resolution 31/93 of 14 December 1976, and
continues to encourage Member States to be represented at a high level of expertise
and to ensure the continuity of their representation in the Committee for Programme
and Coordination, whose central role and overall responsibilities are recognized;
16. Also recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
reiterates that the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Advisory
Committee should examine the proposed programme budget in accordance with their
respective mandates and, preserving the sequential nature of the review processes,
submit their conclusions and recommendations to the General Assembly for the final
approval of the programme budget;
17. Decides that the sessions of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination shall end no later than mid-June to ensure more time for substantial
deliberation of the programmes and consultation with relevant United Nations bodies,
starting from the sixty-fourth session of the Committee, in 2024;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to assess a procedure to inform the
Advisory Committee of possible resource implications that may result from the
recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, for the
consideration of the General Assembly, to address the sequential nature of the review
process under the annual cycle;
19. Re-emphasizes the role of the plenary and the Main Committees of the
General Assembly in reviewing and taking action on the appropriate
recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination relevant to their
work, in accordance with regulation 4.10 of the Regulations and Rules Governing
Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of
Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;
20. Reiterates that whenever the Committee for Programme and Coordination
cannot provide conclusions and recommendations on a given subprogramme or
programme of the proposed programme budget, the plenary or the relevant Main
Committee or Main Committees of the General Assembly responsible for those
mandates will consider the said subprogramme or programme at the very start of its
session in order to provide any conclusions and recommendations to the Fifth
Committee, at the earliest opportunity, and no later than four week s after the start of
the session, for timely consideration by the Fifth Committee;
21. Decides that the Fifth Committee will consider the report of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination at the earliest opportunity during the main part of
the sessions of the General Assembly, under the agenda item entitled “Programme
planning”, and no later than the first week of November;
22. Recognizes the efforts of the President of the General Assembly and the
Chair of the Fifth Committee in following up with th e Chairs of the relevant Main
Committees on the consideration of the programmes without recommendations from
the Committee for Programme and Coordination, in accordance with paragraph 16 of
its resolution 76/236 of 24 December 2021, and decides that incoming Presidents of
the General Assembly and Chairs of the Fifth Committee shall reach out to and
support the Chairs of the Main Committees to ensure that conclusions and
recommendations are issued on time;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all the Main Committees
have access on their Committee Places of the e-deleGATE portal, for information
purposes, before the start of the session, to the programmes of the proposed
programme budget and the latest report of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination;

23-00149

3/4

A/RES/77/267

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations: review
of changes to the budgetary cycle

24. Decides to extend the length of the first resumed session of the Fifth
Committee to five weeks, starting from its seventy-eighth session;
25. Notes the increased workload on the Fifth Committee, the Committee for
Programme and Coordination, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and the Secretariat;
26. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that results and,
where possible, performance measures actually reflect achievements and impacts in
the implementation of the programmes of the Organization and not those of individual
Member States;
27. Recalls paragraphs 33 and 46 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
stresses that accountability is a central principle of management reform, and requests
the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure a strong culture of
responsibility and accountability, compliance with regulations and rules, and the
achievement of results;
28. Expresses its support for the efforts of the Secretariat to better engage and
support programme managers with the aim of making the Organization more effective
and results-oriented, and welcomes the commitment and ongoing efforts of the
Secretariat to improve and update the programmatic aspects, including planned
results, performance measures and external factors, of the programme budget;
29. Stresses that effective and efficient mandate delivery is the overriding
factor in determining the Secretariat’s resource requireme nts;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure effective and efficient utilization
of available resources and programme delivery by programme managers, including
through clearly defined results-based performance indicators and benchmarks;
31. Notes with appreciation the cumulative improvements to the presentation
format of the proposed programme budget resulting from the implementation of the
guidance from the General Assembly during the annual budget trial period, and
welcomes the submission of the proposed programme plan and programme
performance alongside the proposed post and non-post resource requirements in a
single document;
32. Recalls paragraph 45 of the report of the Advisory Committee, reaffirms
the programmatic nature of the United Nations budget, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to preserve the optimal functioning of all programmes by improving the
presentation of and the link between proposed resources and programme delivery.
56th (resumed) plenary meeting
30 December 2022

4/4

23-00149
