S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9387

th meeting
Thursday, 27 July 2023, 3.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki/Mr. Eckersley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Ms. Wang Yingtong
Mr. Egas Benavides
Mr. Nely
Ms. Oye
Ms. Osei
Mr. Nishiyama
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Buanahagi
Mr. Khloponin
Mr. Carpenter
Ms. Almenhali
Ms. Postel

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-22178 (E)
*2322178*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was resumed at 3.35 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to Mr. Camelli.
Mr. Camelli: The European Union (EU) and
its member States are deeply concerned about the
increasing violence and extremism in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory, which are leading to
appalling numbers of civilian casualties. The EU
deplores the increase in violence, which has not only
resulted in tragic loss of life but also fuels tension and
animosity. We call on all sides to genuinely recommit
to reaching a two-State solution in order to enhance
stability, increase prosperity and strengthen security
for Israelis and Palestinians alike. We continue to call
on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to de-escalate the
situation and to refrain from actions that will increase
tension. The status quo of the holy sites must be upheld,
in line with previous understandings and with respect
for Jordan’s special role. Peaceful coexistence between
Christians, Jews and Muslims must be maintained.
The EU strongly condemns the indiscriminate
launching of rockets into Israel by Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other terrorist groups. The EU
recognizes Israel’s right to self-defence and to protect
its civilian population, while underlining that this right
must be exercised in a proportionate manner and with
full respect for international humanitarian law. We
firmly condemn the recent terror attacks in Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as all forms
of terrorism, and deplore the tragic loss of life. We
remain committed to Israel’s security and to preventing
and fighting terrorism and violent extremism. There
must be an immediate end to terror attacks, which
everyone should condemn, as well as to the practices
that support them.
We reaffirm our commitment to implementing
previous Council decisions, including resolution 2334
(2016), as well as the applicability of international
human rights and humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We reiterate our strong opposition
to Israel’s settlement policy and activities, including
in and around East Jerusalem. Actions such as
evictions, forced transfers and the demolition and
2/25

27/07/2023

confiscation of homes will only exacerbate an already
tense environment and threaten the viability of a twoState solution. Israel must stop settlement expansion
and legalization, prevent settler violence and ensure
that the perpetrators are held accountable. The EU
will not recognize changes to the 1967 lines unless
they are agreed to by the parties. The humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip requires that restrictions be
eased further, while taking Israel’s legitimate security
concerns into account.
The EU reaffirms its commitment to a just and
comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on a two-State solution, with the State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition, with
Jerusalem serving as the future capital of both States.
It is vital to restore a political horizon towards a twoState solution. Only a negotiated agreement offers a
chance of security and peace for all.
There is an urgent need for a new perspective on
peace. On 13 February, the EU High Representative
and Vice-President, the Saudi Foreign Minister and
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
agreed to explore ways to revive and safeguard the
prospect of a two-State solution and to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. The EU reaffirmed
its proposal of an unprecedented package of economic,
political and security support in the context of a
final status agreement, as endorsed in the Council
conclusions of December 2013. In that effort, we
look forward to working closely with other Arab and
international partners.
The EU will continue to call upon the Palestinian
Authority to hold free, transparent and inclusive national
elections without further delay. It urges all Palestinian
factions to engage in good faith in the reconciliation
process, adhere to previous agreements, renounce
violence and terrorism, recognize Israel’s right to exist
and commit to democratic principles, including the
rule of law. Democratic Palestinian institutions based
on respect for the rule of law and human rights are vital
for the Palestinian people and, ultimately, for the twoState solution.
Palestinian civil society must be allowed by all
parties to carry out its important task freely, while
freedom of expression must be upheld. The EU is
proud of its continued support to civil society, which
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

contributes to peace efforts and confidence-building
between Israelis and Palestinians.
In preparation for the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians on the margins of the general debate
of the General Assembly in September, the EU calls
for the implementation of the commitments made at
previous meetings. Until there is a just, fair, agreed and
realistic solution to the refugee issue, in accordance
with international law, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) remains critical for providing the necessary
protection and essential services for Palestine refugees
and supporting peace and stability in the region. The
EU will continue to support UNRWA in all its fields of
operations, including in East Jerusalem. The EU will
closely monitor developments and their implications on
the ground and remains ready to contribute further to
the protection and viability of the two-State solution.
Syria continues to be high on the priority list of the
European Union and its member States. At the seventh
Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria
and the Region, hosted and chaired by the European
Union last June, the international community pledged
€5.6 billion for 2023 and beyond, including €4.6 billion
in 2023, for supporting people inside Syria and the
neighbouring countries hosting Syrian refugees. The
European Union pledged 70 per cent of the total grants,
or €3.8 billion, with €2.1 billion by the European
Commission and €1.7 billion by the member States. In
addition, international financial institutions and donors
have announced €4 billion in loans, in concessional
terms, bringing the total of grants and loans to
€9.6 billion, an increase of €800 million compared to
what was achieved during last year’s Conference.
That is a tangible demonstration that the
international community stands by the Syrian people
and those hosting them. The Conference reiterated
the political, humanitarian and financial commitment
of the international community to the Syrian people
and renewed the continuous and steadfast support of
the international community to Syria’s neighbours in
addressing the immediate and long-term challenges
brought upon them by the conflict. The European Union
and its member States continue to be the largest donor
and have mobilized more than €30 billion to support
Syrians in Syria and in the region to meet the needs
arising from the Syrian crisis since 2011.

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The only path to sustainable peace for Syria is a
political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
with the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women and in line with the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). In the thirteenth year of the conflict,
it remains essential that the international community
continue to pursue a sustainable and comprehensive
political solution in Syria. The EU stands firm in its
commitment to that goal, supporting the continuous
efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen to advance on all
aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), including his stepfor-step approach in furthering the political process and
resuming the work of the Constitutional Committee.
The EU has taken note of the sovereign decision
of the League of Arab States to readmit Syria.
Our position has not changed. We reiterate that no
normalization, lifting of sanctions or reconstruction
will be possible until the Syrian regime engages in a
credible, sustainable and inclusive political process, in
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015). The EU notes,
however, that, in the light of the recent earthquakes,
the Security Council adopted humanitarian exemptions
to the United Nations sanctions regimes in resolution
2664 (2022). While EU restrictive measures do not
stand in the way of humanitarian relief efforts, food or
medical supplies, the EU has decided, in the same spirit,
to apply temporary exemptions to its own autonomous
sanctions regime for Syria. That will facilitate the
speedy delivery of humanitarian assistance and aid,
and help to respond to the continuing urgency of the
humanitarian crisis in Syria.
Accountability and justice for victims are essential
for a stable, peaceful Syria. All parties responsible
for breaches of international humanitarian law and
violations and abuses of human rights, including sexual
and gender-based violence, must be held accountable.
We reiterate our call to have the situation in Syria
referred to the International Criminal Court.
In the absence of international processes for
justice, the prosecution of war crimes and other serious
crimes, under national jurisdiction where possible,
now well under way in several EU member States,
represents a crucial contribution towards securing
justice, as does the Dutch-Canadian initiative to hold
Syria to account for breaching the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. We will continue to support
efforts to gather evidence, with a view to future legal
action, including by the International, Impartial and

23-221783/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the work
of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic.
The
European
Union
commends
Syria’s
neighbouring countries for hosting large numbers of
refugees for more than a decade. We recall that the
underlying causes of the refugee and displacement crises
must be addressed under resolution 2254 (2015). The
European Union continues to warn against any further
displacement, in any part of Syria, as well as against
the potential exploitation of such displacement for the
purpose of social and demographic engineering. Syrian
refugees in neighbouring countries are still unable to
go back home, as the conditions for safe, dignified and
voluntary return, in line with the parameters defined by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and in accordance with international law, are
not fulfilled. It is the responsibility of the Syrian regime
to remove those obstacles, and we will be in a position to
support returns only once those conditions are satisfied.
The Syrian regime must fully cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and its investigations on the use of chemical weapons
in the conflict, including the attack in Douma, as well
as on the completion of the dismantling of its chemical
weapons programme. The European Union, as a member
of the International Partnership against Impunity for
the Use of Chemical Weapons, will continue to work
towards ensuring full accountability.
The European Union deplores the veto the Russian
Federation cast, on 11 July, on the renewal of resolution
2672 (2023) regarding the cross-border delivery of
humanitarian assistance in north-western Syria. That
veto will further exacerbate the already dire humanitarian
situation in the region and gravely disrupt the delivery
of life-saving humanitarian supplies to millions in need.
We call on the Security Council to undertake efforts to
find a solution that will enable cross-border assistance
to continue.
Civilians must be protected at all times. The European
Union echoes the calls made by the Security Council for
the implementation of a nationwide ceasefire. Türkiye’s
security concerns stemming from northern Syria need to
be addressed through political and diplomatic means, and
in full compliance with international human rights law.
4/25

27/07/2023

Early-recovery projects are important to support
resilience, community capacity-building and selfreliance of the Syrian people and for their future.
EU-funded projects in that regard are intended for
those in genuine need and designed to strengthen the
sustainability and cost-effectiveness of the humanitarian
response. The European Union will not, however, fund
early-recovery efforts that could support social and
demographic engineering.
Syria has one of the highest numbers of detained,
abducted and missing persons in the world owing to the
ongoing conflict. We therefore welcome the adoption of
the General Assembly resolution (resolution 77/301) for
the establishment of a new Independent Institution on
Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic. The new
Institution will address a clear humanitarian imperative.
It will not only clarify the fate and whereabouts of
missing persons in Syria, but will also provide adequate
support to meet the needs of the victims, survivors and
families of those missing. The European Union stands
ready to support that new Institution.
We also salute the ongoing work of the other actors on
the issue, including Syrian civil society, the International
Commission on Missing Persons, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
emphasize the need for enhanced cooperation. We look
forward to engaging constructively in the upcoming
discussions to establish the new mechanism.
In conclusion, the EU remains committed to the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian State,
and will continue to call on all parties to the conflict,
particularly the Syrian regime and its allies, to advance
a credible, sustainable and inclusive political solution,
based on the full and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015). It is the only route to sustainable
peace in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the United Kingdom’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would also like
to thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
Egypt aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and the statements
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to be made by the representatives of Yemen, on behalf of
the Group of Arab States, and Azerbaijan, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
There can be no question that every member of
the Security Council is fully aware of the regrettable
developments in the occupied Palestinian territories over
the past few weeks, particularly the Israeli occupation
forces’ incursion into the city and refugee camp of Jenin,
which resulted in the martyrdom of some Palestinians
and injuries to scores of others, despite the efforts that
Egypt and many other regional and international actors
have been making to contain the escalating violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory. Egypt has repeatedly
warned that Israel’s ongoing unilateral measures would
undermine those efforts to improve the conditions on
the ground, based on the progress that was made at
the Al-Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings held in
February and March, in which both Palestinian and
Israeli representatives participated.
The violence against civilians has been condemned
by members at a number of Council meetings in the
past few weeks, echoing the position of Egypt and other
countries and emphasizing the dangerous consequences
of Israel’s continued violations through its settlement
expansion, demolition of Palestinian homes and
facilities, incursions into Palestinian cities and killing
of unarmed civilians by Israeli occupation forces and
settlers, including children, as well as its violation
of the status quo at the holy sites in East Jerusalem
under Jordan’s custodianship. As for the occupied
Syrian Golan, the situation there is no better. Israel’s
attempts to seize land with a view to installing wind
turbines to generate electricity are in violation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
law requiring the occupying forces to refrain from
changing the situation on the ground.
Through its adoption of resolution 77/23, the General
Assembly recently commemorated the 1948 Nakba,
which remains the crux of the continuing legitimate
question as to how much longer the Palestinian people
must continue to suffer. How much longer must the
non-compliance with United Nations and Security
Council resolutions on the Palestinian question and the
Arab territory that has been occupied since 1967 in the
Syrian Golan and in southern Lebanon continue? How
much longer will the Security Council remain unable
to provide international protection for the Palestinian
people, despite the fact that we are seeing civilians
targeted on a daily basis by the occupying forces and

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

the settlers? Any discussion on meaningful reform
of the Council should include the issue that is the
most obvious of all, that is, ensuring respect for the
Council’s resolutions, which represent the will of the
international community.
Egypt has made it clear that the Palestinian
question is the core issue for the Arab nation and
that achieving peace and security in the Middle East
will remain impossible if the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people and the liberation of the occupied
Arab land in the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon
are not achieved. I want to note that Egypt welcomes
the decision of our sister nation of Jordan to convene a
ministerial conference on 21 September, on the sidelines
of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, to
garner the political and financial support needed for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, given the unprecedented
deficit that the Agency is facing this year, with a view
to ensuring that its operational activities can continue
and to strengthening regional security and stability.
In conclusion, Egypt reiterates its firm support for
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, especially
their right to self-determination and to establish an
independent State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with the resolutions
of international legitimacy, international law and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
The past few weeks have seen a troubling resurgence
of violence in the occupied West Bank. In early July,
Israeli military forces carried out one of the most
extensive operations in the West Bank in more than 20
years, killing 12 Palestinians, including children, and
injuring more than 140 others in the Jenin refugee camp,
deep inside Area A. If the current trends continue, 2023
will be the deadliest year for Palestinians in the West
Bank since United Nations records began in 2004.
Several Israelis have been killed and injured in attacks
by Palestinian militants. Both Israelis and Palestinians
deserve to live in security. While we recognize Israel’s
legitimate security concerns, we reiterate that Israeli
security forces must exercise the utmost restraint in
their use of force. International human rights norms
must be respected. Violence against civilians, whether

23-221785/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

perpetrated by Israeli security forces, Israeli settlers
or Palestinian militants, is unacceptable and cannot
be justified.
The Israeli settlements on occupied land are
illegal under international law and must stop. Israeli
settlements and settler violence are fuelling violence
in the West Bank and undermining the prospects for
an independent and contiguous Palestinian State. The
recent approvals of new housing units in the settlements,
as well as administrative changes that simplify the
system for planning and establishing new settlements,
are unacceptable.
The Oslo Accords were signed 30 years ago. They
represented a step towards peace and a two-State
solution. Many things were different back then — the
situation on the ground, the politics and even the world.
But one important factor in particular was present,
leading the Israelis and Palestinians to come together
around a table for months to negotiate, despite their
differences and scepticism about one another. Those
Palestinian and Israeli political figures and leaders had
one factor in common. They had a vision for peace, a
vision for peace for their peoples and a vision for peace
for their children, grandchildren and future generations
to come. Because of their vision, and the prospect of
living next to each other in two States, they were able
to navigate a complex and challenging path aimed at
peace. Today there is a whole generation of Israelis and
Palestinians who were not born at the time of the Oslo
agreement. Some of them have not only lost faith in a
two-State solution, they never had any such faith in the
first place. Many young people are resorting to violence,
which is a symptom of the lack of vision for a political
solution. At the same time, the violence is leading the
parties away from peace and a two-State solution.

27/07/2023

renewed democratic legitimacy, is necessary too. It is
also crucial to continue strengthening and supporting
the Palestinian Authority and its institutions, and
the Palestinian economy. We welcome the fact that
the Israeli Government has said that it too wants a
strengthened Authority. Norway will continue its efforts
to revitalize the peace process. We encourage increased
support for Palestinian institution-building and for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Norway will convene
the next ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians on 20 September in New
York. Thirty years after the first Oslo Accord, almost
to the day, and in the spirit of those who negotiated it,
it will be an opportunity for Ministers to discuss how
we can work together to increase our efforts to revive a
vision for peace and end the conflict.
Let me reiterate Norway’s clear position. Seventysix years since the partition plan was approved by the
United Nations, we believe that the negotiated twoState solution, based on the 1967 lines, United Nations
resolutions and international parameters is the best way
to achieve a lasting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ajeeb (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation associates itself with the
statements to be delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Group of Arab States.
We would like to make the following statement in our
national capacity.

We therefore call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to take on the responsibility of ensuring that the
generations to come have a vision of something other
than distrust, violence and destruction. The current
situation is in no way sustainable. It is in neither
party’s interest to keep the conflict unresolved. They
need to make sure that their peoples have a vision for a
political solution.

The Israeli occupation forces for weeks have
continued their barbaric attacks and criminal practices
against the fraternal Palestinian people and our people
in the occupied Syrian Golan who confront the Israeli
war machine with their bare hands and declare their
rejection of the continuation of the Israeli occupation
of their land, the establishment of settlement projects
on it, the displacement from their cities and villages
and the destruction of their homes, which undermines
every opportunity for achieving peace and stability in
the region.

I fear that our discussions in these meetings are
doomed to repeat themselves unless we find a way to
address the root causes of the conflict. That primarily
requires taking steps to end the Israeli occupation.
A strong and unified Palestinian leadership, with

The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns
those Israeli attacks, which constitute a war crime and
a crime against humanity, and affirms that the Israeli
policy of escalation is nothing but an expression of
the inability of the occupying forces to weaken the

6/25

23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolve of the Palestinian people and their adherence
to their legitimate historical rights represented in the
establishment of their independent State with Jerusalem
as its capital and the return to their homeland.
The paralysis experienced by the Security Council
and its inability to find a just and urgent solution to
the long-standing question of the Palestinian people,
due to the obstruction of one permanent member in
it, harms the Council’s reputation and its ability to
fulfil its responsibilities at a time when we desperately
need urgent action by the Council to stop the crimes
of the authorities of the Israeli occupation, hold the
perpetrators accountable, ensure that crimes are not
repeated, oblige Israel to implement the resolutions
of international legitimacy related to the Palestinian
question and enable the Palestinian people to enjoy
their legitimate and inalienable rights.
It has become clear that the recurring political crises
faced by the successive Governments of the Israeli
occupation entity compel its leaders, who are unable to
solve them, to export their internal crises by launching
attacks against our defenceless peoples in Palestine and
the occupied Syrian Golan, in a clear demonstration
of the law of force and the law of the jungle and with
shameless disregard for international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its
aggressive policies against our people in the occupied
Syrian Golan since 1967. Israel continues to commit
the most heinous violations of international law and
international humanitarian law, including arrest,
killing, displacement and the continued closure of
the Quneitra crossing since 2014, which is the only
lifeline that allows the people of the occupied Golan
to communicate with their families in their homeland,
Syria, according to the separation of forces agreement
of 1974.
The occupation forces also continue their systematic
expansionist policy and projects to build thousands of
housing units and settlement outposts with the aim of
perpetuating their occupation of the Golan, imposing
demographic change and increasing the number of
settlers therein. In June, Israeli occupation forces
stormed the Al-Hafayer area, east of Masada village, in
the occupied Syrian Golan to bulldoze its agricultural
lands in preparation for the implementation of its
settlement plan of establishing wind turbines on those
lands. They are also planning to bulldoze the remaining

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

houses in the village of Ein Fit, which, in 1967, was
destroyed by the occupation, causing the displacement
of its people, with the aim of obliterating its Arab
Syrian identity and turning it into a military site in a
new violation of resolution 497 (1981).
The gravity of implementing settlement projects
and installing wind turbines lies in the fact that they
are suffocating the villages of the occupied Golan,
isolating them from each other and undermining their
agriculture which is the livelihood of most of the Golan
population, in addition to displacing the people of the
Golan and replacing them with settlers.
At the same time, the Israeli occupation forces
are continuing their attacks against the territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic. On 19 July, they launched
an aggression with barrages of missiles from the north
of the occupied Syrian Golan, targeting some points in
the vicinity of Damascus, which resulted in casualties
and material losses. They also launched a new
aggression just two days ago against some posts of the
Internal Security Forces in the town of Al-Qahtaniya
in Quneitra, in a new flagrant violation of the 1974
separation of forces agreement.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns all Israeli
violations and aggressions against the Syrian lands
and our people in the occupied Syrian Golan. We warn
of the dangers of Israel’s aggressive policies and its
extremist Governments, which are greatly escalating
tensions in the region and pushing the region towards a
new phase of insecurity and instability. Syria calls upon
the Security Council to break its silence and urgently
assume its responsibilities to end the Israeli occupation
of Arab lands, including the Syrian Golan, and to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions,
especially resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as resolution 497 (1981), which considers Israel’s
decision to annex the Golan null and void and without
legal effect.
Before I conclude, my delegation will not respond
to what was mentioned in the statement of the European
Union, especially the baseless allegations and
accusations against my country as they are not related
to the discussion undertaken today. We must focus on
the cause of the Palestinian people and our people in
the occupied Syrian Golan, which is worth our time,
instead of wasting our time and that of the Council by
responding to those false allegations and accusations.

23-221787/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Ms. Bakytbekkyzy (Kazakhstan): We commend
the presidency of the United Kingdom for hosting this
debate on the Middle East, and we thank AssistantSecretary-General Khiari for his briefing.
We echo the warnings of Secretary-General António
Guterres and other key players of the international
community that the cycle of conflicts currently in the
Middle East region, especially the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, is a cause for serious concern. That is because
the conflict has the potential to escalate into further
tensions at all levels, resulting in the destabilization of
the entire region and beyond; and therefore demands our
urgent attention.
Kazakhstan joins the general concern about the
continued settlement expansion across the occupied
Palestinian territory. We are concerned by the recent
escalation of violence in Jenin in the West Bank.
Kazakhstan calls on Israelis and Palestinians
to refrain from all actions that could undermine the
advancement of a two-State solution. We hence appeal
to all political, community and religious leaders to spare
no efforts in ending the intensifying hostilities.
In view of the above, Kazakhstan suggests a
revival of dialogue among all parties to the conflict,
accompanied by new measures for improving the
humanitarian situation of the population of Gaza with a
view to building confidence and reducing further threats.
That is essential because Gaza remains an integral part
of the two-State solution, in keeping with relevant and
key United Nations resolutions.
Kazakhstan reiterates the urgent need to support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in its critical role in mitigating
the deteriorating situation in Gaza and promoting longterm development of the area. The current situation,
which we are witnessing today, is one of deepening
poverty, unemployment and, consequently, chronic
economic regression which will fuel further conflict.
The deterioration of the security and socioeconomic
situation across the occupied Palestinian territory must
be reversed.
We thus again call on both sides to refrain from
violence and to work towards a political settlement on the
principle of two-States for two peoples. Such a concept
should guarantee the inalienable right of Palestinians to
statehood, together with Israel’s right to security.
8/25

27/07/2023

Kazakhstan’s long-standing policy is to fully
support the creation of an independent State of
Palestine, which coexists peacefully with Israel within
the 1967 borders and obtains full-fledged membership
in the United Nations. We join others in emphasizing
that the two-State solution is the only viable option
for a durable peace; it is to be reached by dialogue, in
keeping with the United Nations Charter and relevant
Security Council resolutions. Other mechanisms and
initiatives, both bilateral and multilateral, such as the
road map for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and a
revived Middle East Quartet or a version of the Quartet
adapted to the current context, should be availed of in
order to resolve the situation today.
Kazakhstan stands ready to join every collective
mediation effort, especially that of calling on all
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to demonstrate political
goodwill so that both sides can live in peace, security,
progress and prosperity, which are the long-cherished
goals of both peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Abdelaziz.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for
his comprehensive briefing today, and I align myself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Yemen on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
We gather today to discuss a very complex and
sensitive regional situation in the Middle East that
has resulted from the challenges that Israel, the
occupying Power, is continuing to pose to the will of
the international community and the United Nations.
It continues to violate international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
in the occupied Palestinian territory, without being
held internationally or criminally accountable. It is no
secret that one of the most important and malicious
goals of the extremist right-wing Israeli Government
is to do away with the two-State solution and any
chance to build an independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital. It is doing that by continuing its
expansionist settlements and construction policies that
violate resolution 2334 (2016), including displacement,
confiscation and demolition measures and support for
Israeli settlers while intensifying its attacks in order
to change historical reality on the Palestinian territory,
particularly in East Jerusalem, the capital of the
independent Palestinian State.
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Israeli Government intends to deploy
special security forces in support of settlers who are
illegitimately attacking the defenceless Palestinian
people, all of which is in violation to all Israel’s
obligations as the occupying Power. The current
situation is exacerbated by the absence of any prospects
for a settlement by the Middle East Quartet or the
Security Council itself. The Council has not convened
a meeting of the Quartet in a very long time. The wellknown reasons stem from the ongoing confrontations
and tensions in the Security Council relating to other
issues that are strongly preoccupying its members and
the international community. Despite the apparent
similarity among those issues, particularly those
involving to the occupation of lands of others by force,
the Council has chosen to apply a double standard
in dealing with the Ukrainian issue, providing it
with all kinds of support — institutional, logistical
and financial — while minimizing the international
community’s support for Palestine amid the current
deteriorating conditions. Nevertheless, it remains the
responsibility of the Council to provide protection
to the Palestinian people in the Palestinian occupied
territories. The League of Arab States asserts that it is
the duty of the Council not to wait for a third Palestinian
intifada or for Israeli forces and hordes of settlers to
commit another massacre like the Hebron massacre in
1994 before it adopts a new resolution that echoes its
own resolution 904 (1994).
Despite false accusations and continuous attacks
by the Permanent Representative of Israel against the
United Nations and the Security Council, the Arab
League emphasizes that it is the responsibility of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General to
implement the proposals set forth in his 2018 report
on the protection of the Palestinian civilian population
(A/ES-10/794), prevent any further deterioration
of the Palestinian people’s security and set up a
mechanism for ensuring international protection
for this defenceless people and their holy sites, in
particular Al-Aqsa Mosque, but also other Muslim and
Christian holy sites. Israel must respect the Hashemite
Jordanian custodianship of those holy sites. To ensure
that the Council is capable of doing that, the principles
of international accountability that are applied in other
countries need to be upheld, especially with regard to
any Israeli who commits violations on the Palestinian
occupied territories.

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

This week, many countries and organizations
submitted their legal views to the International Court
of Justice on the illegitimacy of the Israeli occupation
of Palestinian territories. The Arab League was one of
the organizations to express its views. We are looking
forward to the advisory opinion of the Court requested
by the General Assembly in its resolution 77/247, which
will lay a new solid legal foundation in support of
international legitimacy.
The thirty-second Arab summit, which was held in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, took a pivotal decision
to reinstate Syria’s suspended membership in the Arab
League and to give further attention to the Syrian issue
in order to reach a peaceful comprehensive settlement
that helps Syria regain its standing. That can be achieved
by respecting Syria’s sovereignty over its territories
and eliminating any unauthorized foreign presence
therein, including by ending the Israeli occupation of
the Arab Syrian Golan. The increased activities by
terrorist organizations on Syrian territory must also
end. The Arab League appreciates the support of the
international community to those ends, despite some
having reservations.
The League of Arab States expresses its concern
that the Security Council does not have sufficient unity
with regard to cross-line and cross-border mechanism
for delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria, despite
the Security Council co-penholders’ constructive
solutions and Syria’s unilateral sovereign decision to
open the Bab Al-Hawa crossing for the United Nations
humanitarian support to reach north-west Syria for
six months. The Arab League calls on the Council to
intensify its joint work with the Syrian Government
to overcome the acute humanitarian crisis faced by
the Syrian people. All parties should come together
on this matter, while ensuring the independence
and objectivity of the delivery of humanitarian aid,
respecting the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Syria and providing adequate funding.
The Arab League welcomes the recent exchange of
prisoners in Yemen. Furthermore, we would also like to
express our appreciation for the constructive role played
by the United Nations in offloading the FSO SAFER
oil tanker so as to avoid any environmental or security
disaster in the Red Sea. We support all efforts made
to provide the necessary funding for a comprehensive
political settlement in Yemen as well as the intensive
political efforts made to reach such a settlement.

23-221789/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite the serious humanitarian implications of
the military confrontations in the fraternal Sudan and
despite the Arab League’s efforts to bring about an
immediate ceasefire between the Rapid Support Forces
and the Sudanese Armed Forces and reach an internal
consensus among all military and civilian Sudanese
stakeholders on a political settlement for re-establishing
civil rule in the country, the Arab League reiterates the
position expressed by the Group of Arab States in New
York in a letter sent to the President of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General dated 3 February,
in support of the Sudanese Government’s request
for the sanctions imposed by resolution 1591 (2005)
and other relevant resolutions to be lifted without
any preconditions, as the Council did in relation to
lifting the arms embargo on Eritrea in resolution 2444
(2018). Lifting the sanctions will enable the Sudanese
Government to regain control over its territories and
maintain peace and stability, as well as the unity and
sovereignty of its lands. The Arab League calls on
donor countries and organizations to provide the Sudan
with the support it needs to face its acute humanitarian
and economic crises.
In conclusion, as an active partner of the United
Nations, the Arab League looks forward to continuing
to cooperate and coordinate with the Security Council
to effectively address the foregoing and other important
Arab issues inscribed on the Council’s agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sangjin (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his briefing today.
The Republic Korea is deeply concerned about the
security situation in Israel and Palestine, which has
been deteriorating since early this year. It is particularly
alarming that the recent clashes in the West Bank city of
Jenin led to numerous casualties, followed by the terror
attack on 20 June that killed 4 Israelis and rampages
against Palestinians on the same day.
My delegation strongly condemns all violence
against civilians and reaffirms that there can be no
justification for terror attacks. Continued violence in
the region will only exacerbate mistrust and further
undermine a peaceful resolution to the conflict. We call
upon all parties to exert the utmost restraint in the light
of the current volatile situation on the ground.
10/25

27/07/2023

My delegation strongly urges all parties to
take concrete steps to lower tensions and create an
environment conducive to dialogue to advance the peace
process. We hope to see the continued engagement
pledged in the joint communiqués in Aqaba and Sharm
El-Sheikh last spring.
In that connection, my Government expresses its
deep concern about the Israeli Government’s recent
plan to expand settlement homes in the West Bank
and to amend settlement approval procedures, which
could expedite their expansion. We urge the Israeli
Government to reverse its policies of settlement
activities, demolitions and evictions since these
constitute clear violations of international laws and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Republic of Korea reiterates its firm
commitment to contributing to international efforts to
establish permanent peace in the region. My delegation
firmly believes that there is no alternative to a twoState solution in which Israelis and Palestinians live
side by side in peace within secure and recognized
borders consistent with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm my
Government’s unwavering commitment to supporting
international initiatives to address the humanitarian
and development needs of the Palestinian people. The
ongoing financial hardship facing the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) is worrisome. In that regard,
my Government decided to increase our support to the
Agency’s programme budget this year and will continue
its support going forward.
In addition, my Government has recently decided to
provide additional humanitarian assistance this year to
those vulnerable in Palestine and Palestinian refugees
in the region through UNRWA, as well as the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Korea hopes
that this support can help improve the humanitarian
conditions in the region and alleviate the suffering of
the Palestine refugees and vulnerable population.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Novicio (Philippines): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the United Kingdom for convening
today’s Security Council quarterly open debate on
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. I
would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mohamed Khaled Khiari for his briefing this morning.
The Philippines follows with serious concern the
recent developments surrounding Israel and Palestine,
including the growing tensions on the ground. We join
the international community in urging all the parties
concerned to exercise maximum restraint and act
responsibly, in accordance with international law. We
also urge them to recognize the need to protect civilians,
in accordance with international humanitarian law. We
support all efforts to prevent all forms of violence,
terrorism and violent extremism.
The Philippines recognizes the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a key to the region’s
peace and stability. The conflict can never be resolved
by violence, but only through meaningful dialogue and
negotiations in accordance with international law.
Diplomacy must continue to be the driving force
in achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East. Indeed, we all want a comprehensive,
just and sustainable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in order to achieve peace and stability in the
Middle East region. Diplomatic efforts, therefore,
must continue to bring the concerned parties to the
negotiating table, foster communication and bridge
the gaps in their positions. The goal should be to reach
a mutually acceptable agreement that addresses the
legitimate aspirations and concerns of both Israelis
and Palestinians. Both sides, therefore, should actively
take positive steps to allow for negotiations to gain
traction and work together towards the resumption of
negotiations to achieve an enduring peace.
On the two-State solution, the Philippines has
always expressed support for the creation of a State
of Palestine living in peace and security with its
neighbours. The Philippines reaffirms its support
for a two-State solution, which envisions Israel and a
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security and mutual recognition. All parties, therefore,
must refrain from unilateral actions that undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution.
On the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), we commend the Agency’s ongoing efforts,
under extraordinary circumstances, to immediately
respond to the humanitarian needs of affected
populations, including refugees and non-refugees.

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

We should therefore continue to support UNRWA’s
work to protect the delivery of vital services to
Palestine refugees. The Philippines has supported
UNRWA’s work.
On the way forward, the Philippines encourages
the parties concerned to increase their focus on
building trust and confidence. We welcome the recent
establishment of diplomatic relations between Israel and
a number of Arab countries, with a view to enhancing
the prospects to reach a comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East peace process. We also welcome the recent
meetings between Jordan, Egypt, the United States,
Israel and the Palestinian Authority in Aqaba, Jordan
and Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, aimed at de-escalating
tensions, and we hope the commitments in the resulting
joint communiqués will be fulfilled in good faith.
Finally, the Philippines reiterates the importance
of supporting steps that can expand the space for
meaningful dialogue and negotiation, building trust
and mutual understanding and cooperation for peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-dobhany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the successful United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
Mr. Khaled Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the
Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, for his briefing.
I would like to make a statement on behalf of the
member States of the Group of Arab States in New York.
The occupying Power has ignored the repeated
calls of the members of the Council for calm in the
occupied Palestinian territory and continues its brutal
aggression against Christian and Muslim Palestinians,
in violation of all international laws, conventions and
Council resolutions.
In that context, the Arab Group condemns in the
strongest terms the brutal aggression of the Israeli
occupation forces since the beginning of the month
against the city and refugee camp of Jenin and other
cities in the occupied West Bank. Such actions have
killed scores of people and left hundreds injured,
including women and children, and has caused the
displacement of refugees and the demolition of hundreds
of homes. This aggression is a continuation of the cycle
of bloody violence systematically perpetrated against
the Palestinian people, particularly since the beginning

23-2217811/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

27/07/2023

of this year and last year. The Arab Group condemns
the systematic forced displacement of Palestinians,
especially in occupied East Jerusalem, carried out by
the Israeli occupation forces and settlers, as well as the
attacks on worshippers and the arrest of hundreds of
them. Those irresponsible acts of aggression add to the
daily crimes committed against the Palestinian people
by Israel, the occupying Power, since the Nakba to the
present day.

in cities, villages and streets, storming homes, schools
and workplaces, and carrying out deliberate attacks on
medical and press teams. In addition, extremist settlers
carry out attacks while the Israeli Government persists
in its colonial expansion along with inciting and racist
rhetoric. There is neither accountability nor punishment
for Israel’s flagrant violation of the international
position regarding its violations in and occupation of
Palestinian territory.

In that regard, the Arab Group stresses the need
for Israel, the occupying Power, to respect the legal and
historical status quo of the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including its area of 144 dunums,
as a place of worship exclusively for Muslims. It must
also respect the role of the Jordanian Jerusalem Waqf
and Al-Aqsa Mosque Affairs Administration as the only
body authorized to manage the affairs of the entirety of
Haram Al-Sharif and regulate access to it.

The Arab Group therefore calls upon the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities and ensure the
implementation of its resolutions in order to put an end
to the brutal aggression and to all of Israel’s unilateral,
illegal, provocative and escalatory measures, as well as
the unabated violations that it continues to commit in
order to build and expand its illegal settlements. Israel
continues to kill innocent people, storm Palestinian
cities and villages, confiscate Palestinian land and
property, demolish Palestinian houses and structures
and displace the original inhabitants, including in
Jerusalem, in addition to flagrant violations of the
sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Haram Al-Sharif that
are committed by Israel’s occupying army and extremist
settlement groups.

The Arab Group also stresses that the State of
Palestine has the right to exercise its sovereignty over
the occupied city of East Jerusalem — the capital of
the State of Palestine — and its holy sites. Israel, the
occupying Power, has no rights or sovereignty over the
occupied city of Jerusalem and its Islamic and Christian
holy sites.
The Arab Group values the positions of the countries
that rejected and condemned the provocative aggression
by Israel against Palestinian cities and refugee camps,
most recently the Jenin refugee camp, and the expulsion
of Palestinians from their homes in occupied Jerusalem.
It also values the positions rejecting any altering of the
historic and legal status quo. The Group also reiterates
the need for continued efforts and initiatives to protect
and defend the occupied city of Jerusalem and its holy
sites while rejecting any condemned attempts to alter its
demographic character, its Arab, Islamic and Christian
identity, and its legal and historic status — including
the Israeli policy of colonialism and annexation in the
occupied city and territory.
The Arab Group condemns the extremist views of
the Government of Israel, in flagrant violation of all its
commitments to international law and Security Council
resolutions, which have led to a state of great tension in
the occupied Palestinian territories.
Reassured by the fact that the international
community’s stance is nothing but words on paper,
Israel has let loose, targeting Palestinian civilians,
killing children, young people, women and the elderly
12/25

The Arab Group calls urgently for the protection of
the Palestinian people by the international community
in line with the proposals made by the SecretaryGeneral, which the General Assembly welcomed in
view of the increase in Israel’s aggressions against the
Palestinian people.
The Arab Group condemns Israel’s policy of
arbitrary detention, denial of medical care for prisoners
and deliberate medical neglect leading to detainee
deaths. We support the prisoners in their struggle to
achieve their release. We must ensure that the occupation
Government complies with international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Pressure must
be put on Israel to immediately release all prisoners and
detainees, as well as the bodies of martyrs. Israel must
end its policies on deportation and house arrest, among
other things. We call on the international community
and Council members to condemn all forms of violence
against Palestinian civilians by occupation forces and
radical settler groups, and demand that the perpetrators
of such practices be held accountable, in line with the
rules governing accountability and transparency, which
are upheld for all except Israel.
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Time and again, we have reiterated that it will
not be possible to achieve a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East, along with security and
stability, until the Palestinian people are granted their
inalienable legitimate rights, including their right to
self-determination, and until we see the end of Israel’s
illegal and colonial occupation and the establishment of
an independent and sovereign State of Palestine within
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
therefore call on the countries of the world to show their
solidarity with the Palestinian people in their struggle,
to ensure that the just Palestinian question emerges
victorious and to acknowledge the State of Palestine
and its right to be granted full membership of the
United Nations.
The Arab Group welcomed the General Assembly’s
adoption of resolution 77/247, which decides to request
the International Court of Justice to render an advisory
opinion on Israel’s colonial occupation of the land of
the State of Palestine and its repercussions, given that it
violates the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and international humanitarian law. The Arab
Group greatly appreciates the positions taken by those
countries that supported that endeavour, including those
that provided written legal submissions to the Court in
defence of international law and Palestinian rights. We
call on the International Criminal Court to complete
its investigation and hold to account the perpetrators
of the war crimes and crimes against humanity being
committed by Israel against the defenceless Palestinian
people, including the crimes of settlement, annexation,
aggression, the continued blockade against Gaza,
deliberate summary executions of civilians, journalists
and medics, forced displacement, arbitrary detention
and prisoner abuse.
The Arab Group appreciates Jordan’s role in
safeguarding and maintaining Islamic and Christian
holy sites in Jerusalem within the framework of the
custodianship of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
under the leadership of King Abdullah II. We appreciate
the role of the Al-Quds Committee and its affiliated
Beit Mal Al-Quds Agency under the chairmanship of
King Mohammed VI of Morocco. We also appreciate
the efforts in support of the Palestinian question by
Algeria, under the leadership of President Abdelmadjid
Tebboune, through Algeria’s historic stances and
continued financial aid to the budget of the State of
Palestine. We express our appreciation to the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, under the leadership of King Salman

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, for its support of the Islamic holy sites in
Jerusalem. We also appreciate the historic role played
by Egypt, under the leadership of President Abdel Fattah
Al Sisi, in support of the Palestinian question. We also
want to express our appreciation for all Arab efforts
aimed at preserving the city of Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Palestine, along with its Arab, Islamic
and Christian identity, holy sites and cultural and
humanitarian heritage, and supporting its institutions
while addressing Israel’s settlement policy, Judaization
efforts and systematic Israeli forgery. We also appreciate
those countries hosting Palestinian refugees.
In conclusion, the Arab Group stresses that the
Palestinian question is the central Arab issue. It has
been an important item on the Council’s agenda since
1948, attesting to the injustice that has been inflicted
on the Palestinian people, for whom the time has come
to exercise their right to self-determination and to an
independent State, while further demonstrating the
international community’s inability to date to establish
an effective mechanism for the implementation of
United Nations resolutions.
The Arab Group stresses the need to continue to
provide political and financial support to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) until a just and lasting
solution to the plight of Palestine refugees is achieved
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
194 (III). The Arab Group once again emphasizes
that peace in the Middle East can be achieved only
through a just and comprehensive solution based on
international legitimacy and the implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, including, most
recently, resolution 2334 (2016). Furthermore, there is a
need to implement the Arab Peace Initiative and ensure
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967 with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to keep their statements within the limit of three
minutes if possible, to allow us to get through the rest
of the speakers’ list in good time this afternoon.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the opportunity to participate in this
open debate and to reiterate the importance we attach
to this issue. We also thank the Assistant Secretary-

23-2217813/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General for the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific in the
Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
Peace Operations for his presentation.
We reiterate that it is essential to relaunch, with the
support of the international community, the process of
direct negotiations in good faith between Palestine and
Israel in order to achieve a just, full and definitive peace
agreement, which allows for two free, autonomous,
sovereign and independent States, with internationally
secure, definitive and recognized borders based on the
1967 borders and the decisions and agreements of the
United Nations, which include resolutions adopted by
this body. We call for respect for international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights and the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as for refraining
from any unilateral acts of force.
We condemn violence in all its forms. In that
regard, Chile expresses its deep consternation and
concern about recent actions that have increased
tensions. We condemn the violent actions of Hamas
and of any armed group that uses violence to achieve
any objective, as well as the latest large-scale Israeli
military operation carried out in the refugee camp in
the city of Jenin, in Palestine’s West Bank. The attack
included the demolition of homes, the destruction of
public infrastructure and aerial bombardment, leaving
some Palestinians dead, many injured and thousands
more displaced from their homes.
We therefore call on Israel to refrain from settlement
construction and expansion and from encouraging the
legalization of settlements. That means that it must
comply with resolution 2334 (2016) on the illegality
of establishing settlements. However, it is frustrating
that ever since the Security Council’s adoption of the
resolution (see S/PV.7853), the demolitions of Palestinian
homes have continued to increase in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, while legislation regularizing
the establishment of new settlements continues to be
enacted. That is demonstrated by the fact that while
there were 441,600 settlers in the West Bank in 2019,
that number had risen last year to 700,000 in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The humanitarian crisis,
which has a particular impact on women and children
refugees, must come to an end. In that regard, we
acknowledge the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
14/25

27/07/2023

Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by thanking the United Kingdom presidency
for convening this quarterly open debate. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Khiari
for his valuable briefing this morning.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Yemen on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.
It is clear from the briefing we heard this
morning that the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory has now become even more dangerous as the
violence has escalated. The Security Council issued a
presidential statement on the subject on 20 February
(see S/PRST/2023/1), but the dangerous trend has not
changed. The situation therefore calls for concrete
measures to prevent the situation from deteriorating
further, and for the Council to fulfil its responsibilities
with regard to the Palestinian question, which has
been central to the issue of peace in the Middle East
for decades.
Serious violations by the occupying Power have
continued unabated since the beginning of the year.
The most recent incursion was directed at the city of
Jenin and its refugee camp in June and July, in addition
to the aggression in the Gaza Strip, which remains
under a blockade, and the brutal attacks by Israeli
settlers on Palestinian villages. We reiterate Qatar’s
firm condemnation of those attacks, which have
claimed the lives of many civilians, including women
and children. Such recurring acts are essentially part of
a series of crimes perpetrated by the occupying Power
against the defenceless Palestinian people, jeopardizing
the prospects for peace and risking exacerbating
the violence.
The cycles of violence we are witnessing come
as no surprise. They are a result of the dangerous and
provocative approach taken towards the Palestinian
people, their territories and their Muslim and Christian
holy sites. We watched as Israeli Government officials,
parliamentarians and settlers recently stormed the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and were protected by occupation
forces. That was a gross violation of international
law and an aggression not just against Palestinians
but against Muslims around the world. We once again
reject all measures aimed at altering the historical and
religious status quo of the holy sites and restricting the
right of Muslims and Christians to free and safe access
to their places of worship. We condemn the policies of
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Judaization in the occupied city of Jerusalem, as well as
those aimed at changing its Arab, Muslim and Christian
identity. In that respect, we emphasize the role of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s guardianship over the
holy places of Jerusalem.
The recent Israeli trends are dangerous. In that
connection, the Israeli army’s decision to repeal the
disengagement law for northern West Bank settlements
is aimed at entrenching the occupation and the
illegitimate settlements in the occupied territories.
That is a gross violation of international law and United
Nations resolutions. In order to draw attention to those
facts, the State of Qatar has submitted a written note to
the International Court of Justice, which in response to a
request by the General Assembly will shortly be issuing
a legal opinion on the legal implications of the Israeli
occupation. In the note we point to Israel’s obligations
under international law to put an immediate end to its
illegitimate occupation and to provide compensation
for the damage and suffering that have been endured.
Qatar calls on the international community to
urgently fulfil its moral and legal responsibility to
condemn the Israeli aggressions and violations, provide
the necessary protection to our brother Palestinian
people and compel Israel to cease its flagrant violations
of international law and resolutions of international
legitimacy. The occupation and blockade imposed
on the Gaza Strip must be brought to an end, as
must the collective punishment of the Palestinian
people, including arbitrary and administrative
detentions — particularly of children — and measures
aimed at repressing activists and defenders of
Palestinian rights as well as Palestinian civil-society
organizations. The perpetrators of the heinous crimes
committed on the Palestinian occupied territories must
be made accountable if justice is to be served.
The State of Qatar remains steadfast in its
principled position of solidarity with our brother
people of Palestine until they regain their legitimate
rights, including the right to establish an independent,
contiguous and viable State along the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. We believe that resolving the Middle
East question and reaching lasting peace cannot be
achieved through de facto measures. There is no
alternative to a two-State solution. The occupation of
Arab territories, including in the Syrian Golan and

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

Lebanon, must end immediately and completely. There
must also be an immediate cessation of all settlement
and annexation activities.
My country is committed to fulfilling its duty to the
Palestinian people and to improving their humanitarian
situation in order to come up with solutions conducive
to lasting peace. In cooperation with the United
Nations, particularly in the Gaza Strip, Qatar has made
great efforts to promote reconstruction and provide
electricity, as well as offering cash assistance and
meeting other urgent basic needs and development
requirements. We are also continuing our support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), to
which we have pledged $16 million for the period 2023–
2024. We stress once again the importance of providing
financial and political support to UNRWA, for which
there can be no substitute until a just settlement of the
issue of Palestinian refugees is reached.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reaffirms its
support for all sincere efforts to bring about peace,
security and safety in the Middle East, especially those
aimed at achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mrs. Kuzee (Namibia): Namibia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Malaysia on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
My delegation also appreciates the comprehensive
briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for the
Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, Mr. Khaled Khiari,
highlighting the deterioration of the security situation
since the previous briefing (see S/PV.9361).
The recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory reveal a continuing trend of flagrant violations
of human rights and the denial of dignity to the people
of Palestine. Namibia remains concerned about the fact
that the increasingly dire situation facing Palestinians is
continuing to take us ever further from an international
consensus on achieving a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. The Israeli military raids in Jenin
last month, as well as previous raids in other parts
of the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are exacerbating an already precarious

23-2217815/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

situation, leaving unarmed civilians dead and injured.
No reasonable argument can justify the magnitude of
bloodshed and continued escalation of violence.
The protracted illegal occupation and repetitive
attacks are perpetuated by the disproportionate use
of force being meted out by Israel and have led to a
lack of access to essential health-care services and
education. Namibia deplores the fact that those rights
are constantly being violated. In particular, while
education is considered a basic right for all, children
all over the occupied Palestinian territory continue to
be exposed to fear, trauma and grave injuries, limiting
their capacity to attend or reach schools.
My delegation reiterates that Israeli settlements
in the occupied areas violate the rights of Palestinian
refugees under international law, particularly resolution
2334 (2016). The socioeconomic impact of the
prolonged, unlawful occupation exacerbates despair,
heightening tensions in the region.
Namibia strongly condemns the recent two-day
Israeli military operation in June in the Jenin refugee
camp that destroyed the health centre of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East — critical infrastructure
that is unprotected and, therefore, vulnerable to
attacks. Despite those challenges, Namibia recognizes
the concerted efforts of the Agency and its partners
to ensure that vital services are provided to millions
of vulnerable Palestinian refugees adversely affected
by displacement and its consequences for more than
70 years.
In conclusion, Namibia reaffirms its resolute
support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people against Israeli occupation. We further reiterate
our commitment to the realization of the two-State
solution, which sees Israel and Palestine living side
by side, within secure and recognized borders, with
Jerusalem as their capital. It is our belief that it is
only through legally established statehood that social
normalcy, legal equality, economic opportunity and
sustainable development can be realized.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina supports a peaceful, definitive and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian issue and
reiterates its unwavering commitment to the two16/25

27/07/2023

State solution, respecting the legitimate aspirations of
Israelis and Palestinians to live side by side, in peace
and security. In that regard, Argentina reaffirms its
support for the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to establish an
independent and viable State, recognized by all nations,
as well as the right of the State of Israel to live in peace
with its neighbours, within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
With that in mind, on several occasions, my
country has spoken about the alarming escalation of
violence this year and has repeatedly called on the
parties to avoid increased confrontation and conflict.
The Argentine Republic is deeply concerned about the
ongoing violence and loss of life in Israel, Gaza and
the West Bank. The gravity of the situation related to
Israeli settlements has been recognized by the General
Assembly and by the Security Council in resolution
2334 (2016), the terms of which we fully reaffirm. The
resolution underscores that the settlements established
by Israel in the West Bank and East Jerusalem have no
legal validity, are at variance with international law and
an obstacle to peace and undermine prospects for the
two-State solution.
In that context, my country has expressed its
concern about the decision of the Government of Israel to
legalize outposts and construct new housing in existing
settlements. In the light of the decisions taken by the
Government of Israel in June to approve more than 5,700
new settlements and the changes to the approval process
that facilitate swifter approval of their construction, the
Argentine Republic reiterates its concern and calls for
an end to settlement expansion. Similarly, we condemn
the reprehensible violence perpetrated by some
extremist settlers against Palestinians.
Argentina recognizes the right of Israel to
legitimate self-defence, stressing that it is important
that measures taken respect international humanitarian
law, in particular with regard to the principles of
distinction and proportionality.
We reiterate our firm condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations and believe that the
indiscriminate firing of rockets from the Gaza Strip and
the south of Lebanon towards Israel is unacceptable.
In recent months, we have reiterated our condemnation
of attacks perpetrated against Israeli citizens, and
we again extend our condolences to the families of
the victims.
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to the situation in East Jerusalem,
Argentina believes that it is an issue for which the final
status should be determined by the parties in bilateral
negotiations, in line with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. We call on all parties, in particular the
Israeli authorities, to respect the legal, historical and
religious status of the holy sites. Argentina again calls
on the parties to return to the path of negotiations in
order to achieve just and final peace, in accordance
with international law and the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): Indonesia appreciates
the United Kingdom for holding this open debate.
We also thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
his insight.
Unfortunately, for the Palestinian people, the story
of sorrow and injustice remains. Illegal settlement
expansions, worsening settler violence, demolitions,
confiscations and the deteriorating humanitarian
situation are endured on a daily basis. We have been
warned that 2023 could be bloodier. Yet even with the
numerous diplomatic tools available, we have failed to
heed the call thus far. Halfway through the year, we
are witnessing continued civilian casualties, including
children. Do we really want to wait until another record
is broken? The Security Council should not consider
it business as usual. Instead, meaningful attention and
immediate action should be given.
Against that backdrop, allow me to underline
three points.
First, violations by the occupying Power must stop.
Despite clear international law and United Nations
resolutions, the encroachment of annexation towards
the occupied Palestinian territory, apartheid policies
and disproportionate use of force have regretfully
become normalcy. On top of that, continuing
provocation towards the holy sites contributes further
to the escalation of conflict. That is unacceptable.
We cannot allow the unceasing culture of
impunity to prevail, as each flagrant violation by the
occupying Power will only drive us further away from
a just and lasting peace. We call upon the international
community to demand accountability and reiterate our
call on the Council to ensure implementation of its
own resolutions. The principles of international law

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

and international humanitarian law must be upheld to
prevent further security deterioration and escalation
of violence.
In that spirit, Indonesia has submitted its written
submission to the International Court of Justice, with
regard to its advisory opinion on the legal consequences
of Israel’s occupation of Palestine. Moreover, we also
call for the establishment of an international presence
in Al-Quds to monitor and ensure the safety of the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories, as well as
to protect the status of the Haram Al-Sharif compound,
the holy place for three religions.
Secondly, we must work hand in hand to ease the
humanitarian situation. It has been 75 years since the
Nakba, yet the catastrophe is still ongoing. The recent
escalation of aggression by the occupying Power,
including on Gaza and the refugee camps, has caused
widespread destruction of civilian infrastructure,
worsening the living conditions of the Palestinian
people and refugees, particularly women and children.
The international community should extend the muchneeded assistance and protection, especially when the
occupying Power deliberately chooses not to fulfil its
legal obligations.
On the other hand, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) continues to work on the front lines of the
crisis, providing education, health and social services.
However, the Agency continues to face a dire financial
crisis, and relying on donor and voluntary contributions
does not suffice. Therefore, Indonesia is of the view that
UNRWA should be granted greater sustainable funding
from the United Nations regular budget to ensure
the reliable delivery of its mandate, which we — the
Member States — have entrusted to it.
Thirdly, collective efforts to forge a path for the
peace process are needed. Indonesia appreciates each
“delicate diplomacy” approach currently in place to
broaden the political horizon. Nevertheless, all those
efforts and initiatives should be directed towards
ensuring the implementation of the two-State solution.
There is no plan B for a two-State solution. It is the
only way to bring sustainable peace to the region. It is
important to ensure that the international community
remains committed not only to a credible multilateral
process but also to protecting the internationally agreed
parameters. We remain hopeful that the continued
intra-Palestinian reconciliation will create a inclusive

23-2217817/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

environment conducive to the peace process. Indonesia
stands ready to lend assistance to the Palestinians in
achieving their aspirations for effective governance and
full independence.
In conclusion, let me to reaffirm Indonesia’s
unequivocal support for and solidarity with the
Palestinian people. We will remain steadfast until they
are no longer denied their legal and inalienable right
to attain independence. Furthermore, we will support
Palestine’s full membership in the United Nations to
pave the way for Palestinians’ manifestation of their
independence and contribution to the peace process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Ahangari (Azerbaijan): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the 120 member States of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the United
Kingdom on its successful presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to express our appreciation
for the opportunity given to the Movement to present
its position on the question of Palestine.
The Ministerial Committee of the Non-Aligned
Countries on Palestine recently met on the sidelines of
the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of
the Non-Aligned Movement Countries, held on 5 July,
and adopted a political declaration reiterating that
achieving a just solution to the question of Palestine
must remain a priority on the Movement’s agenda,
as well as a permanent responsibility of the United
Nations, until it is satisfactorily resolved in accordance
with international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions.
In that regard, the member States of the Movement
once again reaffirm that at its core, the decades-long
ongoing historic injustice of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territory and other Arab territories continues
to pose a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. As the Palestinian people continue
to be deprived of their inalienable rights, including to
self-determination and independence, the prolonged
international paralysis on the issue is inexcusable. The
international consensus on a just solution is firm and
clear, and there is an abundance of multilateral political
and diplomatic tools for promoting the achievement
of a just and peaceful settlement. We must use them
18/25

27/07/2023

responsibly. We in NAM are ready to do so, and we
urge the Council to act forthwith to shoulder its
responsibilities in that regard.
The Security Council must uphold its duty under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security and must act to implement its own
resolutions. The question of Palestine cannot be an
exception to international law or the authority of the
Council. The members of the Movement call on the
Security Council to overcome its paralysis on the
Palestinian question to justly resolve the protracted
conflict and tragic injustice. That will not only open
a new era for the people of the occupied territories and
the region, it will also restore credibility to the Council
and to our international system as a whole.
NAM believes that resolution 2334 (2016) provides
a viable path to peace, setting forth the essential
requirements and parameters for the realization of a
just outcome on the basis of a two-State solution along
the 4 June 1967 borders, while ensuring the fulfilment
of the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights, including
to self-determination and to an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as a just solution to the plight of Palestine refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
194 (III). NAM therefore reiterates its call for full
respect for resolution 2334 (2016) and for the effective
implementation of its provisions and obligations,
particularly by the occupying Power, including in
terms of States’ obligations with regard to distinction,
which is central to ensuring accountability. The
Movement also underscores the need for intensifying
international and regional diplomatic efforts, including
by the Council, aimed at ending the Israeli occupation
that began in 1967 and achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution.
Similarly, the member States of the Movement
continue to call for full respect for and the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) and all
other relevant resolutions regarding Israel’s settlement
activities and the status of occupied East Jerusalem.
In that regard, NAM is gravely concerned about the
deteriorating situation on the ground, which has been
marked by an escalation of Israeli settlement activities
in grave breach of international law and by rising
violence, provocation and incitement, particularly
settler violence and terror. That in turn has led to further
tragic loss of life among civilians, including children,
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the detention of thousands of Palestinian civilians and
countless other human rights abuses and violations of
international law.
Action must be taken immediately to help
de-escalate the volatile situation. It must include a
halt to all unilateral and unlawful measures by Israel,
the occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Actions that violate
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
regarding the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem
and its holy sites, are provocative and dangerous and
destroy the prospects for peace. We reiterate our call
for full respect for the historic and legal status quo,
the Hashemite custodianship over the Christian and
Muslim holy sites in the city, the protection of the
sanctity of the holy sites and all the relevant provisions
of international law and Security Council resolutions.
NAM commends the efforts of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI of Morocco, in his capacity as Chair
of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization of the
Islamic Cooperation. We welcomed the call signed in
Rabat on 30 March 2019 by King Mohammed and His
Holiness Pope Francis, stressing the important role
that Al-Quds/Jerusalem plays as a city of tolerance
and mutual respect among the people of the three
monotheistic religions and the need to preserve
its specificities and features as a city of peaceful
coexistence. In that regard, NAM reiterates its
rejection of Israel’s purported annexation of occupied
East Jerusalem and underscores that the continuing
measures and threats regarding annexation by Israeli
officials, as well as the ongoing settlement activities and
forced displacement of Palestinian families from their
homes and lands, must be unequivocally condemned.
Any such measures should be rejected forthwith as null
and void, without any legal effect, and should be met
with firm measures of accountability for such grave
breaches, including lawful countermeasures.
The situation in the Gaza Strip continues to be of
great concern to the Movement, particularly the grave
humanitarian crisis. NAM reiterates its call for the
complete lifting of the illegal Israeli blockade, which
continues to inflict dire humanitarian, social and
economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian
children, women and men in Gaza. The crisis must
be comprehensively addressed in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 1860 (2009). In the
absence of a just solution, NAM member States also

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

reiterate their call for the continued provision of
essential humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance
to the Palestinian people, including refugees. The
Movement reaffirms the continued indispensability
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), together
with other United Nations agencies and international
organizations, for alleviating the refugees’ plight. The
Movement also urges the international community to
provide the Agency with sufficient and predictable
funding. Ensuring the continuity of UNRWA and its
significant contribution to regional stability must be a
priority for the Council.
As the occupying Power, Israel has clearly abdicated
from its obligations, as prescribed by the Fourth
Geneva Convention, to protect the Palestinian civilian
population, as was recently attested to by the Israeli
occupying forces’ attacks on the Jenin refugee camp,
which led to deaths and injuries among Palestinian
civilians, including children, as well as widespread
destruction to homes and vital civilian infrastructure,
and forced thousands of Palestinian families to flee the
onslaught. The Movement therefore also reiterates its
long-standing call for international protection for the
Palestinian people so as to deter violations, promote
the human security of the population in the occupied
territory and prevent any further loss of innocent life.
In that connection, the Movement reiterates its
grave concern about the lack of accountability for
all violations committed by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, many
of which may amount to war crimes. Israel must comply
with international law and be held to account for its
blatant contempt of the Council and its international
legal obligations. The absence of justice only leads
to greater impunity and a recurrence of crimes and
destabilizes the situation on the ground, diminishing
the prospects for peace. The NAM member States will
therefore continue to call for international action to
ensure an end to the violations being systematically
committed by Israel against the Palestinian people and
accountability for them.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Movement reaffirms that all measures and
actions that may be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December
1981, which purported to alter the area’s legal, physical,
demographic status and institutional structure, as well
as measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration

23-2217819/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

27/07/2023

there, are null and void and have no legal effect. In that
regard, and in line with NAM’s principled position,
the Movement once again demands that Israel abide
by resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan to its 4 June 1967 borders,
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

incidence of provocation by extremists against the
status and sanctity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif are on the
rise. The recent storming of a mosque in Urif in the
West Bank and the desecration of the Holy Qur’an
was a blatant hate crime. Its perpetrators must be held
accountable. Those provocations generate resentment
among the 2 billion Muslims around the world.

Moreover, NAM member States emphasize that
Israel must withdraw from all Lebanese territories,
including Sheba’a Farms, Kfar Shouba hills and the
northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent
area north of the Blue Line, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).

We also strongly condemn the provocative storming
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque by the Israeli Minister of National
Security, together with extremist settlers and under the
protection of the Israeli security forces. We call on the
Israeli authorities to take the necessary measures in
a serious manner to restrain those provocations. We
strongly emphasize once again that the status quo of
the holy sites in Jerusalem must be upheld.

To conclude, the Movement seizes this opportunity
to reiterate its call for collective international efforts
to uphold international law in order to bring an end to
this historic and grave injustice. NAM member States
reaffirm their commitment to promoting a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question
of Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight
of the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm their support
for the Palestinian people in their struggle to achieve
justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations, including to self-determination,
freedom and independence in their sovereign and
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. They stand ready to cooperate with and
support the Security Council in the fulfilment of its
responsibilities in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): The situation in Gaza
and the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem,
continues to be a cause for great concern and calls for
greater attention and engagement of the international
community. Intensified unlawful settlement activity,
demolitions and forcible evacuations are eroding the
contiguity of the Palestinian territory and undermining
the viability of a two-State solution.
Since the beginning of this year, the number of
illegal settlements has exceeded 13,000 units, which
represents a record number of settlements allowed in a
year. The violence in the occupied Palestinian territory
has reached an alarming level. In 2022, 224 Palestinians
were killed, which was sadly recorded as the deadliest
year since 2005. And since the beginning of this year,
more than 200 Palestinians have lost their lives. The
20/25

This week we hosted President Abbas in Türkiye.
On that occasion, President Erdoğan reiterated Türkiye’s
solidarity with the Palestinian people and emphasized
the importance of Palestinian unity.
We will continue to extend our full support to
alleviate the plight of the Palestinian people while
maintaining contact with both sides of the conflict
to help de-escalate the situation on the ground and
contribute to international efforts to find a viable
solution to the Palestinian question.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for convening this meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
at a time when the region is facing several challenges
impeding the realization of lasting peace and stability.
I would also like to thank Mr. Khaled Khiari, Assistant
Secretary-General in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, for
his briefing.
Conflicts have long ravaged many countries in the
Middle East and have led to negative repercussions
for the region’s peoples, hindering their development,
security and stability. Efforts to settle conflicts
peacefully must be strengthened and the United Nations
good offices must be supported in that regard.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms the centrality
of the Palestinian question in the region and stresses
the need to settle the Palestinian-Israeli conflict by
reviving the comprehensive and just peace process
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aimed at establishing an independent Palestinian
State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, pursuant to the two-State solution and in
accordance with the principles of international law and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates the importance
of ending all settlement activities in the West Bank.
The continued escalation will lead to dire results which
the situation in region cannot afford.
Moreover, my country condemns the repeated
violations against Al-Aqsa Mosque by repeatedly
storming it, as that is a violation of international
law which causes emotional distress to Muslims
everywhere. The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms the
need to respect the role of the sisterly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan as the custodian of the holy sites
and Awqaf, in accordance with international law and
the current historic status quo. We call for refraining
from any actions that could increase tension and hatred
and undermine international efforts to advance the
peace process.
The Kingdom of Bahrain supports the outcomes
of the summit held by the countries neighbouring the
Sudan in the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt on 13 July.
We appreciate the diplomatic efforts undertaken by
Egypt in hosting that important summit and its call on
the parties to the conflict in the sisterly Republic of the
Sudan to immediately abide by a permanent ceasefire
and end the war to protect lives and properties and
facilitate access to and the delivery of humanitarian
aid, ensuring full respect for the sovereignty of the
Sudan’s unity and territorial integrity. That should be
an important step in the context of international efforts
towards achieving a comprehensive, sustainable and
peaceful solution to the current crisis by engaging all
the Sudanese parties in an inclusive national dialogue
that fulfils the aspirations of the fraternal Sudanese
people to achieve security, stability and prosperity
while preserving their State institutions and resources
and completing the path of democracy.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates
the importance of continued international cooperation
to support all efforts to achieve peaceful and political
solutions to conflicts and to lay the foundation for
peace and stability in the Middle East in order to
fulfil the aspirations of its peoples to realize security
and prosperity.

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): I thank the
United Kingdom for convening this open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
Guyana remains seriously concerned about
the volatile situation and escalating violence in
Palestine which has resulted in the loss of precious
lives, devastating injuries and the destruction of
infrastructure. Those events deepen the stalemate in
the protracted Israeli-Palestinian conflict and make a
permanent solution appear even more elusive.
The deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territories and increased displacement of persons
are of great concern to Guyana. Those incidents
further compound the economic difficulties faced
by the Palestinian people and increase their risk
of being left further behind in the global thrust for
sustainable development.
Guyana is particularly disturbed by the recent
killing of Palestinian civilians, including women and
children, by air strikes in Gaza. It is intolerable that
children continue to be victims of violence. They must
never be the target of violence or put in harm’s way. The
latest act of aggression and massive onslaught against
Palestinians should not continue. We call on the parties
to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions.
As a member of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People since 1975,
Guyana will continue to recognize Palestine as a free,
independent and sovereign State, based on its pre-1967
borders, and also will continue to contribute to concrete
efforts to advance the Middle East peace process. In
this regard, we are pleased to have joined colleagues
in submitting statement to the International Court of
Justice in support of an advisory opinion on the legal
consequences arising from the policies and practices of
Israeli in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
Guyana calls on the international community to
accelerate efforts to secure a comprehensive, just and
peaceful solution to the question of Palestine. We call
on the concerned parties to desist from action that is
contrary to the United Nations Charter, international
law and relevant Security Council resolutions. We call

23-2217821/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of
the Palestinian people, including their right to return to
their country, their right to a standard of living adequate
for their health and well-being, and their right to live in
peace and security within secure and settled borders.
We also call for a return to dialogue aimed at
arriving at a full and final settlement of all pending
issues, with the ultimate objective of two independent
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace.
In this regard, Guyana urges the Security Council to
contribute to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
by fulfilling its relevant obligations under international
law. Guyana remains irrevocably committed to these
objectives and stands in full solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their just struggle for freedom
and peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate on the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. We
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari
for his briefing. We align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Malaysia on behalf
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
South Africa remains concerned about the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories in the light of Israel’s
continued acts of aggression against the Palestinian
people. We condemn Israel’s military operation in
Jenin earlier this month, considered one of the deadliest
raids in the occupied West Bank in recent years. The
brutality of these attacks, coupled with the loss of
human life and damage to civilian infrastructure is in
serious contravention of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and aggravates an
already tense situation. As the international community,
we cannot sit idle and watch as the occupying Power
fails to abide by its obligations under the Geneva
Conventions and its Additional Protocols.
The Secretary-General has outlined his vision of
multilateral efforts for peace and security in his New
Agenda for Peace. Key to this vision is a rules-based
system premised on international law. Accordingly,
as the international community, we cannot allow the
selective application of international law in some cases
and its total disregard in others. Israel’s prolonged
22/25

27/07/2023

illegal occupation of and its increasing expansion of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories
is unjust, perpetuates impunity and is in breach
of international law. Israel must therefore be held
accountable for its actions in the occupied Palestinian
territories and against the Palestinian people.
We wish to re-emphasize that, as the body entrusted
to maintain international peace and security, the Security
Council must strengthen and uphold its responsibility to
ensure accountability when international law has been
violated. It therefore remains pivotal that the decisions
and resolutions of this body be enforced.
South Africa further wishes to underscore our
unwavering support for the freedom of the Palestinian
people as they pursue their right to peace, sovereignty,
freedom and justice. In this regard, we support the
initiative aimed at refocusing the international agenda
on the Palestine and Middle East peace processes
with a view to achieving a two-State solution and the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State, existing side
by side with Israel within internationally recognized
borders based on those existing on 4 June 1967, prior
to the outbreak of the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all relevant
United Nations resolutions, international law and
internationally agreed parameters.
We remain determined both to contribute
to reconciliation and the peaceful settlement of
the Palestinian situation and to assist the parties
to this conflict in their genuine pursuit of peace
and coexistence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting. I also thank Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific, for his briefing.
We meet in the Security Council Chamber again
amid the escalation of tensions and violations of
international law, international humanitarian law
and international human rights law by the occupation
authorities in the occupied Palestinian territory. Israel
continues to disregard international calls to stop its
escalation and cease its use of violence against the
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

defenceless Palestinian people. Israel’s use of violence
makes no distinction between human beings and rocks,
or between men, women and children.
We reiterate our strongest condemnation and
denunciation of all those violations, the latest of which
was the armed aggression of the occupying forces
against the city of Jenin in the West Bank, which led
to many Palestinian martyrs and wounded people,
including the heinous crime of targeting a civilian
vehicle by shooting at it, resulting in the martyrdom
of its three passengers. We also note the storming of
Al-Aqsa Mosque this morning by the so-called Minister
of National Security of the occupation Government,
Itamar Ben-Gvir, supported by a group of officials and
settlers in blatant disregard of the feelings of hundreds
of millions of Muslims around the world. We therefore
reiterate our categorical rejection of all of those acts of
escalation and violations by the occupying forces, which
require the international community and the Security
Council to assume their political, legal and human
responsibilities and intervene immediately to stop these
violations and hold their perpetrators accountable.
Although statements of condemnation and
denunciation seem to be futile in terms of the occupation
Governments, especially when it comes to the current
Israeli Government, which is considered to be the most
extremist in the country’s history, they nevertheless
constitute solid ground for promoting international
positions that favour peaceful solutions, provide
international protection for the fraternal Palestinian
people and support the State of Palestine’s efforts to
obtain full membership in the United Nations, in line
with the fact that it is an active member in many regional
and international organizations, including the League of
Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the Non-Aligned Movement and many others.
The State of Kuwait affirms our constructive
engagement with the just Palestinian cause, as it is
considered a central and pivotal issue for the Arab
and Muslim world. We support General Assembly
resolution 77/247, which requested the International
Court of Justice to issue an advisory opinion on the
Israeli colonial occupation of territories of the State of
Palestine and the legal consequences arising from it.
When we submitted our written statement to the Court,
we also expressed our trust that it would take our
written statement and those submitted by many other
fraternal and friendly countries into account when
issuing its advisory opinion. In that regard, we urge the

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

International Criminal Court once again to complete
its criminal investigation and to hold accountable the
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed by the Israeli occupation authorities
against the defenceless Palestinian people. Those
crimes include settlement; annexation; aggression; the
continuous blockade on the Gaza Strip; extrajudicial
killings; deliberate targeting of civilians, journalists
and paramedics; forced evictions; arbitrary detentions;
and maltreatment of prisoners.
We reiterate that a just and comprehensive peace,
security and stability in the Middle East can be achieved
only after the Palestinian people attain their legitimate
and inalienable rights, including their right to selfdetermination, an end to the illegal colonial Israeli
occupation and the full independence of the sovereign
State of Palestine on the Palestinian territory occupied
in 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital. International
promises to end the occupation and establish a
Palestinian State should not be mere words.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the United
Kingdom for presiding over the Security Council
this month. We express our deep appreciation to the
United Kingdom for convening this important meeting,
which requires the attention of the entire international
community. I would like to thank Mr. Khaled Khiari,
Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle East, Asia
and the Pacific, for his valuable briefing. We value his
role and constructive efforts in that regard.
This meeting is being held against the backdrop
of critical circumstances for the fraternal Palestinian
people and the whole region as a result of the ongoing
Israeli violations against the defenceless Palestinian
people, who have been suffering for decades from the
consequences of Israel’s occupation of their lands and
control over their fate.
It is extremely unfortunate that the Israeli
Government continues its daily aggression against
the Palestinian people, their holy sites and properties,
the latest of which was the raid, carried out by the
Israeli Minister of National Security and a group
of settlers, on the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound. My
Country’s Government condemns and denounces that
flagrant incursion and those systemic practices, which
constitute a flagrant violation of international norms

23-2217823/25

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and conventions and provoke the outrage of Muslims
worldwide. We strongly condemn the repeated aggression
against the city of Jenin recently and deplore the extremist
settler attacks against certain Palestinian villages in
the West Bank. There is no doubt that those practices
contravene international norms and principles and
undermine peace efforts. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
reiterates its unwavering position in support of all efforts
to end the occupation and reach a comprehensive and just
solution to the Palestinian question.
A just and comprehensive peace cannot be achieved
amid the ongoing acts of aggression and intimidation
by Israeli extremists, the confiscation of lands and the
displacement of the Palestinian people. Peace, security
and justice can be achieved only through a two-State
solution establishing an independent Palestinian
sovereign State along 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital — pursuant to resolutions of
international legitimacy, Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative launched by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia in 2002.
We again call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and implement its resolutions to put an end
to all illegal unilateral, provocative and escalatory actions;
the violations that Israel continues to commit unabated
in order to build and expand its illegal settlements; the
targeting of Palestinian presence in Jerusalem; attempts
to change the legal nature and demographic composition
of the city; and attempts to modify the special
arrangements for Islamic holy sites and to impose Israeli
sovereignty over them. We call for the urgent provision
of international protection to the Palestinian people,
pursuant to the proposals of the Secretary-General that
were welcomed in the General Assembly.
In conclusion, we call on the Israeli Government
once again to respond to the calls for peace and to
work seriously towards settling the conflict with the
Palestinians. There is no doubt that resolving the conflict
will help the entire region, including Israel, on which
we call to engage in serious negotiations in good faith
in order to achieve peace on the basis of the two-State
solution in a way that guarantees stability in the Middle
East. Reaching a just solution expeditiously will ensure
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. We assert
that it is important to revive the efforts of the international
community in order to resolve the longest conflict in the
history of the United Nations, thereby preserving all the
legitimate rights of the fraternal Palestinian people, in
accordance with the purposes and principles upon which
the United Nations was founded.
24/25

27/07/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we
express our gratitude for the convening of this quarterly
open debate.
My delegation also endorses the recent statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic
of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its historic principled position in support of the just
Palestinian cause. We will not tire of defending the
right of the brotherly Palestinian people to exist in their
free, independent and sovereign State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital and along the pre1967 borders; nor will we tire of supporting each and
every international effort that will bring us closer to
achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting peace on
the question of Palestine.
We agree that the situation on the ground continues
only to deteriorate, which is a matter of great concern,
especially in the absence of a clear political horizon
and the continuation of policies of racial domination,
oppression, colonial occupation and apartheid that are
being systematically and deliberately pursued by the
occupying Power — not only to prolong the conflict,
but, even worse, to destroy the viability of a twoState solution.
It is clear that the occupying Power has no intention
whatsoever of ending either the occupation or its
criminal aggression and that its policies are, in fact,
aimed at seizing total control of the occupied Palestinian
territory, even insisting on altering its demographic
status, as evidenced by the recent announcement by the
Israeli regime of the construction of thousands of new
settlements, which will undoubtedly result, in turn, in
further evictions, destruction of homes and transfer of
settlers, a matter that was condemned on 12 July by at
least six independent experts of the United Nations, as
well as by Assistant Secretary-General Khiari.
We categorically reject that conduct, which flouts
international law, on the part of the occupying Power.
This is nothing more than the result of the framework of
impunity with which the United States of America, its
main partner within the Security Council, protects it.
23-22178

27/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is one of the most
painful conflicts facing humankind for more than 75
years, when the Palestinian catastrophe, or Nakba,
began. We cannot continue to procrastinate in taking
concrete steps to put an end to the prolonged suffering
of an entire people who cannot and will not tire of
demanding what is rightfully theirs — the inalienable
right to exist; the inalienable right to return to their
homes and the inalienable right to live in a free,
independent and sovereign State of Palestine.
The panorama is certainly not encouraging and,
although there are those who prefer not to denounce
it publicly, this is a reality based on probable facts
and constitutes a flagrant, systematic and grotesque
violation of the precepts contained in the Charter of the
United Nations and all norms of international law.
Perhaps this is the best example that we need to
dismantle the so-called rules-based order that the
United States and its satellite countries so ardently tout
and pretend to impose — an order based on presumed
exceptionalism, unilateralism, supremacy, double
standards and interpretations that accommodate their
international obligations. None of those notions has any
place in the United Nations, which operates according
to the rules accepted by the entire international
community in its actions and relations.
From this podium, we call for an end to the
prevailing cycle of impunity that, for years, has only
emboldened Israel to continue its war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We ask that those responsible
for so much pain and suffering be brought to justice
and that the noble Palestinian people be provided with
international protection. That is particularly necessary
in view of the cruelty of the most recent episodes of
violence against the Palestinian civilian population by
the occupying Power, and of attempts to minimize the
consequences of that violence, as happened recently

S/PV.9387 (Resumption 1)

in Jenin, despite the fact that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs confirmed that it
was the most lethal operation, with the highest number
of Palestinians killed in the West Bank, of the last 20
years or so.
We also demand that the Charter of the United
Nations be respected and that all resolutions adopted by
the Security Council be implemented fully. We call for
the cessation of any unilateral measures or actions that
could escalate tensions, destroy a political horizon and
further prolong the conflict, and for progress, without
further delay, particularly in the Security Council,
towards changing the status of the State of Palestine,
so that it becomes a full-fledged member of our United
Nations once and for all.
The time has come for the promise of peace,
justice and freedom contained in the Charter of the
United Nations to become a reality for the heroic
Palestinian people, who demand their inalienable
right to self-determination and the realization of their
legitimate national aspirations. Once again, we renew
our unwavering solidarity to the brotherly Palestinian
people and our firm support for their just cause, which
is synonymous with conscience and dignity worldwide.
Finally, we conclude by acknowledging the most
recent developments in some of the dynamics of the
Middle East since our last open debate (S/PV.9309),
particularly the return of the Syrian Arab Republic
to the League of Arab States. We hope that those
positive developments will extend to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict, confident that that will lead to the
fulfilment of the yearnings for peace and justice of all
the peoples of the Middle East, including those of the
noble Palestinian people, and to Israel’s withdrawal
from all Arab territories that remain illegally occupied,
including the Syrian Golan.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

23-2217825/25
