IX,

33/95.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country, 11
Considering that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the United Nations and to the
status of the missions accredited to it are of great
importance and of mutual concern to the Member
States, including the host country, as well as to the
United Nations as a whole,
Expressing its concern over the incident and all its
aspects which resulted in a diplomatic representative
of a Member State of the United Nations being unilaterally required to leave the host country,
l. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country;
2. Considers that the security of the missions accredited to the United Nations and the safety of their
personnel are indispensable far their effective functioning, notes with satisfaction the assurances given by
the competent authorities of the host country and recognizes the usefulness of the various measures taken
to this end;
3. Urges the host country to take all necessary
measures without delay in arder to prevent any acts
violating the security of missions and the safety of
their personnel or the inviolability of their property
and in arder to ensure normal conditions far the existence and functioning of ali missions;
4. Urges the host country to continue to take measures to apprehend, bring to justice and punish all those
responsible far committing criminal acts against missions accredited to the United Nations as provided far
in the 1972 Federal Act far the Protection of Foreign
Oflicials and Oflicial Guests of the United States;12
5. Calls upon the missions of Member States to
co-operate, with a view to facilitating the course of
justice, as fully as possible with the Federal and local
United States authorities in cases affecting the security
of those missions and their personnel;
6. Calls upon the host country to avoid actions
not consistent with meeting effectively obligations undertaken by it in accordance with international law in
relation to the privileges and immunities of Member
States;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to en ter into
consultations with the host country concerning procedures far consultations between the host country
and the Member States or the Secretary-General, pursuant to section 13 ( b) of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, 13 and
to report to the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country in 1979;
8. Appeals to the host country to review the measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles
with a view to facilitating the desires and needs of the
diplomatic community and to consider terminating the
practice of serving summonses to diplomats;
Supplement No. 26 (A/33/26 and Corr.1 ).
States Public Law 92-539 (see A/8871 /Rev.1 ).
13 Resolution 169 (11).
11 /bid.,

12 United

219

9. Welcomes the diplomatic community's readiness
to co-operate fully with the local authorities in solving
traflic problems and notes, in this regard, the desirability of missions making reasonable efforts to utilize
off-street parking facilities;
1O. Expresses the hope that efforts will be continued and intensified with a view to implementing an
infarmation programme in order to acquaint the population of the City of New York and its boroughs with
the privileges and immunities of the personnel of the
missions accredited to the United Nations and with
the importance of the international functions performed
by them;
11. No tes that there have been difliculties concerning unpaid bills far goods and services rendered by
private persons and organizations to certain missions
accredited to the United Nations and certain individual
diplomats attached to those missions, and suggests that
the Secretariat and others concerned work together to
solve these outstanding difliculties;
12. Expresses its appreciation to the New York
City Commission far the United Nations and far the
Consular Corps and those bodies which contribute to
its efforts to help to accommodate the needs, interests
and requirements of the diplomatic community, to
provide hospitality and to promote mutual understanding between the diplomatic community and the people
of the City of New York;
13. Decides to continue the work of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of
15 December 1971, with the purpose of examining on
a more regular basis all matters falling within its terms
of reference, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide the Committee with all necessary assistance;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the itero entitled "Report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33 /96.

Report of the Special Committee on
Enhancing the Effediveness of the Principie of Non-Use of Force in International
Relations 14

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976,
in which it invited Member States to examine further
the draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in
International Relations 15 submitted by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, as well as other proposals
made during the consideration of this item,
Recalling in particular its resolution 32/ 150 of
19 December 1977, whereby it established the Special
14 As a result of the replacement of Argentina, Brazil and
Chile by Nicaragua, Panama and P.eru (see A/32/500, annex
111), the Special Committee is now composed as follows:
Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Cuba, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Greece, Guinea,
Hungary, India, Iraq, ltaly, Japan, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Poland, Romanía, Senegal,
Somalía, Spain, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.
l!'i Ofjicial Rccords of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/33/41 and Corr.l), annex.

220

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-Use of Force in International Relations,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,16
Noting that the Special Committee has commenced
work to accomplish the tasks assigned to it,
Taking into account that the Special Committee has
not completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of the principie of the non-use of force in
international relations and for assistance by the United
Nations in this endeavour,
l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue its work with the goal of drafting, at the earliest
possible date, a world treaty on the non-use of force
in international relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes or such other recommendations as
the Committee deems appropriate;
3. Invites the Goverments which have not yet done
so to communicate their comments or suggestions or
to bring them up to date, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 31 /9;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, including the preparation of summary records
of its meetings;
5. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "Report
of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principie of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978

33/97.

Draft Code of O:ffences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Law Commission
submitted a draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind in 1954, 17
Recalling further that the General Assembly decided,
by its resolutions 897 (IX) of 4 December 1954 and
1186 (XII) of 11 December 1957, to postpone the
consideration of the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind"
until a definition of aggression had been adopted by
the Assembly,
Bearing in mind that on 14 December 1974 the
General Assembly adopted resolution 3314 (XXIX)
entitled "Definition of Aggression",
Having considered the statements made during the
debates on this item,
16 /bid.,

Supplement No. 41 (A/33/41 and Corr.1).

17 /bid., Ninth Session, Supp/ement No. 9 (A/2693), para. 54.

1. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States and relevant international intergovernmental
organizations to submit their comments and observations on the draft Code of Offences against the Peace
and Security of Mankind, including comments on the
procedure to be adopted, not later than 31 December 1979, and to prepare a report to be submitted to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
2. Also reque~ts the Secretary-General to circulate
to Member States and relevant international intergovernmental organizations reports prepared for and
by the International Law Commission, the summary
records of the relevant debates in the General Assembly and all other relevant official documentation
on the item;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Draft Code of
Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind"
and to accord it priority and the fullest possible consideration.
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/139.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its thirtieth session, 18
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in arder
to make it a more effective means of implementing
the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 19 and to give
increased importance to its role in relations among
States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirtieth session
the International Law Commission, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 32/151 of 19 December 1977, completed, in the light of the observations
and comments of Member States, of organs of the
United Nations, of the specialized agencies and of
interested intergovernmental organizations, the second
reading of its draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses,
Noting further with appreciation the work done by
the International Law Commission on State responsibility, succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties, treaties concluded between States and
international organizations, as well as the status of
the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
Taking note of the preliminary work done by the
International Law Commission regarding the study of
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses, the second part of the topic "Relations
between States and international organizations", international liability for injurious consequences arising out
of acts not prohibited by international law and jurisdictional immunities of States and their property,
18 Ibid.,

Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. JO (A/33/10).
2625 (XXV), annex.

19 Resolution
