S/2016/996

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central
Africa and the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
statement of the President of the Security Council dated 11 June 2015
(S/PRST/2015/12), in which the Council requested me to keep it informed of the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UN OCA). It
provides an assessment of the major political and security trends in the Central
African subregion since my previous report, dated 25 May 2016 ( S/2016/482) and
provides an update on progress made in the implementation of the mandate of
UNOCA and on efforts to implement the United Nations regional strategy to address
the threat and impact of the activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) (see
S/2012/481).

II. Major developments in the Central African subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
The political landscape of the subregion continued to be dominated by
preparations for and the conducting and aftermath of electoral processes, a number
of which were marked by serious tensions and violence both before and after the
electoral processes were conducted.
3.
The fight against Boko Haram, including in the context of the Multinational
Joint Task Force, continued during the reporting period. The significant progress
achieved by the Joint Task Force notwithstanding, the Boko Haram crisis continued
in the Lake Chad basin. In parallel, national, regional and international efforts to
combat LRA continued, against a backdrop of the planned withdrawal of Ugandan
forces from the African Union Regional Task Force and its likely impact on the
strategy to counter LRA.
4.
The challenging economic situation in the subregion, owing to the slump in
global oil prices and difficulties in diversifying the economy and achieving progress
in economic integration, continued to contribute to political and social tensions.

16-19581 (E)

291116

*1619581*

S/2016/996

5.
The summit of Heads of State of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community was held in Malabo on 30 July, under the chairmanship of Equatorial
Guinea. The summit discussed an economic partnership agreement with the
European Union and the economic and security situation in the subr egion. The
Heads of State decided to make available 4 billion CFA francs (approximately
$6.8 million) to the Central African Republic for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programming. The establishment of a steering committee and an office
of the president dedicated to economic and financial reforms within the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community were proposed in order to assist the
community to address the current economic difficulties.
6.
To date, four countries in the subregion have developed national action plans
to guide in their implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, namely, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. Women remain underrepresented in
the security sector in Central Africa, with only four countries having more than 20
per cent representation by women in the police force, whereas women ’s
representation in the military averages between 2 and 3 per cent for most Central
African countries.
7.
On 15 November, the Presidents of Equatorial Guinea and Gabon signed, in
my presence, a special agreement to submit the long-standing border dispute
between their two countries to the International Court of Justice for a peaceful
settlement. The signing ceremony was held in Marrakech, Morocco.
8.
During the reporting period, my Special Representative for Central Africa and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, Ab doulaye Bathily
(Senegal), tendered his resignation, citing personal reasons, effective 31 October. I
appointed François Louncény Fall (Guinea) as my Acting Special Representative,
effective 1 November.
Political developments and trends
9.
In Angola, the seventh ordinary congress of the ruling party Movimento
Popular de Libertacão de Angola was held in Luanda from 17 to 20 August, at
which the President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, was re -elected head of the
party. At a central committee meeting of the party held on 23 August, the former
Minister of Defence, João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, was chosen as the vice president of the party, replacing Roberto de Almeida. The voter registration process
for the presidential election began on 25 August and will continue through 31 March
2017.
10. In Cameroon, following the changes to the cabinet made in October 2015,
plans to hold elections early appear to have been put on hold even after the
detention, earlier in 2016, of opposition leaders, party followe rs and journalists who
criticized the proposed constitutional amendments that could have paved the way
for holding the presidential election early. The Government is initiating an
assessment of recovery and peacebuilding in the Extrême Nord region, with th e
support of the United Nations, the World Bank and the European Union, in order to
adequately respond to the humanitarian, recovery and development aspects of the
Boko Haram crisis.

2/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

11. The ninth meeting of the International Contact Group on the Central African
Republic was held in Bangui on 25 August. Participants included representatives of
the Economic Community of Central African States and the Governments of
Angola, Chad and the Congo. Among the points discussed at the meeting were the
steps taken by the Government of the Central African Republic regarding security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, the
announcement that the States members of the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community had each agreed to train one battalion of the armed forces of
the Central African Republic, the need for dialogue with armed groups and the
decision to transform the International Contact Group, co -chaired by the African
Union and the Congo on behalf of the Economic Community of Central African
States, into an International Support Group co-chaired by the African Union and the
United Nations and tasked with coordinating reconstruction efforts in the country. In
October, a renewed bout of intercommunal violence in the country resulted in the
death of dozens of civilians. Violence was also directed towards the United Nations.
On 24 October, four peacekeepers were among those injured during a large -scale
protest against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilizatio n
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the Government, at which
at least four civilians died.
12. On 8 August, the President of Chad, Idriss Déby Itno, was sworn in for a fifth
term of office, amid opposition protests regarding the results of the presidential
election held on 10 April. Clashes between the opposition and security forces
resulted in one death. On 26 July, 31 opposition parties had created a coalition
known as the Front de l’opposition nouvelle pour l’alternance et le changement,
which had called upon the people of Chad to unite and protest the new term of
office of the President. It subsequently issued a declaration calling for dialogue with
the Government under the auspices of international partners, while also emphasizing
its intention to call for large-scale action. In response, the Coordination des partis
politiques pour la défense de la constitution, an older coalition, decided to expel
members who had joined the Front de l’opposition nouvelle.
13. On 14 August, the Prime Minister of Chad, Albert Pahimi Padacké, who had
been reappointed by the President on 9 August, announced the new members of his
government, comprising 38 members, including seven women. On 26 August, the
parliament adopted a five-year political programme presented by the Prime
Minister.
14. In the Congo, a former presidential candidate in the 20 March election, Jean Marie Michel Mokoko, was arrested on 14 June and charged with attempting to
undermine State security and with illegal possession of weapons, on 16 June. He
was indicted on a new charge, disturbance of public order, on 17 August. Requests
for his provisional release have been denied. On 25 July, the President of the
opposition party Unis pour le Congo, Paulin Makaya, was sentenced to two years ’
imprisonment for incitement to engage in disorderly conduct, after having organized
an unauthorized demonstration in October 2015 in protest against the constitutional
referendum. During a press conference on 29 July, former presidential candidate and
opposition leader Guy-Brice Parfait Kolélas called for dialogue under the auspices
of the international community and for a presidential pardon of Mr. Mokoko. In
early October, the Prime Minister and the Mayor of Brazzaville initiated the

16-19581

3/19

S/2016/996

colloquium on the theme “Vivre ensemble”, which brought together political
protagonists with the aim of adopting recommendations for addressing political
grievances for the President’s consideration.
15. According to a board of inquiry report submitted on 31 August to the Mini stry
of Justice of the Congo, the attacks that took place in Brazzaville on 4 April, the
same day that the Constitutional Court validated the final results of the presidential
election, were the responsibility of the “Ninja” combatants operating under the
command of former rebel leader Frédéric Bintsamou, also known as “Pastor
Ntumi”. The strong response by national security forces to apprehend
Mr. Bintsamou notwithstanding, his whereabouts remain unknown. In September,
several attacks against security forces, local officials, civilians and humanitarian
workers occurred in the Pool region, and they were reportedly perpetrated by
suspected “Ninja” combatants. The numbers of those killed and injured remains
unconfirmed. A low-intensity conflict has continued in the region.
16. The President of Equatorial Guinea, Teodoro Obiang Nguema, named the 36
ministers of his new government on 22 June, following his re -election on 24 April.
His eldest son, Teodorin Nguema Obiang Mangue, was promoted to Vice -President,
in charge of defense and security, and his other son, Gabriel Mbega Obiang Lima,
retained his position of Minister of Mines and Hydrocarbons. In total, eight newly
appointed ministers, including three women, joined the government.
17. In Gabon, the presidential election was held on 27 August with the
participation of regional and international observers. On 31 August, the Minister of
the Interior announced the provisional results, in which the incumbent President, Ali
Bongo Ondimba, garnered 49.8 per cent of the votes, securing his re-election,
whereas the main opposition candidate Jean Ping came a close second, with 48.23
per cent of the votes. Mr. Ping rejected the results and, in the evening on the same
day, his supporters clashed with security forces in Libreville and other towns. A
number of businesses were looted and the buildings of State institutions, such as the
National Assembly, were set ablaze. On 1 September, security forces raided
Mr. Ping’s campaign headquarters, where a number of opposition leaders and civil
society activists were located, and they were subsequently held in de facto detention
until 2 September. Internet services, text messaging and social media websites and
applications were interrupted for about four weeks. As a result of the unrest, it was
reported that three people were killed, an undetermined number of people were
injured and more than 800 people were arrested. According to the National
Prosecutor, 70 people remained in custody as at early October, including 31 people
charged with flagrant acts of violence and 39 people placed in preventive detention
for deliberate arson, destruction of public and private property, and looting.
18. On 5 September, the Minister of Justice and Human Rights, who also served as
the Second Deputy Prime Minister, resigned from both the government and the
ruling party in protest over the disputed presidential election. He called for a
recount of the votes by polling station. On the same day, the Chairperson of the
African Union, Mr. Déby Itno, announced that a high -level delegation composed of
African Heads of State, accompanied by senior officials of the African Union
Commission and of the United Nations, would be dispatched to Libreville to mee t
with stakeholders to defuse tensions. On 8 September, however, the Minister for

4/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

Foreign Affairs of Gabon announced the postponement of the planned visit, citing
competing commitments in the agendas of the leaders.
19. On 8 September, Mr. Ping filed an appeal before the Constitutional Court for a
recount of the votes from each polling station in Haut-Ogooué province, where
Mr. Bongo Ondimba had won 95.46 per cent of the votes, with a participation rate
of 99.93 per cent, according to the provisional results. Mr. Ping requested equal
participation of representatives of his camp and that of Mr. Bongo Ondimba, as well
as observers from the international community, during the Court ’s deliberations.
Two other independent candidates also submitted appeals before the Constitutional
Court. On 15 September, the legal team of Mr. Bongo Ondimba presented its
counter-appeal case before the Court, rejecting the presence of international experts
but agreeing to a recount of the votes from each polling station in the conte sted
province.
20. On 24 September, the Constitutional Court upheld Mr. Bongo Ondimba ’s
re-election victory and partially modified the vote count of the election, the final
results of which were 50.66 per cent of the votes for the incumbent President and
47.24 per cent for Mr. Ping. It also amended the voter participation rate to 57.35 per
cent. No security incidents were reported in Libreville or other major towns
following the Court’s announcement of the final results. Shortly after the ruling, the
President reiterated his intention to create conditions for political dialogue and
called upon all political stakeholders to work with him for the greater good of the
nation. The same day, Mr. Ping deplored the “flawed justice”, accused the Court of
bias and vowed not to retreat. The President was sworn in for a second seven -year
term of office on 27 September.
21. On 28 September, the President appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Emmanuel Issoze Ngondet, as Prime Minister and tasked him with forming an
inclusive government, the composition of which was announced on 2 October.
Although three lesser opposition party members, including a former presidential
candidate, joined the cabinet, it does not include prominent allies of Mr. Ping.
Several young ministers and twelve women were appointed, raising the
representation of women to 30 per cent of the cabinet. A new ministry dedicated to
political dialogue was created. To date, Mr. Ping continues to reject the President ’s
invitation to dialogue. Tensions continue to be high in the country, resulting in the
limited activity of most public schools and universities since the official beginning
of the academic year on 31 October.
22. In Sao Tome and Principe, the presidential election took place in a peaceful
environment on 17 July. According to the provisional results released by the
electoral commission on 18 July, the candidate of Prime Minister Patrice Trovoada ’s
party Acção Democrática Independente, Evaristo Carvalho, received 50.1 per cent
of the votes, whereas the incumbent President, Manuel Pinto da Costa, received
24.8 per cent of the votes. On 21 July, however, the Supreme Court invalidated the
provisional results on the grounds that the electoral commission should have waited
to announce the results until the completion of the tally of votes cast in the district
of Maria Louise, which voted on 20 July, and by voters in the diaspora. Mr. Pinto da
Costa and the third-place candidate, Maria das Neves, submitted a complaint
requesting the invalidation of the election, the organization of new elections and the
resignation of the president of the electoral commission.

16-19581

5/19

S/2016/996

23. The Constitutional Court subsequently ordered that a second round take place
on 7 August, with the participation of Mr. Carvalho and Mr. Pinto da Costa. The
latter, however, boycotted the second round, arguing that his participation would
sanction what he described as illegal acts during the electoral period that the Court
had not addressed. The second round went forward as schedul ed with only the
participation of Mr. Carvalho, who was officially declared the victor on 19 August.
He was sworn in as President on 3 September.
Boko Haram
24. Violent attacks and suicide bombings by Boko Haram militants continued,
including hostage-taking, cattle raiding and raids on villages. There was a
resurgence of violence in the Extrême Nord region of Cameroon, including on
21 August in Mora, the headquarters of sector 1 of the Multinational Joint Task
Force. On 21 November, Boko Haram conducted three attacks in northern
Cameroon, including in Darak, where six Cameroonian soldiers were killed. Suicide
bombings continued to serve as the group’s modus operandi, with mosques, local
markets and other crowded public spaces targeted. Since July 2015, there have been
over 40 suicide bombings in Cameroon.
25. In Chad, Boko Haram attacks continued to affect transborder trade and the
livelihoods of the local population. On 14 August, two attacks occurred around the
area of Kaiga Kinjira, near the Nigerian border, followed by another in the same
area on 26 August. During the reporting period, some 850 people, mostly women
and children, reportedly associated with Boko Haram, surrendered to the
Multinational Joint Task Force in Chad. This brings the total numb er of defectors in
the past few months to about 1,500. The Chadian authorities have called for
international assistance with regard to the reintegration of Boko Haram defectors
and their families.
26. A schism in the Boko Haram leadership was noted during the reporting period.
Abu Musab al-Barnawi was declared the new leader of the group by Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as Daesh. The formerly recognized leader,
Abubakar Shekau, continued to assert his authority, while maintaining h is allegiance
to ISIL. The schism was reportedly owing to the fact that he had failed to adhere to
guidance from ISIL leadership, including a directive to stop using children as
suicide bombers.
27. Multinational Joint Task Force operations continued to target Boko Haram
elements in the Lake Chad basin. In particular, the large -scale Operation Gama Aiki
was launched in June with the goal of eradicating Boko Haram. On 8 July, the chiefs
of defence staff of the four affected countries and the Force Commander of the Joint
Task Force met in Diffa, the Niger, to take stock of ongoing military operations.
28. Children, especially young girls, are particularly vulnerable to the insecurity
generated in the broader context of the Boko Haram threat. Children are at r isk of
being abducted and forcibly recruited by Boko Haram, including as suicide
bombers. For the most part, boys are kidnapped to join Boko Haram as fighters, and
women and girls are abducted primarily for sexual abuse, forced marriages and
labour.

6/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

Lord’s Resistance Army
29. LRA remains a persistent threat to civilians, in particular in eastern Central
African Republic and in areas with little to no security presence. One LRA group
has also been present in Garamba National Park, in the Democratic Repu blic of the
Congo, but the bulk of LRA activities in that country during the reporting period
occurred in areas bordering the Central African Republic. This suggests that the
LRA elements involved in poaching activities in Garamba National Park in recent
months had crossed or intended to cross the border. According to defectors, LRA
continues to kidnap civilians, including children, and the group intends to abduct
young boys and force them into military training.
30. A significant number of LRA-related incidents were noted in the Central
African Republic. This was owing to an increase in activities of the Doctor Achaye
group, which was responsible for five incidents in August, including an attack on a
Ugandan patrol near the village of Kitessa, and the possible movement of LRA
elements in Haute-Kotto prefecture towards Kafia Kingi. Incidents of looting
involving LRA elements continued, including the 20 August attack on the mining
site of Yangou Waka, located near Sam Ouandja.
31. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, LRA elements continued ambushing
civilians travelling along key axes within the Dungu and Niangara territories in
northeastern Haut-Uélé province, as well as in Ango and Bondo territories, located
in north-western Bas-Uélé province at the border with the Central African Republic.
LRA-related incidents included ambushes, lootings, the abduction of civilians, who
were often forced to transport items, and armed attacks on security forces.
32. Uganda expressed its intention to withdraw its forces o perating in the Central
African Republic under the auspices of the African Union Regional Task Force by
September, but subsequently decided to postpone the withdrawal until 31 December.
33. On 23 August, the Government of the United States of America impo sed
economic sanctions on two sons of Joseph Kony, Salim and Ali Kony, citing their
activities on behalf of their father and LRA. The action freezes any assets held by
the two individuals within the United States.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
34. Since my previous report, about 20 incidents of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the Gulf of Guinea have been reported by the International Maritime
Organization.
35. From 9 to 12 August, experts from the States members of the Maritime
Organization for West and Central Africa met in Lomé to discuss issues linked to
maritime security, in advance of the extraordinary summit of the African Union on
maritime security and development in Africa, also held in Lomé, on 15 October. The
African Union Charter on Maritime Security, Safety and Development was adopted
at that summit.
Poaching and the illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
36. On 6 July, in Makoua, the Congo, two traffickers were arrested while trying to
sell eight elephant tusks representing 13 kg of ivory. They were sentenced to three

16-19581

7/19

S/2016/996

years’ imprisonment and fined $3,400. On 9 July, in Franceville, Gabon, two
traffickers were arrested while attempting to sell four elephant tusks representing
23 kg of ivory.
37. The regularity of ivory seizures in Central Africa notwithstanding, little
progress has been made to dismantle the trafficking networks. Few poachers are
caught or prosecuted. Differences and loopholes in national legal frameworks,
institutional weaknesses, corruption, the limitations of criminal justice systems and
porous borders are exploited by criminal networks, which are also involved in the
trafficking of arms, drugs and humans, fuelling further insecurity in the region.

B.

Humanitarian developments
38. Violence and conflict across the Lake Chad basin, in the Central African
Republic and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to be the main
drivers of human suffering in the subregion. Around 2.6 million people have been
displaced as a result of Boko Haram attacks and military counter-offensives in the
broader region. The crisis has left 6.3 million people severely food insecure, with
pockets of famine conditions reported in certain locations. The United Nations has
also received reports of an increase in the number of incidents of sexual and genderbased violence among the displaced persons.
39. In Cameroon, security in the Extrême Nord region remains unstable. Cross border raids and suicide bombings by Boko Haram continue to cause deaths and
poverty. The Extrême Nord region is host to 72,846 Nigerian refugees. The use of
improvised explosive devices by Boko Haram restricts humanitarian access to the
internally displaced persons, refugees and host communities. In its eastern region,
Cameroon hosts around 260,000 refugees from the Central African Republic, many
settling within local communities.
40. In certain areas of the western Lac region of Chad, attacks attributed to Boko
Haram and large military operations against the armed group are hampering
humanitarian operations and causing new population displacements. Trends show
increases in the use of improvised explosive devices and in attacks on villages for
the purpose of looting food and livestock. As a result, several humanitarian partners
have suspended operations in the health, nutrition and food security sectors.
Currently, there are more than 126,000 displaced people, including 109,000
internally displaced persons, 7,900 refugees, 11,000 returnees and 320 third -country
nationals. Malnutrition rates continue to be above the emergency threshold in many
districts across the Sahel region in Chad. Poor pastoral conditions have decreased
livestock prices, reduced pastoralists’ revenue and terms of trade and created food
consumption deficits. Chad continues to host some 300,000 Sudanese refugees in
the east and 69,000 refugees from the Central African Republic in the south.
41. Following a lull in violence during the presidential election period in the
Central African Republic, at the end of 2015 and early in 2016, hostilities flared up
once again in April and in October, including in Bangui, forcing tens of thousands
of civilians to flee for safety — 40,000 in the first half of October alone. Around
410,000 Central Africans remain internally displaced a nd close to 453,000 are
refugees in neighbouring countries. Insecurity in many areas has been the main

8/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

impediment to voluntary returns by refugees and internally displaced persons.
Across the country, some 2.3 million people, or half the population, requir e
humanitarian assistance. Public and social services are extremely limited or
non-existent, with humanitarian organizations providing much of the basic services
to the population. Fifty per cent of the rural population is food insecure, with nearly
30 per cent experiencing crisis levels of hunger requiring immediate assistance.
Attacks against humanitarian actors have been increasing, seriously undermining
the delivery of assistance to those most in need.
42. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remained
highly challenging, in particular in the east. Continued armed group activity and a
reported increase in intercommunal tensions contributed to the displacement of
367,000 people in the first half of 2016 alone, with 1.7 millio n people currently
displaced. The eastern provinces also host the majority of the refugee arrivals from
neighbouring countries, a total of 388,000 people originating mainly from Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Rwanda and South Sudan. Moreover, durin g the
period under review, a yellow fever epidemic spread to 7 of the country ’s 26
provinces. A cholera epidemic continued to worsen in the first half of 2016, with the
disease spreading from regions in the east in which cholera is endemic towards
Kinshasa along the Congo River.

C.

Human rights trends
43. The human rights situation in the subregion continued to be of concern during
the reporting period, with diverse forms of violations of fundamental freedoms in
some countries, mainly targeting political opponents and demonstrators, civil
society organizations, human rights defenders and members of the media. The
situation reveals the trend of continued narrowing of the democratic space having a
negative impact on non-State activities and electoral processes. Violations of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression and access to information have included
arbitrary arrests and detention, harassment and intimidation of journalists, as well as
targeted attacks on media outlets. Service shutdowns and o ther restrictions have also
been used as measures limiting freedom of expression and effective political
participation, including in Burundi, Chad, the Congo, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Gabon.
44. In Gabon, the presidential election was followed by violent unrest in Libreville
and elsewhere in the country. The reports of excessive use of force by security
forces are a matter of concern. On 29 September, the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court issued a statement acknowledging receipt of a referral from the
Government of Gabon to open an investigation without delay regarding the situation
in the country. The statement indicated that the Court would conduct a preliminary
examination to establish whether the criteria for opening an inve stigation had been
met.
45. In Chad, on 24 August, a court in N’Djamena closed the case pertaining to
soldiers who reportedly disappeared after voting against the President during the
recent presidential election. The Prosecutor stated that all the indivi duals in question
were subsequently found and presented to the court and police in the course of the
investigation that had been launched. On 22 September, the United Nations High

16-19581

9/19

S/2016/996

Commissioner for Human Rights and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad
signed a host country agreement for the opening of a country office of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Chad.
46. In the Central African Republic, MINUSCA documented 455 new verified
incidents of violations or abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law
committed against 1,257 victims, including 92 women, 47 boys and 14 girls. The
violations included arbitrary killings, cruel and inhuman treatment, conflict -related
sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detentions, as well as abductions.
47. Although the security situation returned largely to normal after the post electoral political tensions in the Congo earlier in the year, the human rights climate
remained fragile, highlighting an acute need for legal and institutional reforms,
including of the National Human Rights Commission and the committees charged
with reporting to treaty bodies. The Government extended its full cooperation to an
OHCHR mission deployed to the country from 13 June to 25 July to assess the
human rights situation during the period from the holding of the constitutional
referendum in October 2015 to the post-electoral crisis that followed the
presidential election of 20 March 2016 and to formulate recommendations to the
Government for addressing remaining issues and challenges.
48. A new criminal justice code was promulgated in Cameroon in July, sparking
controversy among some sectors. The revised Penal Code retains the death penalty
and the criminalization of homosexuality and includes provisions for criminal
penalties for unpaid rent and extramarital affairs. It also contains new provisions
that protect the rights of women and girls, in particular with regard to the custody of
minors and issues related to female genital mutilatio n, rape and sexual harassment.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
49. Several Member States in Central Africa continued to experience the
consequences of low commodity prices, increased security costs and insufficient
regional integration, which represent a serious threat to the socioeconomic stability
of the region. Declining public spending, including through the adoption of austerity
measures, has heightened social tensions in several countries. For example, on
31 August, the Government of Chad adopted austerity measures to increase
resources and curb public spending, which included reductions in social benefits
and allowances and the restructuring of State institutions. As a result, labour unions
and students launched an indefinite strike, rejecting the unilateral nature of the
measures imposed and accusing the Government of mismanaging oil resources.
50. On 12 July, the Bank of Central African States announced its average growth
rate forecast for 2016 for the Central African Economic and Monetary Community
area at 1.7 per cent, down from 2.5 per cent in 2015. The average fiscal deficit
forecast for 2016 for the area increased to 7.9 per cent of gross domestic product
(GDP), from 3.5 per cent in 2015. On 12 July, the Executive Board of the
International Monetary Fund announced a 1.9 per cent average growth rate forecast
for 2016 for the area. It noted that average external public debt had increased, from
13.1 per cent of GDP in 2012 to an estimated 25.6 per cent for 2016, and called for
ensuring debt sustainability. The Executive Board encouraged States members of the

10/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

Economic and Monetary Community to focus on fiscal consolidation and structural
reforms, including improving the business climate and boosting private investment,
and moving the regional integration agenda forward.
51. In order to strengthen its recovery efforts, the Central African Republic, with
the support of the United Nations, the World Bank and the European Union,
organized a conference on the country’s recovery and peacebuilding plan in
Brussels on 17 November.

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
52. My Special Representative for Central Africa continued to be actively engaged
in the subregion in promoting regional peace and security and preventing conflict,
including by undertaking a number of country-specific visits. From 20 to 23 July,
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs visited Chad, the Congo and
Gabon to discuss national and regional political challenges with various
stakeholders. On 21 July, he inaugurated the new UNOCA premises in Libreville.
Central African Republic
53. On 25 August, in Bangui, my Special Representative, in his capacity as the
United Nations representative in the international mediation on the crisis in the
Central African Republic, attended the ninth meeting of the International Contact
Group on the Central African Republic. In his meetings with the Heads of State of
the Economic Community of Central African States, he urged for continued
engagement by States of the region in consolidating peace in the Central African
Republic.
Chad
54. On 7 and 8 June, my Special Representative travelled to Chad where he met
with the President of Chad and opposition leader Saleh Kebzabo. He stressed the
need for inclusive dialogue, in particular on issues related to political and electoral
governance in the run-up to the legislative elections. On 8 August, my Special
Representative attended the swearing-in ceremony of the President.
Gabon
55. My Special Representative held intensive engagements with key national
stakeholders and regional and international partners to address the electoral crisis in
Gabon. He met with the candidates for president, the incumbent, Mr. Bongo
Ondimba, and Mr. Ping, as well as their allies and advisers, on several occasions to
call for restraint and advocate for a peaceful resolution of the crisis. I also spoke
with Mr. Bongo Ondimba and Mr. Ping on 30 August and 4 September to reiterate
the importance of avoiding any further escalation of violence. In addition, my
Special Representative discussed the situation in Gabon with regional leaders,

16-19581

11/19

S/2016/996

namely, the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, in Brazzaville on
14 September, and the President of Chad, in N’Djamena on 16 September.
56. My Special Representative played a key role in defusing post -electoral
tensions, in particular regarding the release, on 2 September, of 27 opposition
members, who were held at Mr. Ping’s campaign headquarters. He repeatedly called
for the adjudication of electoral complaints through established legal channels in a
transparent, fair and credible manner. He worked closely with the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, who travelled to Libreville, and the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General of the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the Secretary-General of the Economic Community of Central
African States to help defuse rising tensions. He also held regular consultations with
the President of the Constitutional Court of Gabon to encourage her to preserve the
credibility of the appeal process, in particular by making public announcements on
the Court’s regulations and procedures.
Congo
57. From 30 May to 1 June, my Special Representative travelled to the Congo to
assess the situation and to call for a reduction of the tensions stemming from the
20 March presidential election. He met with the President of the Congo, presidential
advisers and opposition leaders Mr. Kolélas and Mr. Mokoko. He also vis ited the
Pool region, the theatre of security operations against Pastor Ntumi, in the aftermath
of the presidential election. On 26 June and 1 August, he met with the President in
Oyo and Brazzaville, respectively. During his visits, he called for an inclu sive
dialogue and confidence-building measures to chart a peaceful political course in
the run-up to the legislative elections to be held in July 2017. He also discussed
regional issues.
Rwanda
58. On 25 June 2016, my Special Representative travelled to Rwanda where he
met with the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Louise Mushikiwabo, to discuss regional issues, including Rwanda ’s return
to the Economic Community of Central African States and its possible role in
fostering peace, security and stability in Central Africa.
Sao Tome and Principe
59. On 4 and 5 August, my Special Representative travelled to Sao Tome and
Principe in the run-up to the second round of the presidential election, held on
7 August. He met with the Prime Minister and the presidential candidates. During
his visit, my Special Representative called upon political stakeholders to preserve
the peaceful nature of the country’s competitive politics.
60. A representative from UNOCA also travelled to Sao Tome and Principe during
the first and second rounds of the presidential election from 13 to 20 July and from
4 to 10 August, respectively. He met with the presidential candidates, the electoral
commission, security officials, civil society organizations and the Head of the
African Union electoral observation mission, the former President of Mozambique,
Armando Emilio Guebuza. Whereas political stakeholders noted the professionalism

12/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

of the electoral commission, they stressed the need to transform i t into a permanent
body.
Elections
61. UNOCA worked closely with partners to follow up on the recommendations of
the workshop held in Douala, Cameroon, in May 2015 on the role of the media in
the conduct and promotion of peaceful electoral processes. In this regard, UNOCA,
in cooperation with the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa and with the support of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), organized a workshop in Sao Tome and Principe, held on 25 and 26 May.
Participants included journalists and representatives of the National Electoral
Commission and the Media High Council. Participants called for assistance to
develop a code of ethics and professional conduct for journalists.
62. UNOCA organized a workshop, held in Libreville from 7 to 10 June, on
supporting the electoral process by strengthening freedom of expression and the
safety of journalists. A key outcome of the workshop was the endorsement of the
code of good conduct for the media and journalists o f Central Africa during
elections, which had been adopted in Douala, Cameroon, in May 2015. At the
request of the Gabonese authorities, UNOCA and other United Nations entities,
including UNDP, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central
Africa and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, as well as the
International Organization of la Francophonie, supported the organization of similar
workshops in Gabon, held in Port-Gentil from 15 to 17 June 2016, Franceville from
22 to 24 June and Oyem from 28 to 30 June.

B.

Support to United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives on
peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
63. In its capacity as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, UNOCA worked closely with
the Chair of the Committee (Central African Republic) to implement the
recommendations of the forty-second ministerial meeting, held in Bangui from 6 to
10 June, including the need for States to ratify the Central African Convention for
the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly and to
sign and ratify the Arms Trade Treaty. The next meeting of the Committee is
scheduled to be held in Sao Tome and Principe from 28 No vember to 2 December.
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
64. On 12 August, UNOCA, the International Organization of la Francophonie, the
European Union and the United States issued a joint declaration on the e lection in
Gabon, calling upon all stakeholders to ensure the democratic and peaceful

16-19581

13/19

S/2016/996

character of the election, prioritize dialogue, refrain from any incitement to violence
and ensure respect for human rights.
65. During the electoral crisis in Gabon, the United Nations and the African Union
worked jointly in the implementation of confidence -building measures between the
Government and the opposition, including releasing detainees, avoiding
inflammatory statements and restoring telecommunications services. As agreed with
the Government, UNOCA worked with the African Union for the deployment of a
high-level delegation of the African Union, which was subsequently postponed
indefinitely. The readiness of regional leaders to engage in the resolution of the
post-electoral tensions, however, had provided momentum for the facilitation of the
by the two organizations.
66. From 13 to 15 June, UNOCA participated in a workshop of the Economic
Community of Central African States, held in Yaoundé, regarding the planned
revision of texts that govern the functioning of the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa. UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central African States
also worked closely on the organization of the activities mentioned in paragraphs 67
and 70, below, on mediation and regional integration.
Mediation
67. From 26 to 27 July, UNOCA, in partnership with the Mediator of the
Gabonese Republic and the secretariat of the Economic Community of Central
African States, hosted a conference of mediators and ombudsmen of Central Africa
in Libreville. The mediators of Gabon and Chad, the ombudsman of Burundi and the
Deputy Defender of the People of Equatorial Guinea attended the conference. The
imam of Bangui and the president of the Evangelical Alliance of the Central African
Republic attended as special guests. Other participants included the First Vice President of the Senate of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Deputy Public
Protector of South Africa and a representative of the mediator of Senegal , in his
capacity as Chair of the Association of Mediators of Member Countries of the West
African Economic and Monetary Union. Participants adopted a declaration on the
creation of an association of mediators of States members of the Economic
Community of Central African States. A road map to that end is being developed,
and a steering committee was established, including representatives of the mediators
of Central African States present during the conference, the secretariat of the
Economic Community, UNOCA and the Association of Mediators of the Economic
and Monetary Union.
Boko Haram
68. UNOCA organized a visit of experts from Member States constituting the
Bureau of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (Cameroon, Central African Republic, Rwanda and Sao Tome and
Principe) to Cameroon and Chad from 31 October to 4 November. The experts met
with the relevant authorities of both countries to discuss the impact of Boko Haram
and visited the town of Kousséri, Cameroon, and the headquarters of the
Multinational Joint Task Force in N’Djamena.

14/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

Regional integration
69. On 30 July, my Special Representative attended the opening of the
extraordinary session of the Conference of Heads of State and Governme nt of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community held in Malabo. In his address
to the Conference, he expressed concern over the political and social impact of the
continued decrease in global oil prices on member States of the Economic and
Monetary Community. He reiterated his appeal for increased economic
diversification and regional integration and improved management of resources.
70. UNOCA and the secretariat of the Economic Community of Central African
States co-organized a round table meeting on regional integration in Central Africa,
held in Yaoundé on 18 and 19 October. It was attended by relevant ministers and
senior government officials from States members of the Economic Community,
subregional institutions, experts and development partners. Participants explored
ways to relaunch the regional integration process in the subregion, in the light of
current challenges.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
71. On 22 July, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs visited the
headquarters of the Regional Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in Central
Africa in Pointe-Noire, the Congo, where he received a briefing on the progress
achieved by the Centre and the challenges facing its full operationalization. The
Senior Military Adviser to UNOCA also visited the headquarters of the Regional
Coordination Centre, from 25 to 27 May, to discuss matters related to the Centr e’s
operationalization.
72. During its visit to Cameroon to discuss Boko Haram, the Bureau of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa also
visited the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in
the Gulf of Guinea.
Regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa
73. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa
continued to implement its three-year project on enhancing physical security and
stockpile management in selected countries of the Sahel region, including Chad.
The Regional Centre co-organized, with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chad and
the country’s focal point on small arms and light weapons, national consultations on
the subject, held on 27 and 28 June, which also served to initiate the identification
of pilot stockpile sites for rehabilitation. The event brought together 18
representatives of relevant national agencies in Chad that are involved in the field of
security regarding small arms and light weapons. It helped to raise awareness about
the importance of adopting national legislation and procedures relating to the
security, control and management of small arms and light weapons in order to
minimize and prevent the risk of accidents and the diversion of arms to non -State
actors.
74. On 4 and 5 August, in Abuja, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace
and Disarmament in Africa, in collaboration with the Commission of the Economic

16-19581

15/19

S/2016/996

Community of West African States, held an expert meeting on improving cross border subregional cooperation in the control of small arms and light weapons under
existing regional and subregional instruments. The meeting too k place within the
framework of the Regional Centre’s project on strengthening the capacity of Lake
Chad basin countries to implement Security Council resolution 2178 (2014) by
preventing the acquisition of arms and ammunition by terrorist groups. The meeting
convened more than 30 representatives of the four beneficiary countries and
relevant international, regional and subregional organizations and institutions.
Coordination of the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army
Operationalization of the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
75. From 9 to 13 August, representatives of UNOCA, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the African Union undertook an assessment mission to Obo and
Bria in eastern Central African Republic. They met with a wide var iety of
stakeholders who underlined the growing number of LRA attacks and abductions in
the area and the risk that both LRA and ex-Séléka groups would strengthen their
capacity following the withdrawal of the Ugandan forces operating under the
African Union Regional Task Force. Humanitarian needs in the area were also a key
topic of discussion.
76. From 24 to 28 October, representatives of UNOCA and the African Union
undertook an assessment mission to Dungu in northeastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The mission noted that LRA remained a serious threat to local
communities there, even though the capacity of the group had been reduced.
77. Pursuant to the conclusions of the fifth ministerial meeting of the Joint
Coordination Mechanism of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination
of the Lord’s Resistance Army, held in Addis Ababa on 19 and 20 May, which were
endorsed by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union on 30 May, the
Commission of the African Union conducted a joint technical assessment mission to
LRA-affected areas in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, from 20 to 25 June. The aim of the mission was to
assess, among other things, the impact of Uganda’s announced withdrawal of its
contingent from the African Union Regional Task Force by September 2016. The
European Union, the United States, the African Union, including the Force
Commander of the Regional Task Force, and the United Nations Office to the
African Union took part in the assessment mission. It established that, although
considerable progress had been made in degrading the capacities of LRA, the group
remained an active threat in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan. The presence of other armed groups in the region,
including the ex-Séléka faction and the Janjaweed militia, further complicated the
campaign to eliminate LRA.
78. The assessment of the mission was that the possible non-renewal of the
mandate of United States special forces, which ended on 31 October, would deprive
the African Union Regional Task Force of its main provider of logistical support.

16/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

The situation would be exacerbated by the withdrawal of Ugandan forces from the
Task Force. Since then, the mandate of the special forces has been renewed until
early 2017.
Protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance
79. Through Operation Red Kite, MONUSCO provided logistical support to the
offensive against LRA that was successfully launched by the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including its contingent operating under the
African Union Regional Task Force, which is assisted by the United States military.
80. MONUSCO, jointly with the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, intensified patrols in the LRA-affected areas of Dungu territory, in
particular Badolo, Nambia and Nagero. MONUSCO and MINUSCA have also
intensified their information exchanges on LRA-related issues.
81. Within the framework of the implementation of the early warning system, the
secured, empowered, connected communities project, implemented by Catholic
Relief Services and supported by the Government of the United States, five high frequency radios were installed in the area around Bangadi and in Kapi li.
Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
82. The MONUSCO transit camp in Dungu accommodated 27 LRA dependents,
comprising 10 Congolese nationals, 8 Ugandan nationals, 5 Central African
nationals and 4 South Sudanese nationals. All of them were repatriated by
MONUSCO, with the support of the International Committee of the Red Cross, to
their home countries or reunited with their families in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Long-term development and peacebuilding support
83. Stabilization and recovery efforts in LRA-affected areas remain seriously
underfunded and mostly unaddressed. State authorities and humanitarian and
development actors, including United Nations entities, are largely absent.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
84. The Regional Policy Adviser for West and Central Africa of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women),
who is based in Dakar, visited Libreville on 25 and 26 July to discuss cooperation
with UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central African States in supporting
regional initiatives in the area of women and peace and security. A number of
initiatives were identified, including joint support to the Economic Community to
create a women’s peace network in Central Africa.

16-19581

17/19

S/2016/996

IV. Observations and recommendations
85. In the context of the continued political tensions in the subregion linked to the
conduct and aftermath of a number of electoral processes, I call upon all
stakeholders to resolve their differences in a peaceful manner, including through
inclusive dialogue and mediation, and in conformity with existing legal frameworks.
The peaceful holding of elections is the shared responsibility of all political leaders.
I welcome the key role played by international and regional observers and stress the
importance of the free and responsible participation of the media. I call upon the
Governments concerned to ensure that elections and the follow-up to them,
including appeals of official results, are conducted in a transparent manner to
guarantee the credibility of electoral processes. I urge the Governments concerned
to ensure that internal security measures and/or operations are condu cted in
conformity with international human rights law. My Special Representative will
continue to carry out his good offices role and engage in preventive diplomacy with
all relevant stakeholders.
86. I welcome the signing on 15 November of the special agreement by the
Presidents of Equatorial Guinea and Gabon for the submission of their border
dispute to the International Court of Justice. This marks a historic milestone and the
successful conclusion of the United Nations mediation process. I hope that th e
settlement of this long-standing border dispute will be a source of inspiration for
other countries facing similar challenges and a step forward for the further
enhancement of bilateral relations between the two countries.
87. I am heartened by the efforts in the region in the fight against Boko Haram,
which have resulted in substantial military successes. At the same time, the terrorist
group remains a serious threat to regional peace and security, and its activities
continue to inflict a devastating toll on the political, socioeconomic, humanitarian
and human rights situation in the affected areas. I call upon all the Governments
concerned to stay the course and further scale up their efforts, in full conformity
with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, to address both the
immediate manifestations of the Boko Haram violence and the root causes of the
crisis. In equal measure, I urge the international community to redouble its support
to the region in the fight against Boko Haram, inc luding the vital humanitarian and
early recovery assistance and the requisite political, logistical and financial support
to the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. I
encourage the Economic Community of Central African States and the Economic
Community of West African States to hold, without further delay, the planned
summit of Heads of State on Boko Haram with the aim of developing a regional
strategy to address the Boko Haram crisis, in particular the root causes that have
contributed to the emergence and endurance of the group. UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) stand ready to support the
two subregional organizations in this regard.
88. I am encouraged by the progress made in the implementation of the maritime
security strategy, including efforts to operationalize the Interregional Coordination
Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea. I renew my call
upon regional States and international partners to provide t he resources necessary
for the Centre’s full functioning. UNOCA, in collaboration with UNOWAS, will

18/19

16-19581

S/2016/996

continue to provide assistance and mobilize support in combating maritime
insecurity. I welcome the adoption of the African Union Charter on Maritime
Security, Safety and Development.
89. I remain concerned by the phenomenon of poaching and illicit wildlife
trafficking and its negative impact on the environmental, governance and security
situation in the subregion, including the continuing links between illi cit wildlife
trade and armed groups. I renew my call upon Governments in the subregion to take
definite steps towards the implementation of the specific measures needed to
operationalize the strategic decisions on countering illicit wildlife trade, includi ng
those contained in General Assembly resolution 69/314 and the African Strategy on
Combating Illegal Exploitation and Illegal Trade in Wild Fauna and Flora in Africa.
In collaboration with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, UNOCA will
continue to support subregional efforts to identify collaborative approaches to
address the issue.
90. While progress continues in the fight against LRA, the group continues to
demonstrate its intention and capacity to conduct attacks against civilians in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The planned
withdrawal of Ugandan forces from the African Union Regional Task Force will
require redoubled commitment from national, regional and international
stakeholders to ensure that LRA is not able to exploit the resulting gap. I urge all
stakeholders to remain engaged politically, financially and militarily, including
through the funding of humanitarian programmes in LRA -affected areas. I am
grateful for the dedication and commitment displayed by the Ugandan forces, and
by military personnel of the Task Force and contributing countries, for their
continuing efforts and operations, which are crucial to ending the threat posed by
LRA.
91. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of Central African
countries, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community, the African Union, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
regional and subregional institutions for their continued collaboration with
UNOCA. I would also like to express my appreciation to the Multinational Joint
Task Force and troop-contributing countries for their dedication and commitment to
the service of peace and stability. I am grateful to the Government and people of
Gabon for their generous hospitality and support to UNOCA. I would like to thank
the various entities of the United Nations system working in Central Africa,
including the heads of United Nations peace operations, regional offices, country
teams and other entities, for their support and cooperation with UNOCA.
92. In conclusion, I would like to express my deep appreciation to my outgoing
Special Representative, Mr. Bathily, for his unwavering commitment, dedication
and hard work during his term in office. I would also like to thank my Acting
Special Representative, Mr. Fall, for having accepted this challenging assignment. I
commend the staff of UNOCA for their continuing efforts to advance the cause of
peace and security in Central Africa.

16-19581

19/19
