S/2007/363

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 15 June 2007 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter of 5 June 2007 on the African UnionUnited Nations report on the hybrid operation in Darfur (S/2007/307/Rev.1) and to
the high-level consultations held in Addis Ababa with the Government of the Sudan
on 11 and 12 June. The conclusions of those consultations, as agreed between the
Government of the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations, are attached
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-38580 (E) 180607

*0738580*

S/2007/363

Annex
Conclusions of the high-level African Union-United Nations
consultations with the Government of the Sudan on the hybrid
operation in Darfur
A high-level technical consultation was held in Addis Ababa on 11 and 12 June
2007 pursuant to the letters dated 4 June 2007 of the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission to President Omer Al-Bashir and
further discussions among them. The technical consultations were attended by
delegations from the Government of the Sudan, the African Union and the United
Nations.
The participants discussed the comprehensive clarifications jointly provided
by the African Union and the United Nations on the hybrid operation in Darfur, as
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on the hybrid operation (S/2007/307/Rev.1), in particular its
specific recommendations about the mandate and structure of the operation and
details on its various components and tasks. In view of the explanations and
clarifications provided by the African Union and the United Nations as contained in
the presentation, the Government of the Sudan accepted the joint proposals on the
hybrid operation.
The meeting concluded that the proposed operation would contribute
considerably to the stabilization of the situation in Darfur in its political,
humanitarian and security dimensions. The participants underlined the need for the
resolutions/decisions authorizing this operation to be adopted by the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, taking into account the
conclusions of the high-level meeting held in Addis Ababa on 16 November 2006,
as endorsed by the summit meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council held on 30 November 2006 and the statement of the President of the
Security Council issued on 19 December 2006; the Riyadh agreement of 28 March
2007; the conclusions of the high-level consultative meeting on the United Nations
heavy support package for the African Union Mission in the Sudan held on 9 April
2007; and the high-level consultative meeting on the African Union-United Nations
report on the hybrid operation.
The participants further agreed on the need for an immediate comprehensive
ceasefire accompanied by an inclusive political process, and stressed the need for
troop- and police-contributing countries as well as donors to facilitate the early and
successful implementation of the hybrid operation. The Sudanese delegation also
raised the issue of an exit strategy, and the participants agreed that the requirements
for the hybrid operation would be reviewed periodically subject to the conditions on
the ground and the decisions of the two Councils.
The consultations confirmed the commitment of the United Nations, the
African Union and the Government of the Sudan to the spirit of constructive
engagement. In this context, the consultations also confirmed the need to take
forward expeditiously and in full transparency the implementation of the threephase approach to peacekeeping in Darfur. The Government of the Sudan committed
itself to cooperating closely with the African Union and the United Nations, and all
participants undertook to carry out their commitments.

2

07-38580
