General Auembly-Thirtieth Se11ion

24

Having examined the comprehensive study of the
question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects 36
carried out under the auspices of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament by the Ad Hoc Group of
Quali.fied Governmental Experts for the Study of the
Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones in pursuance
of--General Assembly resolution 3261.F (XXIX) of
9 December 1974,
Having also examined the comments made by States
members of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament regarding that study, 37 the text of which is
annexed to the special report in which the Conference
transmitted the study to the General Assembly, 35
Bearing in mind that, without prejudice to the results
that may be obtained through any further examination
of this matter, from the analysis of the contents of the
special report it is already possible at this time to draw
certain incontrovertible conclusions,
N oting that from among those conclusions it would
seem advisable to stress the necessity that the General
Assembly define the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone and the scope of the principal obligations of the
nuclear-weapon States towards such zones and towards
the States included therein,
Convinced that in so doing it will strengthen the
new efforts recently undertaken and the realizations
already achieved for the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones,
Solemnly adopts the following declaration:

I.

Definition of the concept of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone

1. A "nuclear-weapon-free zone" shall, as a
general rule, be deemed to be any zone, recognized
as such by the General Assembly of the United
Nations, which any group of States, in the free exercise of their sovereignty, has established by virtue
of a treaty or convention whereby:
(a) The statute of total absence of nuclear weapons to which the zone shall be subject, including the
procedure for the delimitation of the zone, is defined;
( b) An intemational system of verification and
control is established to guarantee compliance with
the obligations deriving from that statute.

II.

Definition of the principal obligations of the
nuclear-weapon States towards nuclear-weaponfree zones and towards the States included
therein
2. In every case of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
that has been recognized as such by the General
Assembly, all nuclear-weapon States shall undertake
or reaffirm, in a solemn intemational instrument having full legally binding force, such as a treaty, a
convention or a protocol, the following obligations:
(a) To respect in ali its parts the statute of total
absence of nuclear weapons defined in the treaty or
convention which serves as the constitutive instrument of the zone;
( b) To refrain from contributing in any way to
the performance in the territories forming part of
the zone of acts which involve a violation of the aforesaid treaty or convention;
(e) To refrain from using or threatening to use
nuclear weapons against the States included in the
zone.

111.

Scope of the definitions

3. The above definitions in no way impair the
resolutions which the General Assembly has adopted
or may adopt with regard to specific cases of nuclearweapon-free zones nor the rights emanating for the
Member States from such resolutions.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3473 (XXX). Implementation of General Assem~ly resolution 3262 (XXIX) concerning the
8lgnature and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear W eapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 and 3262 (~XIX) of 9 December 1974 concerning the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) 38 and its
Additional Protocol I,
. T~king into account that certain territories lying
w1thm the zone of application of that Treaty which are
not sovereign political entities are nevertheless in a
position ~o recei~«:: the benefits deriving from the Treaty
through its Add1t10nal Protocol I to which the States
that de jure ?r 1e facto are intemationally responsible
for those tetntones may become parties,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northem Ireland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands became parties to Additional
Protocol I in 1969 and 1971, respectively,
l. Again urges France and the United States of
America to sigo and ratify Additional Protocol I of
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
~atin ~merica (Treaty of Tlatelolco) as soon as poss1ble, m order that the peoples of the territories in
question may receive the benefits which derive from the
Treaty and which consist mainly in removing the danger of nuclear attack and sparing the squandering of
resources on the production of nuclear weapons;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the two States to which the above
appeal is addressed and to inform the General Assembly at its thirty-second session of any measure adopted
by those States;
. 3.. Decides to inc_lude in. the provisional agenda of
1ts th1rty-second sess1on an 1tem entitled "lmplementation of General Assembly resolution 3473 (XXX) conceming the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3474 (XXX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended the
idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East,
38 United Natfons, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

T aking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council and the General Assembly, 39
and the replies contained therein, on the question of
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
region of the Middle East,
Recognizing, on the basis of the above-mentioned
reports, that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the Middle East enjoys wide support in the
region,
Mindful of the prevailing political situation in the
region and of the potential danger emanating therefrom, which would be further aggravated by the introduction of nuclear weapons in the area,
Conscious, therefore, of the need to keep the countries of the region from becorning involved in a ruinous
nuclear arms race,
Taking note of the comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects,40
prepared by the Ad Hoc Group of Qualified Govemmental Experts pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3261 F (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Recalling its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June
1968, in which it expressed the hope for the widest
possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons41 by both nuclear-weapon and
non-nuclear-weapon States,
l. Expresses the opinion that the Member States
with which the Secretary-General has consulted through
his notes verbales of 19 March 1975 and 13 June 1975
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3263 (XXIX)
should exert efforts towards the realization of the objective of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the region of the Middle East;
2. Urges all parties directly concerned to adhere to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a means of promoting this objective;
3. Recommends that the Member States referred to
in paragraph 1 above, pending the establishment of the
nuclear-weapon-free zone under an effective system of
safeguards, should:
(a) Proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain, on a reciproca! basis, from producing, acquiring or in any other way possessing nuclear
weapons and nuclear explosive devices, and from perrnitting the stationing of nuclear weapons, in their territory or the territory under their control, by any third
party;
( b) Refrain, on a reciproca! basis, from any other
action that would facilitate the acquisition, testing or
use of such weapons, or would be in any other way
detrimental to the objective of the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region under an effective system of safeguards;
4. Recommends to the nuclear-weapon States to
refrain from any action contrary to the purpose of the
present resolution and the objective of establishing, in
the region of the Middle East, a nuclear-weapon-free
39 Of/iclal Recorth o/ the Security Council, Thirtl,th Year,
Supplement for /uly, August and September 1975, documents
S/11778 and Add.1-3 and ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1975, document S/11778/Add.4; A/
10221 and Add.l and 2.
Official Records o/ the General Assembly, Thirtieth Seasion, Supplement No. 27A (A/10027/Add.1), annex l.
41 Resolution 2373 (XXll), annex.

"°

25

zone under an effective system of safeguards and to
extend their co-operation to the States of the region
in their efforts to promote this objective;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the itero entitled "Establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3475 (XXX). Prohibition of action to influence
the environment and climate for military and
other hostile purposes, which are incompatible with the maintenance of international
seeurity, human well-being and health

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 3264 (XXIX) of
9 December 1974 it requested the Conference of the
Comrnittee on Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible to achieving agreement on the text of a convention on the prohibition of action to infl.uence the environment for military and other hostile purposes,
Convinced that the conclusion of such a convention
would serve to spare mankind from the potential dangers of the use of environmental modification techniques for military and other hostile purposes, and
thereby contribute to strengthening peace and averting
the threat of war,
Convinced also that such a convention should not
affect the use of environmental modi<fication techniques
for peaceful purposes, which should contribute to the
preservation and improvetbent of the environment for
the benefit of present and future generations,
Taking into account the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament42 as it relates to this
question,
Noting with satisfaction that the delegations of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Uni¡ed
States of America submitted at the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament identical drafts of a convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques43 and
that other delegations offered suggestions and preliminary observations regarding those drafts,
1. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations, bearing in miad
existing proposals and suggestions as well as relevant
discussion by the General Assembly, with a view tb
reaching early agreement, if possible during the 1976
session of the Conference, on the text of a conventiol)
on the prohibition of military or other hostile use of en-,
vironmental modification techniques, and to submit a .
special report on the results achieved for consideration
by the Assembly at its thirty-first session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transrnit to the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the discussion by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session of the item entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate
for military and other hostile purposes, which are incompatible with the maintenance of intemational security, human well-being and health";
4 2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtleth Se6■
sion. Supplement No. 27 (A/10027).
41 Jbid., annex II, documents CCD/471 and CCD/472.
