NEW YORK

CON’IJ3WS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2366) . . . . . . . , . . , . . , . , . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
Adoption of the agenda , , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . I
Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
(II) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/lSO37);
(hl Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15099);
(e) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/lsloo,. . . , . . * *. . , . . , . . , . , , , . . . . . . , . . . , . , . . . *. . . . . * . . , . . , I. I.. *. . 1

SPV .2366

:.

,.

.:

‘/ .”

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are c~mp~xzd of o~pi:al letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol int.iic:tl.es ;I rcl’crrrrce to II. LJnited
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Qflkicrl RP~oI’~J’of the Sccitritv Cottncd. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in acccrrdance with a
system adopted in 1964, ar-e published in yearly vol~mc~ of R~.~ol~rti~n,~ clnd
DCT~.~J~LS of the S~CLWZ?YCmrwil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I Janu;u*y lW5, became fully operative
on that date.

(b

2366th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 25 May 1982, at 10.30 a.m.
Mr. LING

P~~~sident:

Qing (China).

Presenf: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
United States of
America, Zaire.

Provisional

sentatives of Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Cuba,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras, Indonesia,
Kenya, the Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Liberia,
Mexico,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay
and Venezuela to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber,

agenda (S/Agenda/2366)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Question concerning the situation in the region of
the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15037);
(b) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Panama to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15 100)
The meeting was called

to

order- at 11 .I5 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
(or) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);
(6) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15099);
cc) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representatiye of Panama to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15100)
. The PRESIDENT
(int~rpwtalhz
jbtn Chinese):
n accordance’ with decisions taken at previous
neetings on this item [2360th and 2362/d to 2364th
werings],
I invite the representative of Argentina to
ake a place at the Council table; I invite the repre-

2. The PRESIDENT
(inlerprctation
Jkm Chinese):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Chile, the Federal Republic of Germany, India, Italy
and the Netherlands in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite them
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of
procedure.

3. The PRESIDENT
(intcJ~r~~clrrtitt1 ,fiw~~r Chinrsr):
Members of the Council have before them the following
documents: Sll5lO5, containing the text of a letter
dated 24 May from the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to the Secretary-General:

CJ1s106, containing the text of a draft resolution subs/lsrO8, containing the text of a
letter dated 24 May from the representative of Brazil
to the president of the Council; and S/15110, containing the text of a letter dated 24 May from the
representative of Uruguay to the President of the
Council. Members of the Council have also received
copies of a note verbale dated 24 May from the Missions
of Argentina, Nicaragua, Panama and Venezuela to
the President of the Council [S//511/1.
mitted by ~rehd:

4. Mr. SINCLAIR (Guyana): It is with a sense of
the deepest satisfaction that my delegation welcomes
you, Sir, to the presidency of the Council for the
month of May, You could hardly have assumed this
responsibility at a more difficult time, but already we
have seen evidence of the qualities of patience, tact
and wisdom that you bring to your duties, qualities
which my delegation is confident will be conducive
to the successful discharge of your mandate.
5. My delegation must take this opportunity to pay
a well-deserved tribute to Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda,
of Zaire, who presided over the Council during a most
trying period last month. By his skilful performance,
he vindicated the highest confidence with which we
welcomed his assumption of the presidency at the
beginning of April.
6. The Council has convened at the request of the
Government of Ireland, which, in its statement issued
on 4 May 1.5’115044,(IIIIIIJX], expressed concern at what
it described as “open war” between Argentina and
the United Kingdom and at reports that hundreds of
lives had already been lost. Since that date, of
course,
the situation in the South Atlantic has deteriorated markedly. The fighting has intensified and
there have been mounting loss of life and incalculable
material losses on both sides.
7. MY Government naturally views these developments with concern and regret. We feel obliged to
voice those sentiments and to encourage a return to
the negotiating table for a settlement of the differences
between Argentina and the United Kingdom, in
accordance with Council resolution 502 (1982).
8, ‘hsiStent with the concern expressed by Ireland
both in its written statement and in its address to thd
~~unciI On 21 May [.2360rh myting], and with what
mY dehation believes to be the need of the present
moment in relations
between Argentina and the United
Kingdom, 1 shall refrain from addressing myself to the
substance of the question of the Falkland Islands
(IShs Malvinas). The concern of the Council at the
n~Ome% the immediate concern of the delegation of
Guyana, is that an end be brought to this war on the
basis which 1 have just described, a war which has
already taken such a heavy toll in human life and
human suffering and one which, furthermore, could
have been avoided,

9. 1 say that deliberately, for this is not a w;\I’ whi&
started when no one was looking. It is not a ww which
took any member of the international
community
b:
surprise, certainly not any member of the Council.
In fact, I can hardly think of a war for which the COIJ~F
cil was better prepared than it was for this one. (1~
issUed a
1 April, the President, after consultations,
statement on behalf of the members of the Council
[,734.5~/1mc~fing, pa/x. 741, calling on the two par1ic~
to refrain from the use or threat of force and to continue to search for a diplomatic solution.
IO. On 3 April, the Council made a determination
that a breach of the peace had taken place in the Fall;.
land Islands (Islas Malvinas). In full consistency with
its responsibility for maintaining peace and sec~ril!
and for preventing breaches of the peace, the Coun~~il,
in resolution 502 (1982), demanded
an immedinlc
cessation of hostilities and an immediate
Argentine
withdrawal from the islands, which its forces had
occupied on 2 April, the day following the appeal b!
the President.
Il. It is well known that Argentina did not withdrav
its troops from the islands as it was required to d0 h!
the mandatory resolution 502 (1982). In fact, after the
adoption of that resolution, the ‘Argentine
militar)
presence on the islands intensified and consolidated.
We are now witnesses to the dire consequences which
several States predicted when the Council considered
this question in the first days of April,
12. My delegation profoundly
regrets this noncompliance with resolution 502 (1982), as it does the
particular action which made adoption of that resolud
tion necessary and which is described in the second
preambular paragraph of the resolution.
That action
was in clear violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, which places an obligation on all States to
refrain from the use of force for the settlement of their
disputes, an obligatiqn to settle their disputes by
peaceful means.
13. Guyana therefore cannot accept that a State
should unilaterally resort to the use of force in order
to settle in its favour a dispute which it has with
another State. It is even more disturbing to my delegation when such a resort to force takes place even while
negotiations are in progress between the two States
concerned, as they were prior to 2 April. The peaceful
settlement of disputes between States is necessarily,
and must be seen to be, a corner-stone of the edifice
Of international relations based on the rule of taw,
which the United Nations was intended to represent
and promote. When a State chooses force instead of
negotiations to settle its dispute with another, it must
recognize that in so doing it is taking an action the
consequences of which will go far beyond the immediate issue, to affect seriously the very chances of
survival of a system of international
relations basell
on the rule of law,

agreement between them for a negotiated

solution, in
accordance with resolution 502 (19821, and with the
Charter of the United Nations. My delegation would
like to pay special tribute to the Secretary-General
for
his untiring commitment
to that cause, for his patience
and his fortitude. We take this opportunity to reiterate
to you, Mr. Secretary-General,
our continuing support
and co-operation.

14. The world in the 1980s is characterized by an
already appalling number of situations of conflict and
instability and by the increase and intensification
of
international
disputes of one sort or another. Within
this very hemisphere there are several other disputes
awaiiting solution; there are controversies awaiting
solution. Some, of late, are already appearing to
assume ominous characteristics. The action of 2 April
is even being held aloft as an example to be emulated
or alt least imitated. If actions such as this were to
appear to be condoned or were to be passed over in
silence, what must those States expect which are
parties to disputes or controversies with others, particularly those which find themselves in positions of
military disadvantage? What must we expect?

19. The Secretary-General
reported last Friday that
his efforts did not offer any present prospect of
bringing an end to the crisis. Yet his report described
progress over a quite substantial number of areas. In
my delegation’s
view, there is still a role for the
Secretary-General
in helping to structure a framework
for a negotiated solution in the South Atlantic in
accordance with resolution 502 (1982).

15. In taking this stand against the resort to force in
disruption of the processes for peaceful settlement of
disputes between
States, I am being faithful to and
consistent with a position which Guyana has firmly
and unequivocally
advocated in the past. Before the
Council took up this present question, we defended
this position on the occasion of the Council’s consideration of the complaint which Iraq had brought
against Israel. On that occasion I said that States
Memlbers of the United Nations had committed themselves to abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force.
More recently, in a warning expressed in the course
of our consideration
of the complaint
brought by
Nicaragua, I recalled to the Council that the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accorldance with the Charter of the United Nations,
contained in General Assembly
resolution
2625
(XXV), had also set forth the principle that States
shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security are not endangered.

20. My delegation deplores the loss of young lives
which has followed from non-compliance
with resolution 502 (1982) and, with the fullest and most complete
sincerity, expresses the hope that even at this late
stage Argentina may be persuaded of the wisdom of
compliance with that resolution, so that this matter
may be removed from the snowy and rain-soaked field
of battle and returned, with befitting statesmanship,
to the conference table where it so rightfully belongs.
21. My delegation therefore supports the idea that
the Cpuncil should now give a formal mandate to the
Secretary-General
to resume his contacts with the two
parties with a view to securing an early, just and
lasting peace between Argentina and the United Kingdom. In expressing such support, my delegation is
encouraged by the assurances by both Argentina and
the United Kingdom given in the Council last Friday
[ihid.] of their continuing will to negotiate. It therefore behoves the Council immediately
to give the
necessary mandate to the Secretary-General
to resume
his efforts with the two parties, always on the basis
of resolution 502 (1982). My delegation pledges its
fullest support to these efforts,

16. Guyana believes in the &ential
and continuing
validity for the international community as a whole
of’ the principle that aggression shall not be rewarded.
We heave to insist on that validity whenever that
principle is called into question,

22. Mr,
FwML’~):

AMEGA
(Togo)
fitrtc~/.pr,Ptrrrion ,fhm
The famous nineteenth-century
historian
Karl von Clausewitz, who is still the leading war
theoretician,
wrote in his analysis, which seems to
continue to influence our thinking today, that “what
justifies war in the eyes of reason is the extent of the
sacrifices it imposes. Therefore war must be waged
totally and we must be ready to surpass the enemy in
our capacity
to make sacrifices.”
This warlike
theory cannot, of course, commend itself to us.

17. Yet, whatever the first cause, the fact is there is
an ugly war in progress in the South Atlantic, and
Guyana would like to see a speedy end to that state
of war. My delegation would like to express its appreciation to the Governments of the United States and
Peru for their valiant efforts carried out both before
and during the war. Theirs were efforts expended in
the name of peace, and they deserve our recognition.

23. But, unfortunately,
we are confronted with a
phenomenon
which corroborates
this theory and
which reflects this warlike spirit. Indeed, since the
outbreak of hostilities,
the Members of the United
Nations in general, and the members of the Security
Council in particular,
have been receiving almost
every day reports from the warring States about the
damage inflicted upon the adversary, as if each of

18. My delegation would like to make particular
mention of the role played by the Secretary-General.
We listened very carefully to the report which he
presented to the Council last Friday [236&h wec~ti~~g],
detailing his tireless efforts to keep open the lines of
commumication between the two parties and to secure
3

framework of provisional measures.
GnlY :tftcr ”
Thr
cease-fire can negotiations continue
nornj:tllY*
cease-fire should be followed by the witbdruwuf
‘If
the troops of the two warring States and the taFing
over of the administration of the islands bY the Utlttcd
Nations on an interim basis.

them wanted to prove the magnitude of “its SaCritices” or those imposed on the other side. MY

delegation would have preferred there to be no OCC8sion for such reports.
24. The state of war which now prevails in the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) entails considerable sacrifices
on both sides, War has a demographic effect, because
there is no armed conflict that does not cause loss of
life. Indeed, my delegation deplores the considerable
loss of life caused by the most recent developments in
the conflict. War is also a phenomenon with economic
effect, because there is no war that does not use
n?~/tc%rl or money. “To wage war”, Marshal de
Saxe stated, “you need three things: first, money;
secondly,
money; and thirdly, money.”

30. In casting, on 3 April, a vote in f~tv~~ur of resohl*
tion 502 (l982), my delegation made it clear t@t its
position in no way prejudged the substat\co
of the
qllestion, The question shout,1 i><>cxamincd
in itcc0rJ*
of the Gcncral
ante with the relevant resolutions
Assembly.
31, In the present circumstances, the Council mttst
essentially concern itself with the mcasuros it is aPPl-o*
priate to take to put an end to the present conflict.
My delegation continues to believe that the two Parties
must do everything possible to settle the problem of
substance that is at issue between them by Po’tceful
means and in compliance with the provisions
of the
Charter.

2.5. In this period of crisis, when all States are facing
a very serious economic situation in their efforts to
meet the needs of their peoples, it is absurd for
resources to be mobilized and wasted on war, a war
whose only merit is to remind us once again of the
folly of which man is capable,

32. From that standpoint, the Secretary-Gcner:ll
will
have a primary role to play. He has already suff?cientlY
demonstrated that that is true, and his great diplomatic
talents should encourage the Council to entrust to him
a mandate for the continuation of the negotiations
upon which he has embarked.

26. The Council, in its wisdom, has appealed to the
two parties for moderation, but the voice of wisdom
has not succeeded in halting the momentum of this
war, whose consequences are incalculable. In view
of the escalation of the conflict, and in an attempt to
avoid the worst, the Council adopted resolution 502
(1982). By voting in favour of that resolution, the
delegation of Togo wished once again to demonstrate
its attachment to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Togo, a peace-loving country, cannot
agree that violence should be allowed to be elevated
to the status of a political system in relations between
nations. The violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of
the Charter, which states that Members of the
Organization “shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force”, will always
be condemned by my country, whichever country
may commit such a violation and whatever reasons
or motives may be invoked,

WOUM
33. From that standpoint, too, my delegation
like to recall that the settlement of the crisis should
proceed from the application of the following
measures already set forth in the proposal of 15 April of
the President of the Togolese Republic:
first, a Security Council decision calling for an immediate
ceasefire and the resumption of negotiations by the Secretary-General; secondly, the withdrawal of Argentine
troops in accordance with Council resolution
502
(1982) and the return of the naval forces of the United
Kingdom to their base; thirdly, the setting up on the
islands of an interim United Nations administration;
fourthly, continuation of negotiations under the aegis
of the United Nations in order that agreement
may be
reached between the parties on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resohttions.

27. That is why my Government is profoundly concerned by the situation which currently prevails in the
South Atlantic, a situation created by the invasion of
the Falkland/Malvinas
Islands on 2 April, which
recalls the distressing precedent of January 1833.

34. It is imperative that the Council,
Whose chief
function is maintaining peace, discharge its responsibilities and adopt measures that could put an end to
this war which could have been avoid&.
The two
Parties, both of which are disposed to negotiate,
must
combine their efforts to restore and consolidate
peace
between their two peoples.

28. In the face of the gravity of these events the
Secretary-General had no hesitation in undertaking
negotiations with the parties to try to persuade them
to behave more nobly. In this regard, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay him a well-deserved
tribute for his efforts to settle this crisis.

35- In this regard, I wish to quote Genera] Gnassingbe Eyadema, President of the Togolose Republic,
Ori the subject of peace between the nations of the
world:

29. Those efforts should be continued until the conflict has finally been settled. In this context the Council should put into effect the relevant provisions of
the Charter, particularly those contained in Article 40. and Call for an immediate cease-fire within the

“The Togolese People ardently wish for peace
and Progress for itself and for all other nations.
4

“This peace must be a genuine one and promote
the effective emancipation of our various nations.
That is why Togo, in the face of the disarray of our
times and the threat to international equilibrium, has
always advocated recourse to fraternal dialogue
anld Iasting efforts in the search for peace and just
solutions to the tragic conflicts which are convulsing
our world and every day causing loss of human
life.”
36. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Mr. President, I have
on previous occasions expressed my delegation’s
deep appreciation of your consummate wisdom in
your presidency of the Council during many arduous
meetings, both informally
and at formal sessions,
during this trying month in which the turn of events
regarding the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) has
plunged two friendly countries into a full-fledged war.
37. My delegation can hardly overstate its deep
apprelciation of the Herculean efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the judicious manner in which he has
so assiduously striven over weeks to avert the tragic
conflict now raging in the South Atlantic and to
achieve a just, honourable and peaceful solution which
would have spared us profound anguish at the tragic
loss of life on both sides and the shattered longstandi:ng friendship between the two parties to the
dispute.
38. The report of the Secretary-General to the Council on 21 May [ihiu’.], in which he stated his inability
to facilitate an agreement between the Argentine
Republic and the United Kingdom, is ample testimony
not only to his dedicated exertions but also to the
substantial
progress he had succeeded in forging
between the two parties on the basis of Council resolution 5012 (1982), which continues to be the only viable
framework for a peaceful solution consonant with the
Purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the imperatives of international
!aw.
39. But it takes two sides to reach an agreement and,
n the final stages of the mediation efforts, a confluence
>f views between the two parties, having agreed on
almost 70 per cent of the basic issues-that may be
:ontested,
though it is my assessment-proved
voefully wanting. Time was running out, and the
nission had to be aborted even though, with a greater
degree ‘of mutual confidence and goodwill, the last
nile towards agreement might have been overcome,
s the report of the Secretary-General so frustratingly
eve&.
There is almost a consensus that the war,
which involves no vital interests for either party-the
Glands are certainly not the fabled Treasure Island of
lhich we read at school-but
subjective questions of
rinciple compounded by ever-heightening emotions
lhich
armed confrontation
and actual combat
tevitably
engender, had a momentum
of its own
‘hich overrode all goodwill efforts.

40. For over a week the Council has been engaged in
a marathon debate which has unleashed deep emotions but has not contributed substantially to a cessation of hostilities or made the elements arising out of
resolution 502 (1982) any easier to implement without
prejudice to the claims and counter-claims of the two
Parties to the conflict. It is a sad reflection on human
nature, the psyche which regrettably plays such a
vital role in relations among nations. It should also
send an ominous signal to the whole world that even
seemingly surmountable differences over seemingly
peripheral issues can relegate rational diplomacy to the
realm of arms. This is ominous indeed and should be
an eye-opener in this contemporary, dangerous and
volatile world.
41. We often console ourselves with the knowledge
that, despite the advent of the nuclear age, the world
has so far averted a terminal conflagration. Indeed it
has, and yet, since the Second World War, the world
has seen 130 regional wars, which have brought
incalculable casualties, suffering and devastation to
almost all continents, not least the region of the Middle
East, from which I hail.
42. If this stark fact teaches us anything it certainly
should teach us to tackle simmering issues in a timely
and dynamic manner before they erupt. That at least
would give us a better chance to avert the kind of
tragedy that we are witnessing today. Regrettably,
international
diplomacy is only asked to bring its
weight to bear after the momentous events have
occurred and gathered their own self-generating
momentum, and not before. Indeed, as a member of
the Security Council I became aware of the conflict
the night before the armed conflict and the seizure of
the islands occurred. Silenced guns do not mean that
potentially explosive conflicts are not still simmering.
43. At this belated stage in discharging our responsibilities, it is an exercise in futility to cry over spilled
milk. The Council’s renewed thrust should be to give
a formal new mandate to the Secretary-General to
endeavour to secure compliance with the basic
elements of resolution 502 (1982) through resumed
peaceful negotiations, which would and should at this
stage include the new elements which have given the
conflict its new and dangerous dimensions, with
enormous ramifications not only for the two parties
to the dispute but for the whole world. His mandate
should include securing the cessation of active
hostilities at the earliest practicable date. This would
be a prelude to the full implementation
of resolution 502 (1982), taking into account subsequent
developments.
44. Armed seizures must not be rewarded. My country and people have been a foremost victim of disregard of that cardinal principle, all the more reprehensible coming as it does after the declaration of
the Charter and the creation of the United Nations,
which are predicated on that principle.

45. My delegation
reiterates its fidelity to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, including the
non-use of force in the settlement of disputes. That
applies in equal measure to the events before the
armed seizure of the islands in early April and to the
subsequent developments
which have intensified the
armed conflict,
46. The Council should not resign itself to the role of
an onlooker when blood is being shed. A cessation of
hostilities does not prejudice the rights and claims of
the parties to the dispute, which could be resolved by
peaceful means.
47. Jordan’s position,
expressed in various international forums,
on the substance of the dispute
remains unchanged, as enunciated in my statement in
the Council on 3 April [235&h ntc~~ina]. It also remains
unchanged in its rejection of the use of force in settling
disputes among nations,
48. The PRESIDENT
(it?fP~p~~~tatiorFfir>nr Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
49. Mr. SCHEZTEMA
(Netherlands): Mr. President,
first of all 1 should like to express my appreciation to
you and the other members of the Council for allowing
me to make a statement in this debate, upon instructions from my Government.
I should also like to take
this opportunity to express my satisfaction at seeing
you presiding over the Council’s deliberations during
this month.
50. The Netherlands
has been prompted to speak in
this debate by its concern about the rapid worsening
of the crisis around the Falkland Islands. During the
last few days, the hostilities between the British and
Argentine armed forces have sharply intensified, as a
result of which the death toll on both sides has risen
further. This adds to the already too long and tragic
casualty list of both British and Argentine men which
was the result of fighting during the earlier stages of
the conflict. The Netherlands Government is seriously
concerned about this turn of events and its potentially
grave and wide-ranging
consequences. What started
out as a territorial
dispute between two States may
have unintended negative implications for the deep
and many-sided relations between continents. At the
same time, the rule of law must be upheld and States
Members of the United Nations must abide by their
commitment
to resolve their disputes by peaceful
means.
51. My Government
deeply deplores the fact that
one party to the conflict failed to avail itself of the
mechanism for peaceful settlement of conflicts provided for in the Charter. For many years, the question
of the Falkland Islands has been an item on the agenda
of the General Assembly. The Netherlands abstained
in the voting on General Assembly resolution 31/49

because insufficient account was taken of the wishes
of the islands’ population,
but Argentina voted in
favour of that hitherto last pronouncement
on the
substance of the issue, in which the Assembly also
called upon the two parties “to refrain from taking
decisions that would imply introducing
unilateral
modifications
in the situation while the islands are
going through the process recommended in the abovementioned resolutions”.
The latter reference applied
to the request made earlier that both sides expedite
the negotiations concerning the dispute over sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. Argentina’s invasion of the islands in pursuit of its claim ran counter
to this appeal by the world community.
Its resort to
armed force cannot, in the opinion of my Government,
be justified in terms of international law. Therefore,
together with its partners in the European Community,
the Netherlands
deeply deplored the Argentine
action,

i
:

52. In its resolution 502 (t982), the Council laid the
basis for a peaceful solution to the conflict. Both
Argentina and the United Kingdom
subsequently
stated that the text of that resolution must be read as
an integrated whole and that each one of its provisions
was to be complied with. It was a cause for serious
regret, therefore,
that efforts at mediation
from
various sides remained inconclusive. In this regard,
1 shouId like to express in, particular our admiration
to the Secretary-General
for his tenacious and imaginative attempt to arrive at a compromise
and for
his willingness to remain available for further negotiations.
53. In the present situation, the Netherlands GOVernment wishes to appeal to both sides to make a fresh
attempt at a negotiated
solution based on resolution SO2 (1982). We urge them to cease hostilities and
to resume their talks, through the intermediary of the
Secretary-General
or through other channels, on the
future status of the Falkland Islands. Only a peaceful
settlement of this conflict can lead the way to a reconciliation between the two hlember countries of the
United Nations.
54. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
,fiwm Chirresc~:
The next speaker is the representative of Chile. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
55. Mr. TRUCCO (Chile) (i/Zfelp!YYt<lti0/7 jh/F? Spanish): Today, 25 May, the Argentine nation is celebrating
one more anniversary of its national independence.
It should be recalled that Argentines and Chileans
participated
together in the entire effort to achieve
emancipation.
It is a pleasure for me, in commemorating that event, to express to the Argentine Republic, through its Minister
for Foreign Affairs, our
cordial and fraternal greetings.
56.
Mr.

I should like at the outset to express to YOU.
President,
the representative
of a great and

I

C
a

6
s

friendly nation of age-old culture and wisdom, with
which my own country has established and strengthened strong ties of understanding and fruitful diplomatic, cultural and commercial relations, our most
sincere congratulations
and wishes for success in
fulfillling the delicate responsibilities
placed on your
shoulders. I also wish to express our appreciation for
the skilful way in which the presidency was exercised
last rnonth by our distinguished friend, Mr. Kamanda
wa K.amanda, of Zaire, who discharged that responsibility in an outstanding manner in very difficult circumstances.

lowing the development of certain problems in order
to succeed in controlling them properly while there is
still a chance to do so, while they are still at the stage
of negotiations, of inquiry, of mediation, of arbitration,
of judicial settlement or of other peaceful means
provided by the Charter and in numerous international
agreements?
66. Would it not be possible, within the tasks undertaken by our active and experienced
SecretaryGeneral, to seek a means for providing assistance in
these differences, disputes, controversies and negotiations, which have not been resolved by existing
treaties, while they are still in their embryonic or
developing stages‘?

57. More than seven weeks have gone by since
the lCouncil adopted resolution 502 (1982), which
demanded an immediate cessation of hostilities and
the withdrawal of all Argentine forces from the Malvinas’ Islands and called on the parties to seek a diplomatic solution to their differences and to respect fully
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
58.

67. Experience should have already taught us full
well that a limit exists beyond which a thousand
diabolic factors scheme to confuse minds and lead to
the abyss.
68. Responsibility
for what has occurred will unfortunately always rest with the Security Council, since,
pursuant to the Charter, the Council is the ultimate
forum to put an end to situations that endanger
international
peace and security, notwithstanding
the
fact that the Council finds itself doomed to be what
a writer has described as “one of the first victims of
disagreement between East and West”, which has
caused it to lack the coercive authority originally
granted it in Article 43 of the Charter.

That resolution has not yet been heeded.

59. Nor did the difficult task undertaken during the
early weeks by the Secretary of State of the United
States, at the request and with the consent of the
parties, yield any results.
60. The friendly and noble personal initiative of the
President
of Peru, Mr. Fernando Belahnde, also
met with insurmountable obstacles.

69. In these specific circumstances, it is our faithful
commitments
to the solemn pledges we made as
Member States that must be the sole guarantee of
peace in the world.

6 I. The tireless efforts undertaken with exemplary
self-sacrifice, wisdom, intelligence and fortitude by
the Secretary-General have had to be suspended.
62. At the outset of my comments, I would recall
that Chile voted in favour of each of the three resolutions that the General Assembly has adopted on the
question of the Malvinas Islands: resolutions 2065 (XX)
of 16 December 196.5, 3160 (XXVIII)
of 14 December
1973 and 31/49 of 1 December 1976.

70. I am referring to the obligations assumed under
Article 1; Article 2, paragraphs 3 and 4; and Chapter VI of the Charter, on the peaceful settlement of
disputes. It is also fitting to recall that as recently as
March 1982 the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the
Role of the Organization
unanimously
adopted the
draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement of
international disputes. I should like to quote just two
paragraphs from part I of that draft declaration. Paragraph 2 states:

63. Those three resolutions determined that what
was :at issue was a dispute over sovereignty, urged
the parties to find a peaceful solution to the problem,
bearing in mind the purposes and principles of the
Charter and asked that they refrain from taking decisions that would introduce unilateral modifications in
the siituation.

“Every State shall settle its international
disputes exclusively by peaceful means in such a
manner that international
peace and security, and
justice, are not endangered.“’

64. Following more than 15 years of diplomatic negotiations-which
is one of the means for a peaceful
settlement reflected in Article 33 of the Charter-between the Governments of Argentina and the United
Kingdom,
that process was abruptly interrupted and
there occurred events that today are a source of concern to the Council and of anguish to world opinion
at large.

Paragraph

13 says that:

“Neither the existence of a dispute nor the failure
of a procedure of peaceful settlement of disputes
shall permit the use of force or threat of force by
any of the States parties lo the dispute.“’
71. I have referred to the possibilities offered us by
the provisions of the Charter and other international

65. Does this not indicate a serious weakness in our
system, a weakness that prevents us from closely fol7

agreements on the peaceful settlement of disputes
because I firmly believe that by their enhancement,
by the establishment of a stronger link between them
and the ongoing action of the United Nations, we may
find the means, perhaps the only means, to help the
Council to resolve these situations which frequently
take us by surprise and prevent it from acting, because
remedies, when they do exist, are late in coming. The
concern is valid, and several distinguished
ambassadors, among whom I recall the representative
of
Mexico and the representative
of the United States,
have in this forum quite rightly considered the persistence in our hemisphere of certain disputes that,
if not resolved by peaceful means we have committed
ourselves to use, would endanger the peace of the
continent and relations among the Latin American
republics.

78. Italy has always been in favour of a negotiated
solution to the Anglo-Argentine
dispute and has constantly supported the efforts of the United Nations to
that end. In this spirit, Italy voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 3160 (XXVIII)
of 14 December
1973.
79. The Italian Government has taken a clear stand
on the events which have led to the present tragic
conflict. The decision of the Argentine Government
to resort to armed force to support its claims represents, in our view, a violation of the obligation,
enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of
the United Nations, to refrain from using force in
international
relations. The Italian Government is
deeply convinced that observance of this principle is
essential. Equally essential, in our opinion, is observance of the principle that international disputes shall
be settled by peaceful means in such a manner as not
to endanger international
peace and security, and
justice. Non-compliance
with these principles can
result only in the most serious consequences, to the
detriment of the harmonious development of international relations.

72. Lastly, I should like to repeat that my country
and my Government, in accordance with its desire for
peace, considers as an unalterable principle of its international policy rejection of the use of force as a means
for settling disputes or differences between States.
Chile views with the greatest concern the development of a dispute which is corroding the West and
endangering continental and world peace.

80. In that spirit, the Italian Government has supported in its entirety Council resolution 502 (1982),
which calls for cessation of hostilities, withdrawal of
all Argentine forces and a diplomatic solution to the
differences between Argentina and the United Kingdom, in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter. The resolution reflects the basic
conditions
for the re-establishment
of peaceful
international
relations,

73. As has been reiterated by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chile in a statement made on 10 May, Chile
maintains strict neutrality
in this conflict, which
invoIves two great nations whose friendship and cooperation form part of our tradition and our history.
Chile will always be prepared to associate itself with
any action likely to overcome the present crisis and
hopes that the peace initiatives now being taken will
be welcomed, especially the appeals formulated
by
His Holiness Pope John Paul II.

81. Full support was also given by Italy to the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General
to promote a
negotiated solution to the conflict. His endeavours,
carried out with the utmost skill and tenacity, though
unsuccessful, achieved important results which fully
maintain their value.

74. Of course, Chile, through me, offers the Secretary-General its full co-operation so that, pursuant to
the mandate which we hope will be conferred upon
him by the Council, he may continue the difficult task
of leading the parties towards negotiations in which
the world and our continent may honourably be spared
an irreparable tragedy. For that patient and noble
effort, he is particularly suited.

82. The President of the Italian Republic, interpreting
the feelings of the entire Italian people, has addressed
a message to the Secretary-General,
expressing
praise and full support for the efforts that he made
with such perseverance
and determination,
and
encouraging him not to discontinue them.

75. The PRESIDENT
(illte,pl.Ptation~~on~
Chitww):
The next speaker is the representative of Italy. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

83. The Anglo-Argentine
conflict has already caused
serious Ioss of human lives. Italy follows with anguish
and grief this tragic situation which confronts two
countries linked to us by strong ties. The United Kingdom, on the one hand, is a friendly and allied country
with which we entertain close co-operation. On the
other hand, profound bonds of blood and culture exist
between Italy and Argentina, while Latin America in
its entirety is a region to which my country feels
deeply akin and attaches particular importance in the
context of its international
relations.

76. Mr. LA ROCCA (Italy): I should like to offer you
my congratulations,
Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May and to
extend to you my warmest wishes for success in your
high office.
77. Italy has asked to be allowed to participate in this
debate because my country is deeply concerned about
and affected by the grave crisis which confronts us.

84. The Italian Government,
while confirming
its
belief that resolution 502 (1982) should be fully imple8

mented, is prepared to support any initiative for an
immediate cease-fire to prevent any further bloodshed. My Government believes that, on the basis of the
significant results already achieved through his
previous attempt, the Secretary-General is in the best
position to be entrusted with the task of resuming his
efforts aimed at a peaceful solution to the conflict.
85. The PRESIDENT
(intcrprcturion
.fio/n Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement,
86. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): I have already had an
opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the prlesidency of the Council for the month of
May. Our confidence in your stewardship has been
further strengthened
by the exemplary manner in
which you have guided the affairs of the Council this
month. I am grateful to you and the other members of
the Council for facilitating our participation
now in
this important debate.
87. It was only a Few days ago, when I was addressing
the Council in connection with the consideration of
the report of the Commission of Inquiry on the mercenary aggression against Seychelles, that I had occasion to refer to the dramatic and critical times through
which we are now passing. I ventured to express the
hope that the efforts of the Secretary-General
might
yet be able to stave off the eruption of a wider conflict
in the South Atlantic and to facilitate the search for a
negotiated peaceful settlement. It now transpires that
even as I was speaking the Secretary-General’s
efforts were, alas, coming to an end and the stage was
being set for a hardening of positions and the extension
of hostilities on a scale larger and more destructive
than before.
88. The question of the Malvinas is an unfortunate
legacy of the Ipast. It cannot be allowed to fester for
ever, embittering
relations between two responsible
and friendly Member States of the international community and endangering peace and security in the
South Atlantic, with potential danger to world peace
and stability.
89. Numerous
General Assembly resolutions have
urged an early settlement of the dispute through
peaceful negotiation
between the two parties. Nonaligned countries,
in their declarations adopted at
their ministerial
conferences and summits ever since
the Conferenc’e of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned
Countries held in Lima in 197.5, have,
while fully supporting the restitution to Argentina of
these islands, reiterated the call for the speeding up
of peaceful negotiations between the United Kingdom
and Argentina. Against this background, it is a matter
for profound regret and concern that the dialogue
between the two sides should have dragged on, that
there should have been resort to the use of force in
an effort to resolve the dispute, that the talks under

the good offices of the Secretary-General should have
broken down, that an armed conflict should now be
raging, to the detriment of the interests of both parties,
and that the world community
should be helpless
spectators of a deepening tragedy.
90. From the very onset of this distressing crisis, the
Government of India has underscored the need to
eschew violence and the use of force and to return to
the conference table. Since then, over the last few
weeks, we have watched with increasing dismay, bordering on alarm, the heightening of tensions and the
escalation of the conflict. The people and the Government of India have the friendliest of relations with
both the United Kingdom and the Argentine Republic.
The destruction and mounting loss of innocent lives,
most of them young, which both countries have suffered, and are continuing to suffer as every hour passes
and the fighting continues, have deeply pained us. It is
our earnest hope that it may yet be possible to avert
what threatens to be a perilous slide to a bigger catastrophe and to stop further bloodshed. We appeal to
both Governments to stop the clash of arms and to
turn back to the path of dialogue.
91, At a moment like this it is important that nothing
should be said or done which could exacerbate
tensions and further inflame passions. Friends of
both Governments will do them and the cause of peace
the greatest service if they exert their energy and
effort to encourage both parties to resume negotiations.
92. The Secretary-General
provides an appropriate
channel for this purpose. We have watched with
admiration his patient, untiring and quiet endeavours to bring the two parties together and to evolve a
framework within which the search for a peaceful
settlement could go forward. His dedication and his
indefatigable determination deserve our sincere commendation.
From his statement to the Council
[236&h nwcting],
it has become clear that differences
between the two sides had been considerably narrowed when, sadly, the process had to be interrupted.
We share the sentiment expressed by many speakers
in this debate that this process should be resumed
without any delay. The Council must reinforce the
hands of the Secretary-General
with a renewed
mandate to pursue his efforts.
93. The United Nations and the Security Council
have a tremendous responsibility in the face of the
grave developments of the last few weeks. The Council must not only express its serious concern but act
purposefully in support of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, to restore peace
and to assist in the peaceful resolution of the dispute.
Resolution 502 (1982), which neither Government has
disavowed, points the way. The Secretary-General
has declared his willingness to remain available to
both sides. The Council must find the means to
persuade both Argentina and the United Kingdom to

re-engage in the dialogue
General.

through

declaration, which 1 shall read verbatim
concludes my statement, is as follows:

the Secretary-

94. We are aware that mutual suspicion and mistrust
have beclouded the atmosphere,
Nevertheless,
this
armed confrontation and senseless killing cannot go
on. We appeal to both Argentina and the United
Kingdom to put away their fears and doubts and the
weapons of war and to seek a diplomatic solution to
the dispute. We hope that both Governments can find
the necessary faith to do so in the very righteousness
of their respective causes. The support and solidarity
of their peoples in this hour of trial should give them
the confidence not to wage war but to seek peace and
to strive for a solution. The worId looks to them for a
display of the highest statesmanship,
which we know
can be found in the best of their own respective
histories and traditions. This tragic conflict, which
should never have arisen, must end, and end now.

and which

“We the Ministers for External Relations of
Argentina, Nicaragua, Panama and Venezuela, who
are attending the present series of meetings of the
Security Council of the United Nations on the
‘Question concerning the situation in the region of
the Malvinas (Falkland) Islands’, have deemed il
desirable to make the following declaration to the
Council:
” 1. We confirm the rejection by Latin America
of the United Kingdom’s military offensive against
the South American continent and express, unequivocally and firmly, the desire of our peoples
for peace and the hope that it may materialize as a
result of an effective decision by the Council.
“2.

We strongly protest against the British decicommunicated to the Government of
Uruguay, to the effect that )he United Kingdom has
decided to extend its naval and air military action
to the River Plate. This deplorable decision, in
addition to violating general international
law and
the River Plate Treaty,? carries the British agression into the very heart of the continent, since it
ignores all the legal, historical and geographical
reasons which confer on the River Plate the same
status as attaches to jurisdiction
on land. This
directly affects the integrity and security of Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay, while at the
same time aggravating and spreading the conflict
which has resulted from the United Kingdom’s
belligerent adventure.

95. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (intPlp~Ptation
jwn
Spuzish): Interpreting the feelings of the Latin American peoples and countries, which are aware of the
importance of liberty in the world, Panama would like
to pay a tribute of admiration,
respect and affection
to the great Argentine nation on this day, 25 May,
when it celebrates the glorious anniversary
of its
revolution, which traced the promising
pafh of its
national independence.

sion, officially

96. We should like to pay a tribute to the heroes of
Argentine emancipation,
and also to the men and
women of the fertile soil of San Martin, Alberdi and
Sarmiento, who are so valiantly fighting today in
defence of the dignity and territorial integrity of their
country and of the great ideals of humanity, for the
eradication of colonialism
from the world and, within
the context of Latin America, against foreign domination in all its forms and manifestations,

“3. We reject with righteous indignation
the
decision taken by the European Economic Community, with the honourable exception of Ireland
and Italy, extending
indefinitely
the economic
aggression which, under the pretext of ‘sanctions’.
has been imposed on Argentina. This act, which is
offensive to the whole of Latin America, constitutes
a serious threat to international peace and security,
and presages the generalization of a conflict which,
day by day, is assuming the character of an intercontinental confrontation.

97. We have f&h in the victory of the Argentine
people in the absurd and anachronistic
colonial war
launched against it by the United Kingdom,
a war
which, having broken out, warrants the condemnation
of those peoples that believe in the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
98. The struggles, grief and sacrifices of the heroic
Argentine people make that nation greater and give
new direction to Latin America,

“4. We note with alarm that, although a number
of weeks have elapsed since the beginning of the
British fleet’s armed attack on the Argentine
Republic, the Security Council has taken no action
to achieve the re-establishment of peace, This concern is seriously increased by the fact that, after
four days of debate in the Council [2360th tr/~!
2%2nd to 2364th mcvtings], during which both the
fighting and the loss of life have intensified, it has
not proved possible to respond to the outcry of
mankind, which demands an unconditional
ceasefire and vigorous action for peace, for which purpose
it is essential to give the Secretary-General
a
mandate.

99. We express the wish for peace, prosperity and
progress for that fraternal people and we request their
distinguished Foreign Minister,
Mr. Nicanor Costa
Mindez, to transmit our congratulations
to the Government of President Leopoldo
Galtieri
and the
valiant people of Argentina.
100. To set the matter on record, I should like to
read a declaration which was made yesterday by foul
Latin American Foreign Ministers and which is connected with the subject which we are considering. The
IO

-

“It is ulrgently necessary for the Security Council, whose duty is to ensure the peace of the world,
to take the necessary action to halt this belligerent
escalation, We cannot continue to regard with
indifference the course of events which are jeopardizing the future of mankind.”
[S//S///, r/nn~~.r.]

escalated by stages, grievance being deeply felt on
one side, defence of principle on the other. Now both
sides are locked in dangerous combat. and all of us,
sensing the wider dangers, are deeply apprehensive.
I IO. Each of us no doubt has his own view of who
was right and who was wrong at each successive stage
in this escalation from dispute to conflict to war. But
few nations here, if they look to their own tragedies
and failures, are entitled to be self-righteous. What
we must ask ourselves now, rather, is what we as a
Council can do collectively
to offer both sides in the
present conflict a way out of the combat in which they
are locked.

101, The declaration is signed by Nicanor Costa
Mindez, Minister for External Relations of Argentina;
Miguel D’Escoto, Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua; Jorge Illueca, Minister for External Relations of Panama; and Jo& Albert0 Zambrano Velasco,
Minister for External Relations of Veiiezuela.
102. Mr. DORR (Ireland): I am speaking at this stage
to introduce to the Council the draft resolution circulated last night as document S/ 15106.

II 1. The only rational way out is a return to negotiation, provided of course that it is negotiation which
will neither betray the principles which one side is
defending at great cost nor ignore the sense of grievance which the other has felt for many years. That is
the sole purpose of our draft resolution. We have
sought to achieve such a return to negotiation by careful stages, which would build up more confidence at
each stage, Our draft resolution in fact envisages three
stages in the effort to bring the fighting finally to an
end, to get the Secretary-General’s
negotiations back
on the rails and give them new authority.

103. When I spoke in the Council on Friday last
[ZS6Uth /ncc~li~g], I described the war in the South
Atlantic as the war that should not have happened.
I said further that I believed someone must shout
“Stop!”
104. It was in order to offer the Council a way to do
that, a way that we hoped both sides might be ready
to accept, that Ireland decided to submit a draft resolution on Monday evening, three days after our debate
began.

112. The first step, we believe, would have to be
taken by the parties themselves. They must be ready
to stop active hostilities for a limited period in the first
instance. If they are not ready to do that. we fear
that little else can be done. In operative paragraph 3
of our draft resolution we propose a period of 72 hours,
and we call this a suspension of hostilities. This does
not mean that is all we are proposing, nor, of course,
does it mean that after that short period the fighting
would resume. What we want is a short pause, enough
to start a process, to build a very minimum of confidence and to arrange the details of a more lasting
cease-fire.

105. Already, on many previous occasions as the
tragic conflict grew and developed, we had tried to
say “Stop!” while at the same time-and
this is very
important-upholding
the principles
already laid
down by the Council itself as well as the basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
106. We began trying to say “Stop!”
on 1 April,
together with other members of the Council, when we
called on both parties not to use force to settle an old
dispute [2345th meeti/~g]. We continued on 2 and
3 April [2349th rind 2350th mwtitqs],
when we
criticized Argentina for using force in spite of this.
We warned of the danger of further conflict, and we
voted for resolution 502 (1982).

113. This pause would lead into a second stage. It
would be at that second stage-that
of a more permanent cease-fire-that
the Secretary-General
would
begin to come back into the picture. That is the
meaning of operative
paragraph 4 of our draft
resolution.

107. In various ways since then, Ireland, like others,
has continued to say “Stop! Do not let it lead to war.
Let there be a diplomatic solution.” But war it is.

114. During the 72-hour period, while the parties
suspended fighting,
he would enter into urgent
contacts with both sides to try to work out by agreement the practical problems of a lasting cease-fire. We
well know that there are such problems, and we do
not think that they can be ignored.

108. A century ago war was described as the extension of politics by other means. Today that definition
does not hold. War is now always the failure of politics. In our time we have evolved methods and principles which, though still imperfect, allow for the
settlement of international
disputes peacefully. And
the Charter commits us all to using those methods,
to following those principles and to avoiding the use
of force.

11.5. At this second stage, for example, there may be
need for arrangements for a limited withdrawal to
prevent a breach of the cease-fire. The question of
resupply of forces may arise; questions would also
arise as to naval vessels in the area. In our view, this
would be the right moment to re-involve the Secretary-General. His role in the first instance would be to

109. The war over the Falklands/Malvinas
is thus a
failure of politics and a failure of negotiation, It has
11

help the parties to work out practical problems on the
ground on a mutually acceptable basis. This could
help to build confidence and to prepare the way for
the later use of the good offices referred to in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution. At this second
stage, we have also envisaged as a possibility the idea
that United Nations observers might be stationed with
the forces on either side to monitor the cease-fire.
This very minimum involvement of the United Nations
could be a beginning and a preparation for a larger
United Nations presence on the islands at a later stage,
as envisaged in the Secretary-General’s
own proposals.
116. As for the third stage in the approach, what we
have in mind is, of course, the renewed mission of
good offices by the Secretary-General,
referred to in
paragraph 2. If there is one theme which has emerged
with absolute consistency from this debate it has been
praise for the Secretary-General’s
efforts to negotiate
a settlement consistent with resolution 502 (1982).
This has been coupled in most cases with a wish to
see him continue, with the impetus and the authority
of a new and more formal mandate which would
preserve as far as possible at this stage the points on
which he had already established
a measure of
agreement.

every process, it must begin somewhere. It must begin
with a small first step, taken by the parties, a shml
pause in the fighting; but it is a process designed IO
lead to a resumption, on a new and more formal basis,
of the admirable and sustained efforts which the
Secretary-General
undertook with such a substantial
measure of success for over two weeks.
124, Our proposal is not “a wolf in sheep’5
clothing”,
as one source was said to have described
it, according to this morning’s Nc11~ Yo& Tin!cs. Nor
is it a result of woolly thinking. It is an honest attempl.
made in complete good faith, to offer a reason&
and graduated way out to both parties locked in a
dangerous and tragic combat, while upholding-and
I insist on this-the
important principles to which \\‘r
remain fully committed,
12.5. If the parties do not now accept it, so be it. II
they want to fight to a finish, so be it. If the Council,’
for whatever reason, cannot or does not wish to adop’r
our proposal, so be it. If a better formula can be found,
so be it. We shall welcome anything that can workin
the present situation and bring peace while maintniniag
the principles 1 have mentioned.

117. The aim of paragraph 2 of our draft resolution
would be to give him that new authority and impetus.

126. Whatever happens in face of this tragic conflicl.
Ireland will continue to believe that it was at lean
right to have tried. Whatever the outcome, it will not
be said at the end of our short term of membership
of the Council that we did not even try.

118. It might be asked whether such an approach
has any chance of success at this stage. How can
he now hope to go further than in his previous efforts?
There are, I believe, several important points of difference in the present situation which could make it
realistic to think of asking him to continue his devoted
efforts.

127. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtcrtion
fhm
ChiThe next speaker is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Argentina,
Mr. Nicanor Costa Mindez.
I welcome him and call on him to make his statemeL

119. First, he would now have a formal
from the Council.

mandate

120. Secondly, the adoption of our draft resolution
would in some way help to preserve the measure of
agreement which he had already achieved and which
may otherwise completely disappear.
121. Thirdly, the situation itself is changing, One
must always hope that in any conflict a stage will be
reached where both parties would be ready to accept
a settlement if a mission of good offices is continued.
122. Fourthly, this new effort by the SecretaryGeneral would, in our proposal, come when some
elementary measure of confidence had already been
established, first, by the parties’
suspension of
hostilities, and secondly, by the more lasting ceasefire negotiated with the help of the Secretary-General,
123. This then is our proposal-a
careful process, an
effort to build confidence and to get the SecretaryGeneral’s admirable efforts back on the rails. Like

nese):

12X. Mr. COSTA MkNDEZ
(Argentina) (inferpf’efr~
fio~ fiche Spmisk):
Mr. President, first of all 1 wish
to express the gratitude of the Argentine Republic
for the way in which you, as President of the Council,
are guiding the work on a question which undoubtedly
gravely affects the maintenance of international peacz
and security, particularly
in the American continenl.
But I also wish very expressly to convey the apprecip
tion of the people and Government of Argentina to the
Secretary-General
for the genuine peace efforts which
he made for 15 difficult days and for the fairness,
effectiveness and dynamism with which he carried
them out.
129. I should also like to thank the members of the
Council who made possible the prompt convening ot
this meeting in face of the seriousness of the situation
in the Argentine
island territories
in the South
Atlantic.
130. 1 should like to pay a tribute to the countries
that have spoken out before the Council in an expr@+
sion of solidarity with the Argentine people because
they have been personally touched by the situation
affecting my country and because they cannot Pass

over in silence the outrage committed by the United
Kingdom in the region of the Malvinas Islands and the
South Sandwich and South Georgia Islands. In particular.,
I wish to thank the Foreign Ministers of
Nicaragua, Panama and Venezuela for having come to
this city and personally represented their countries in
this debate.
I3 1, The Council has met to study a situation which,
as I have already stated, seriously affects my country’s security and also world peace. The United Kingdom has unleashed a large-scale war in the South
Atlantic causing death and destruction, spurred by
motives that have no justification
whatsoever in the
present day, We are witnessing an unprecedented
event, a regression of history, with no other explanation but the British attempt to hold on to an outdated
imperial
system and world dominance, which, with
their grandeurs and their miseries, belong to the past.
The United Kingdom is sending two thirds of its fleet
to our coasts with the intention of teaching a lesson to
a nation which has dared disturb the harmony of the
old, decadent imperia1 order, and of exhibiting before
thle world one more anachronistic
example of
colonial domination.
132. I should like to refer to two basic issues which
have been the subject of this debate: the use of force
and the self-determination
of peoples.
133. We have been described as aggressors. I shall
not dwell on this point now; I have already gone into
it. I have already described [235&h mwi/zg] the
successive steps in the recovery of the Malvinas on
2 April. It is clear that it was Great Britain which was
the first to threaten to use and then to use force. Now
we must place ourselves in a broader context in order
to understand the truth about all that has happened.

victim of aggression in the conflict
concerned with today.

which

we are

136. The international community
has declared that
the maintenance of colonialism is a crime. The United
Kingdom has perpetrated that crime to the detriment
of my country, amputating
a part of our territory,
and today it is persisting in its criminal attitude by
attempting to recover that territory by force.
137. It has been stated that aggression must not be
rewarded. And that is precisely what the Argentine
Republic is seeking, after having witnessed, powerless, 149 years of usurpation of its islands by Great
Britain as the precise result of an act of aggression
that today, 149 years later, is being repeated.
138. An attempt has been made to view the question
simplistically
and to describe the Argentine action as
a gross violation of the obligation
not to use force
in relations among States.
139. It has been stated that the British aggression
occurred long ago, and an attempt has been made to
adduce a kind of statute of limitations to shroud with a
mantle of neglect events in the historical past.
140. That is clearly unacceptable.
No one has
better expressed this in the current debate than has
the representative of Brazil, who stated:
“With the passage of time, there was no arbitral
award, no international -judicial decision or treaty
giving juridical validity to the British occupation:
nor does the passage of time give legal validity to
the fact of occupation, since the aggrieved country
-Argentina-unceasingly
reiterated its protest and
its objection to the occupation.”
[236&h mecfi/rg,
pwa. 183.1

134. Great Britain occupied the islands by force
149 years ago and maintained,
also by force, that
usurpation,
repeating day after day that initial act,
which was as unlawful as it was violent. For underneath the apparent calm and tranquillity
of colonial
possession there always exists a basic and necessary
underlying
element, namely, force. The imperia1
police force is always present, and the punitive
expedition is always ready, threatening whoever dares
defy the imperial order.
135:. The present power structure of international
relations has not eradicated the use of force. On many
occasions, it has been content merely to conceal it.
Col’onialism
is an act of force and it is permanent
agg,ression. It is the opposite of genuine peace. Many
peoples and nations in the United Nations can provide
evidence,
sometimes painful, of that truth. Coloniallism is the opposite of true peace. It has been,
sndl will be as long as it persists, the root cause of
conflicts and violence. This is the true explanation of
Nhat is now taking place in the South Atlantic, ancl
:his makes clear who is the aggressor and who the

141. During the negotiations that have been held in
recent days, the United Kingdom has resorted to a
well-known method: presenting its demands as though
they were noble principles and attributing to Argentina the negative attitude of not recognizing them.
That is an old, familiar method. Such is the case with
the principle
of self-determination,
to which the
United Kingdom
alludes in the attempt to cloak its
illegitimate
presence in the islands with respectability.
Thus, the British demand that the wishes of the inhabitants be respected was repeatedly brought up during
the negotiations
and constituted
one of the main
obstacles to understanding.
142. I wish to make it clear-although
it is hardly
necessary for me even to mention it-that
Argentina
considers
and has always considered
the selfdetermination
of peoples to be a fundamental right of
contemporary
international
law. We have always
associated ourselves with any people seeking selfdetermination.
We have been a part of every decision
adopted by the General Assembly enshrining that

“In the view of Her Majesty’s Government,
while the principle of self-determination
is a basic
principle which carries considerable weight, it can.
not be defined with sufficient accuracy in connection with specific circumstances to constitute a
right and is not recognized as such either in the
Charter of the United Nations or in customary
international
law.”

right and making it possible for a People t0 achieve
seIf-determination, The United Kingdom. the colonial
power pa,’ CJ.lY’PIIPllC~J
+ is certainly not the nation best
placed to give lessons in this field.
143. lt is appropriate to recall that the United Kingdom itself, in discussing the inclusion of the right to
&f-determination
in the lnternationa] Covenant On
Civil and PoIitical Rights and the international
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
contained in General Assembly resohition 2200 (XX]),
stated that the article on the right to self-determination
was compIeteIy unacceptable to the United Kingdom,
and added that there was no place in the COVenantS
for provisions that do not concern a basic human
right, Moreover-according to the British reasoningself-determination is a political principle, and its
practical application is subordinate to other principles,
especially that of the maintenance of peace,

147. These reservations on the part of the United
Kingdom on the right of self-determination
can be
understood in the light of its conduct in specific cases,
such as that of the island of Diego Garcia, when
1,400 inhabitants were forced to leave their homes in
order to make possible the establishment of a United
States military
base. In that instance, British sub.
jects were not at issue, and perhaps that was a decisive
factor in the interpretation
given by the United
Kingdom to the right of self-determination.

144, That truly equivocal position of the United
Kingdom was clearly evidenced by its abstention in
the voting on General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
Magna Charta of the process of decolonization undertaken by the United Nations. Hence, the representativc of the United Kingdom, Mr. Ormsby-Gore,
expressed in the debate on paragraph 2 of that resolution, which refers to the right to self-determination,
his doubts concerning the inclusion of what he described as a mere principle which, even in that limited context, seemed to him inappropriate.
That
attitude is not surprising, since that instrument of selfdetermination augured the end of the United Kingdom’s colonial empire.

148. Moreover, the United Kingdom has disregarded
the right of self-determination
on innumerable
ocw
sions, dismembering
its colonies without
consulta..
.
,.
tion, without appeal, without constderatton
ot atty.
sort of the wishes of the inhabitants. This in summary _
is the file on the nation which is shielding itself behind ;
that right and demanding its strict application.
149. But that is not all. The application of the right of
self-determination
to the case of the Malvinas Islands
is a simple travesty because it would mean the self.
determination
of the colonizers,
giving them an
opportunity to legitimize their illegitimate
settlement
in a territory that does not belong to them.
150. Self-determination
is a guarantee; it is an
instrument designed to protect the colonized peoples
to hasten the eradication of the colonial system and to
put an end to the domination of the metropolitan
Power. Therefore, it can hardly be used to strengthen
the colonial system and to give legitimacy
to the
presence of the occupying Power.

145. That position of the United Kingdom has been
reiterated in many international forums, and the members of the Council will no doubt find enlightening
the opinion expressed by the British delegation at the
conference held in Mexico to consider the principles
of internationaI IaW concerning friendly relations and
CO-operation among States. On that occasion, the
Mission of the United Kingdom stated:

151. The tardy British commitment to the principles ’
of the colonial issue appeared also in negotiations in
other forms. There was insistence, under the pretext
of defending democracy, on keeping intact the gov.
erning councils of the islands, which are only a facade
to cover up the true colonial structure existing in the
islands. Little is decided by the inhabitants, since those
inhabitants have very little. The land, trade, transport,
communications
and almost every fundamental
economic aspect of life in the islands are controtled
by persons who do not live there, which is in accordance with the strictest colonial orthodoxy. The inhub.
itants are kept content by being given decision-making
rights that are more apparent than real. while just one
company, the Falkland Islands Company, and a handfu] of persons based in the United Kingdom in fact
control all activities in the islands and own almost
100 per cent of the land.

“Her Majesty’s Government is of the view that to
conclude that there exists a right of self-determination on the basis of Article I, paragraph 2, of the
Charter, or of Article 73, subparagraph b, or Article 76, subparagraph b, is an unjustifiable
interpretation of the Charter.”
The statement goes on:
“lf the existence of a right to self-determination
is upheld, it could be invoked in circumstances in
which it might conflict with other concepts contained in the Charter.”
]46* l now conclude the quotation of what was stated
by the British delegation at that important meeting in
Mexico:
I4

152. Argentina has never disregarded the legitimate
right of thle inhabitants of the Malvinas to a decent life
within the: framework of their traditions, beliefs and
customs. What the United Kingdom has affirmed is
incorrect.
On the contrary, the most considerable
improvements
in their standard of living are due to
initiatives
and actions undertaken
by Argentina,
Those contributions were recognized by the General
Assembly,
as reflected in resolutions 3160 (XXVIII)
and 31/49., from which I should like to read, because
they constitute the best proof of the way in which
Argentina
has behaved in this matter in connection
with the inhabitants of the islands,
153. General Assembly resolution 3 160 (XXVIII)
states the following, in its last preambular paragraph:
for the continuous
efforts made by the Government of Argentina, in
accordance with the relevant decisions of the
General
Assembly, td’ facilitate the process of
decolonization
and to promote the well-being”
-1 repeat, “and to promote the well-being”“of the population of the islands.”
“i%pwssing

its

gmtitude

154. Assembly resolution
in paragraph 2:

31/49 states the following,

“E.upr~ss~s
its grcrtitude
for the continuous
efforts made by the Government of Argentina, in
accordance with the relevant decisions of the
General Assembly, to facilitate the process of
decolonization
and to promote the well-being of the
population of the islands.”

I55.
Air transport is provided by Argentina. There
is no other way of reaching the islands except through
the Argentine airline. Sea transport is provided also
by Argentina. Oil is provided by Argentina. Gas services for the well-being of the inhabitants are also
provided by Argentina. When medicines and sanitary
and health care are required, it is to Argentina that
they turn, not the United Kingdom.
156. Argentina has not denied a single one of the
legitimate
rights of the inhabitants of the Malvinas,
and we are prepared to provide guarantees to ensure
those rights. That is dictated by reality, because the
Malvinas are situated near Argentina, they are on the
continenta.
shelf of Argentina,
they belong to
Argentina.
157. But Argentina does not admit that those inhabitants have the authority to decide the destiny of the
islands, betcause they are not their islands: the islands
belong and have belonged from the time of Argentina’s
independence
to the sovereign Argentine
Republic.
The curious thing about this matter is that
according
to the United Kingdom those who are
authorized
to decide the fate of the archipelago are
in the main dependent on those who economically
and politically
really control
the islands from

London. What a curious form of self-determination
being advocated by the United Kingdom.

is

158. During the course of negotiations, the United
Kingdom has accused us of introducing formulas
prejudging the final result of the negotiations. The
Secretary-General knows full well that this is not the
case. Argentina agreed to negotiate without preconditions and in good faith on the substantive issue.
The British demand to incorporate the wishes of the
inhabitants as a decisive element was a clear way of
prejudging and placing conditions on the solution of
the dispute, subordinating it to the stand taken by a
small group of persons controlled economically and
politically by the United Kingdom.
159. Actually, the United Kingdom, while it was
accusing us of intransigence, was itself systematically
rejecting all Argentine initiatives. The United Kingdom confronted us with a virtual ultimatum in submitting to the Secretary-General a document whose
acceptance without changes and in short order was
demanded of us. It is enlightening to compare that document with the initial demands of the United Kingdom,
which are known to us through the steps taken by the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Alexander
Haig, in order to see who was intransigent throughout
the negotiations. I can assure the Council that it was
not Argentina.
160. The United States representative, in her statement [2362nd meeting], seemed to endorse the accusations of intransigence made by the United Kingdom
against us and to attribute the failure of the negotiations to us. But this is not accurate. 1 respect, appreciate and esteem the academic qualifications
of
Mrs, Kirkpatrick,
with whom I have a long-standing
friendship, but I cannot gloss over one sentence in
her statement that filled me with surprise, if not
shock. She said:
“The United States stands behind the principle
that the use of force to settle disputes should not be
allowed anywhere, and especially in this hemisphere . . .“* [ibid., paw. 2201,
161. That surprises me because such a brilliant historian cannot be unaware of the many occasions on
which the United States has resorted to the unlawful
use of force to resolve border problems and all sorts
of other international problems.
162. However, I want to.return to the crux of the
problem and to insist that there has been no intransigence by Argentina. The best illustration of that is
provided by the nature of the proposals made by the
Secretary-General
and considered by Argentina in
the best of faith.
‘li Quoted in English

by the speaker.

Council and to the world that the Argentine Republic
is absolutely certain of its rights and knows that those
rights are inalienable. We know that the only result of
this situation will be the definitive incorporation
of
the islands in Argentine territory.

163. On the other hand, what is true is that the United
Kingdom
broke off the negotiations by its negative
reply to every Argentine proposal.
164. It said “No” to the withdrawal of the fleet to
a reasonable distance. The United Kingdom insisted
on its remaining 150 miles from the islands, a distance
even shorter than that of the original blockade.

174. The PRESIDENT
(inrcrprc’tatio/I
jiwn~
IIPSC): 1 shall now call upon those representatives
wish to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

165. It said “No”
to the inclusion of the South
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands in the negotiations, when the British had always accepted that the
dispute over sovereignty included the three archipelagos. This has been duly documented.

Chiwho

175. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): In
my main speech in this debate a few days ago
[&X01/1 rneetingf, I set out the full position of my
Government on the present crisis up to that moment.
I shall not weary the Council by going through all
that again. My Government’s
views are plainly on
the record. But I must take up some of the Council’s
time by responding to a number of the statements
which have just been made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Argentine Republic.

166. It said “No”
to the ending of its colonial
administrative
institutions
and their replacement by
the participation
of the islanders in an advisory
capacity in the interim administration
by the United
Nations.

176. Several speakers, including the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, have referred to the events of 1833.
I should try to put them into proportion.
I put out
information about the history of the settlement of the
Falkland Islands in my letter dated 28 April [S//S007l
to the President of the Council and I attached to that
letter a chronology of salient events. I shall now
summarize those events briefly.

167. It said “No”
to the admission of Argentine
citizens to the isIands during the interim administration. It did so in order to maintain intact, for political
purposes,
an artificial,
discriminatory
and unjust
system.
168, It said “No”
to entrusting to the General
Assembly, the most universal and democratic of the
organs of the United Nations, the question of the
future of the islands if the negotiations had not been
concluded within a reasonable period.

177. There were British settlements in the eighteenth
century. There were also French and Spanish settlements. The latter were augmented by convicts. The
Spanish settlements were abandoned in 1806, and the
islands were uninhabited
for fully 10 years before
Buenos Aires became independent from Spain. The
period from 1806 to 1833 was marked by some confusion. Many fishing vessels, as well as the United
States naval ship Lcxingfon, visited the islands. Buenos
Aires attempted to establish a colony-its
word at the
time-but
other countries, including my own, did not
accept the right of Buenos Aires to do so.

169. The repeated “No” of the British Government
is eloquent. The United Kingdom does not want to
negotiate; it wants to restore by force a colonial rt5gime
on Latin American soil.
170. The situation in the South Atlantic clearly comes
within the competence of the Security Council. It is
therefore duty-bound
to assume its responsibilities
and ensure that proper measures are taken to put an
end to a situation
that affects peace and security.
Those measures can only be the cessation of hostilities
and the immediate resumption of negotiations between
the parties, with the assistance of the SecretaryGeneral.

178. It was for this reason that, at the turn of the
year 1832-1833, a British ship visited the islands.
Port Stanley did not exist at the time. Captain Onslow
of HMS Clio occupied Port Egmont. On reaching
Soledad he found a detachment of 25 Buenos Aires
soldiers and their schooner, the Sa,vrnt/i. A mutiny
had previously occurred at Port Louis while the
Srrr~nlli was at sea, and the commander of the Argentine schooner had placed the mutineers in irons aboard
a British schooner after they had killed the Governor.
At his request, they were taken to Buenos Aires.
Most people elected to be repatriated:
18 were
persuaded to stay behind. Not a shot was fired on
either side. Captain Onslow reasserted British sovereignty by raising the flag,

1 wish to state that my coun171. In this connection,
try is prepared to consider the proposal that Ireland
has presented.
172. My country is at this very moment resisting an
invasion, It is doing so with all the means available to
it, to which we add the determination,
courage and
patriotism
of our men and women. As has been seen
here in the Council, we have with us in the struggle
the friendship of our brothers in Latin America and of
many other countries of the international community,
at one in the cause of anti-colonialism
and justice.

179. I have given this brief account in order to dispel
any misapprehension
about 1833. The events were
nowhere near as dramatic as some other speakers have

for me to predict the result of
173. It is impossible
the battle now being waged, but I can affirm to the
16

t

suggested. Those events brought to an end a period of
uncertainty and were followed by 149 years of peace
and prosperity, during which the only viable community that has ever existed on the islands came into
being.

deal further to disprove the allegation that we are the
Since General
colonial
Power pclr e,~cY4lrtlw.
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, was adopted at the end of 1960,
we have brought to sovereign independence and membership of the United Nations no less than 28 States.
We are proud of our record, and I think we have every
right to be.

180. The Foreign Minister
of Argentina,
in his
opening remarks, talked of the outrage committed by
the United Kingdom. So far as we are concerned, the
outrage was committed by Argentina when, out of a
clear blue sky, Argentine forces invaded the Falkland
Islands at the beginning of April. This was recognized
by the terms of Security Council resolution 502 (1982),
which are onl:y too familiar to members of the Council.

184. I turn now t.o the whole question of the people
of the Falkland Islands. The Foreign Minister of
Argentina has alleged that the application to the people
of the Falkland Islands of self-determination
is ii
travesty. This is simply not so. The people of the
Falkland Islands are small in number-about
1,800-but as I have said on many previous occasions in the
Council, this in no way at all detracts from their rights
under international
law, under the Charter of the
United Nations, under Article 73 of that Charter. They
are a community. They are a small community, but
they are a peaceful community, they are a homogeneous community and they are a community which
has developed democratic institutions over a period
of a century.

IS?. Why are we now in conflict? It is ludicrous to
suggest that we are trying to create some new form of
Rritish empire in the South Atlantic. I cannot believe
that anybody in their wildest imagination can credit
this thesis. We are in conflict for very simple reasons.
We are in conflict because, first, Argentina invaded
the islands and placed the community on the islands
under alien rule which they decidedly did not want
and, secondl:y, because Argentina has consistently
refused to carry out the unqualified demand to withdraw its forces, as stated in resolution 502 (1982).

185. I turn now to the recent. round of negotiations which the Secretary-General
conducted with
such amazing diligence. We did not issue an ult,imatum to the Government of Argentina. As 1 said
in my main statement to the Council a few days ago
[236&/l meeting], we reached through very careful
consideration at the highest level in London what my
Government genuinely and carefully regarded as the
furthest it could go in terms of flexibility without
compromising principles which we were not in any
circumstances prepared to abandon. One of those
main principles was that, even in an interim period,
the democratic,
freely elected institutions
of the
people of the Falkland Islands could not be dismantled
and set aside. To have agreed to this would have been
a monstrous offence to our own beliefs, to our own
responsibilities,
to our responsibilities as a nation, to
our responsibilities
under the Charter of the United
Nations.

182. The Foreign Minister referred at length to selfdetermination
and referred to my country as the
colonial Power par cxceller~cr. It is true that we took
the position in the 1960s that self-determination
was
a princifile and not a right. However, in 1966 the two
International Covenants-the
International
Covenant
on Economic., Social and Cultural Rights and the
International ICovenant on Civil and Political Rightswere adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 2200 (XXI), Both Covenants stale, in Article 1,
paragraph 1, <that:
“All peoples have the right of self-determination.
By virtue of that right they freely determine their
political status and freely pursue their economic,
social and cultural development.”
183. The United Kingdom has ratified both these
Covenants, which have entered into force. Furthermore, in 1970, the General Assembly adopted by
consensus-that
is. with the United Kingdom joining
in the consensus-resolution
2625 (XXV), containing
the Declaration on Principles of International
Law
Concerning Friendly Relations
and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. The Declaration states that:

186. All that the Government
of Argentina was
prepared to accept in this regard was that they might
be used as advisors in a personal capacity by the
interim administrator,
provided that an equal number
of citizens of Argentine origin could be similarly
used. The Argentine community on the island amounts
to approximately 30 people, the island community to
approximately
1,800. Statistically,
that proposition
was obviously totally unacceptable. Conceptually, it
was totally unacceptable because it would have led to
the dismantlement
of these institutions which have
been developed and which have evolved since the
19th century. It is worth noting at this point that general
elections were held in the Falkland Islands for the
Councils as recently as October 1981. Were these
simply to be set aside even during an interim period?

“By virtue of the principle of equal rights and
self-determination
of peoples enshrined in the
Charter of tihe United Nations, all peoples have the
right freely to determine, without external interference, their political status. . , .”
Not only has my country endorsed the right to self(letermination in the sense of the Charter, the Covellants and this Declaration, but we have gone a great
17

1g7. I will not go into more detail about the nature of
11111’l.eply ;trld contrast it with the nature of the
!argentine response. I have already done so, in great
dcti~il. in many ways. P would only say this: that
my
~hi~glt~ut
the seven weeks of negotiations
6:‘;ovcrm~mentmade many adjustments to our original
r)osition, in the sincere and heartfelt hope of reaching
R peaceful solution to the problem. We reached a
poillt where we believed that we could go no further
withollt, as I have just said, the compromise of principles which we were not prepared to compromise.
188. When we received the response of the Governlllcnt of Argentina, it appeared to ns to demonstrate
rlo :~JV~IIC~ over its initial position at the outset of the
negotiations outside the United Nations forum seven
t~ceks previously. We had no choice but to regard it
;\s a comprehensive rejection of our proposals.

typical British humour, he expressed such doubts
regarding Britain’s title to the islands that he advised
the British to be very wary of visiting them because
they might be chased out by any one of a number of
Powers, since Britain’s right to those islands was so
tenuous. I shall certainly be transmitting the text of
that fetter by Lord Russell to the Council, and above
all to the United Kingdom representative,
because
1 think it is of deep historical significance.
192. 1 could have concluded my statement to the
Council with exactly the same words with which the
representative of the United Kingdom concluded his,
were I as eloquent as he is. What he said was indeed
exactly what I would have said.
193. “Remove
the cause”, he said. The cause
must indeed be removed, but that cause is the IJnitetl
Kingdom’s illegal possession of the islands.

1%). The situation remains as it has remained ever
since the beginning of April. The cause of the conflict
is the Argentine invasion of the Falklands and Argentina’s refusal to withdraw in accordance with the
mandatory demand contained in Council resolution 502
(1983). The effect is the conflict which is causing all of
us such grave concern. Remove the cause, the illegal
Argentine presence on the islands, and the effect will
disappear, We have no other desire but to protect the
rights under the Charter of the United Nations, under
international law, of the Falkland islanders, to redress
the wrong which has been done, to demonstrate that
political disputes cannot and must not be settled by
the use of armed force, and to demonstrate beyond
any shadow of doubt that aggression must not and
cannot be allowed to pay.

194. He also said that a negotiated solution
sought. We completely agree.

must hr:

19.5. Lastly, he said that there must be no preconditions. We ourselves dropped any pre-conditions
to facilitate the work of the brilliant Secretary-General.
We invite the United Kingdom, too, to drop any precanditions and to make possible equally open negotiations with no prejudgement of the results in terms of
the fate of the population and their rights.
196. Argentina is completely open to all negotiations,
in the hope that those negotiations will lead to peace.
As in all disputes, each of the parties is cnnvinceti
that it is right. I believe that negotiations are the
proper way to reconcile disputed points and opposing
positions. Otherwise, to the shame of mankind and of
the Council, the military
actions initiated
by the
United Kingdom will continue,

100. Mr. COSTA MBNDEZ (Argentina) (interpretatio/l.fi’o/n Spcrlzislr): I want to thank the representative
of the Unitsd Kingdom for his statement, but I cannot
piXiS over in silence some of his comments, I should
like to deal briefly with three or four of his points.

The meeting

191. I do not want to refer to the historical debate on
the ownership of the islands. It has been discussed at
length, and I think that Argentina’s title to them,
which came from Spain, is unassailable. I should have
liked to read out a letter, of which I have a copy here,
written 19~ Lord Russell in 1841, in which, with very

00400

rose at 1.45 p.m.

NOTES
’ A/AC.182/L.32/Add.I.

z United Nations,

t

Tt~ory &rie.s, 1973, vol. 87.5, p, Il.

8%60989-October

tY89---2.WW

:
