UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/54
6 November 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3589th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 November 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the planned convening of the continual
round of Inter-Tajik talks in Ashgabad. It commends the efforts of the
President of Turkmenistan in this regard.
"The Security Council calls upon the Tajik parties to begin as a
matter of urgency the continual round of talks with the aim of concluding a
general agreement in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol on the
fundamental principles for establishing peace and national accord in
Tajikistan signed by the President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the
leader of the Tajik opposition on 17 August 1995 (S/1995/720, annex).
"The Security Council expresses the hope that the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy will be able to resume promptly his efforts with regard to
the preparation of the forthcoming round of talks. The Council reaffirms
its full support for the activities of the Special Envoy.
"The Security Council urges the Tajik parties to comply strictly with
the obligations assumed under the Agreement on a Temporary Cease-Fire and
the Cessation of Other Hostile Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within
the Country signed in Teheran on 17 September 1994 (S/1994/1102, annex I).
The Council expresses the hope that the convening of the talks will
contribute to a lessening of tensions along the Tajik-Afghan border and
inside Tajikistan.
"The Security Council notes that the relevant Afghan authorities have
given their agreement to the establishment of a liaison post of UNMOT in
Taloqan (northern Afghanistan). The Council welcomes this development and
agrees with the proposal to establish such a post as suggested in
paragraph 20 of the Secretary-General’s report of 16 September 1995

95-33842 (E)

061195
/...

S/PRST/1995/54
English
Page 2

(S/1995/799) with the privileges and immunities necessary for the security
of the United Nations personnel concerned and for their ability to carry
out the mandate.
"The Security Council also notes the Secretary-General’s observations
regarding the strengthening of UNMOT in paragraph 21 of his report. The
Council supports a corresponding increase in the mission’s strength."
-----
