A/RES/70/60

United Nations

Distr.: General
11 December 2015

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 97 (z)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 7 December 2015
[on the report of the First Committee (A/70/460)]

70/60.

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/43 of 2 December 2011 and 68/49 of 5 December
2013, entitled “Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok
Treaty)”,
Welcoming the desire of the South-East Asian States to maintain peace and
stability in the region in the spirit of peaceful coexistence and mutual understanding
and cooperation,
Noting the entry into force on 15 December 2008 of the Charter of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations,1 in which it is stated, inter alia, that one of
the purposes of the Association is to preserve South-East Asia as a nuclear-weaponfree zone, free of all other weapons of mass destruction,
Welcoming the convening by Indonesia of the third Conference of States
Parties and Signatories to Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and
Mongolia on 24 April 2015,
Reaffirming its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free
zones, established, where appropriate, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived
at among States of the region concerned and in accordance with the 1999
guidelines of the Disarmament Commission, 2 in strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime, in contributing towards realizing the objectives of nuclear
disarmament and in extending the areas of the world that are free of nuclear
weapons, and, with particular reference to the responsibilities of the nuclearweapon States, calling upon all States to seek a safer world for all and to achieve
peace and security in a world without nuclear weapons in a way that promotes
international stability and based on the principle of undiminished security for all,

_______________
1
2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2624, No. 46745.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).

15-16814 (E)

*1516814*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/60

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)

Convinced that the establishment of a South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, as an essential component of the Declaration on the Zone of Peace, Freedom
and Neutrality, signed in Kuala Lumpur on 27 November 1971, will contribute
towards strengthening the security of States within the Zone and towards enhancing
international peace and security as a whole,
Noting the entry into force of the Treaty on the South-East Asia NuclearWeapon-Free Zone 3 on 27 March 1997 and the tenth anniversary of its entry into
force, in 2007,
Welcoming the reaffirmation of South-East Asian States that the South-East
Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone shall continue to play a pivotal role in the area of
confidence-building measures, preventive diplomacy and the approaches to conflict
resolution as enshrined in the Declaration of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Concord II (Bali Concord II),4
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty on the SouthEast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,5
Recognizing that, by signing and ratifying the relevant protocols to the treaties
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, nuclear-weapon States would undertake
individual legally binding commitments to respect the status of such zones and not
to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against States parties to such treaties,
Recalling the statement of the Chairman of the twenty-second Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Summit and the joint communiqué of the forty-sixth, fortyseventh and forty-eighth ministerial meetings of the Association,
Recalling also the applicable principles and rules of international law relating
to the freedom of the high seas and the rights of innocent passage, archipelagic sea
lanes passage or transit passage of ships and aircraft, particularly those of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,6
1.
Welcomes the commitment and efforts of the Commission for the SouthEast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone to further enhance and strengthen the
implementation of the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)3 by implementing the plan of action for the period 2013–2017
adopted in Bandar Seri Begawan on 30 June 2013, with a renewed commitment and a
stronger emphasis on concrete actions, and the decision of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Political-Security Community Council, established under
the Charter of the Association,1 to give priority to the implementation of the plan of
action;
2.
Bears in mind that the adoption of ASEAN 2025: Forging Ahead
Together at the twenty-seventh Association of Southeast Asian Nations Summit, in
Kuala Lumpur, would set out the road map for the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations for the next 10 years, and encourages States parties to the Treaty and the
nuclear-weapon States to intensify ongoing efforts to resolve all outstanding issues,

_______________
3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
A/58/548, annex I.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
6
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.
4

2/3

Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)

A/RES/70/60

in accordance with the objectives and principles of the Treaty, pertaining to the
signing and ratifying of the Protocol to that Treaty at the earliest;
3.
Underlines the value of enhancing and implementing further ways and
means of cooperation among the States parties to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties
and the protocols thereto, with a view to strengthening the non-proliferation regime
and to contributing towards realizing the objective of nuclear disarmament;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second session,
under the item entitled “General and complete disarmament”, the sub-item entitled
“Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)”.
67th plenary meeting
7 December 2015

3/3
