United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8949th meeting

Tuesday, 18 January 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Ms. Qi Lihong
Ms. Freudenreich
Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Mr. Famiah
Mr. Setia
Mr. McSwiney
Ms. Nthoki
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Kuzmenkov
Ms. Tantawy
Ms. Andrews
Ms. Kroeker-Maus

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Protecting participation: addressing violence targeting women in peace and
security processes
Letter dated 10 January 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/22)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by a
compilation of annexes (S/2022/38) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

22-23336 (E)
*2223336*

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes in
order to enable the Council to do its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the microphone collars will prompt
speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Inanç Örnekol (Turkey): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important debate. I also
thank the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the other briefers for sharing their
insights. And I would like to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude and appreciation to women
peacekeepers around the world for their service.
More than two decades ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000). In doing so, the
Council made it known to the world that there could
not be lasting peace without gender equality. Yet
despite subsequent resolutions and our best efforts, the
implementation of that agenda has fallen short. The
stalled progress coincided with and was exacerbated by
the coronavirus disease pandemic. A shadow pandemic
of intensified violence against women and girls
emerged. Humanitarian workers in conflict zones across
the world now report new cases of violence against
women and girls daily. The Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2021/827) outlines the violence, intimidation
and reprisals that women endure in response to their
engagement in peace processes around the world. We
need to take immediate action to reverse that deeply
worrying trend.
To date, the Council has called for the
implementation of peace agreements in numerous
resolutions, as well as for ensuring the enhanced
participation of women at all stages of peace processes.
However, the onus is on all Member States to ensure
women’s full, equal, and meaningful participation in
decision-making at all levels, everywhere. We must
support women peacebuilders, human rights defenders
and representatives of civil society so that they can fully
and meaningfully engage and take part in all aspects
of public and political life. Only then can we achieve
truly inclusive societies that will enable us to make
progress in maintaining peace and security, upholding
human rights and implementing the Sustainable
Development Goals.
2/21

18/01/2022

Turkey has actively contributed to the development
of recently adopted NATO policies on issues related
to women and peace and security. We also continue
to implement gender-responsive training for security
personnel deployed domestically, as well as to
NATO’s Mission Iraq and Kosovo Force and to other
peacekeeping missions and operations.
In Afghanistan, Turkey is currently operating 45
schools across the country, 14 of them girls’ schools.
We have also been emphasizing to the caretaker
Government the importance of political inclusivity
and the protection and promotion of human rights
and fundamental freedoms. The fundamental rights
of Afghan women and girls must be respected, and
that includes the right of every woman and girl in
Afghanistan to access both employment and education.
Those are non-negotiable.
Turkey continues to make every effort to support
women and girls who have fled Syria. We have provided
psychological and social support to more than 400,000
Syrian refugees in Turkey since 2014. All the necessary
legal steps are being taken to protect women refugees
who have experienced violence. Women refugees who
identify as victims of violence have the right to stay in
women’s shelters and receive much-needed assistance.
Syrian women under temporary protection also benefit
from the same health-care services as Turkish citizens.
We sincerely hope that our efforts will enable Syrian
women to participate in rebuilding a post-conflict Syria
in the future.
I applaud brave women peacebuilders around the
world. They press on in the face of danger in the hope
of creating a more peaceful society for all. We thank
those fearless women and promise to continue our work
to implement the women and peace and security agenda
with determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I would like to thank
the delegation of Norway and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as Ms. Yaftali
and Ms. Asoka, for their important contributions this
morning. I also congratulate Norway and Albania,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and the United Arab
Emirates, all current Council members, for making
women and peace and security a priority of their
respective presidencies.
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

We are constantly reminded of the relevance of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions by
the daily risks that women encounter at every stage of
the conflict cycle. One striking example is Afghanistan,
as the representative of Turkey also mentioned. Since
the takeover by the Taliban, Afghan women have
encountered violence, infringements of their rights and
extreme marginalization. That summons us to create
safe environments for women involved in peacebuilding
in order to protect and empower those who defend
human rights in Afghanistan and beyond. Germany is
fully committed to the women and peace and security
agenda, including by ensuring women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peace and security
processes at every level, leveraging their leadership.
That continues to be an important commitment that
we pursue in all aspects of our foreign policy. Today I
would like to mention three concrete examples of our
current endeavours.
First, two years ago, Germany founded the
Elisabeth-Selbert-Initiative, a protection programme
for human rights defenders, including women, at
risk all over the world. The Initiative helps those
under threat receive temporary relocation grants and
on-site assistance.
Secondly, the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund is a unique financial instrument for strengthening
women’s organizations and female leadership through
concrete projects. In 2021, Germany supported the
fund with €18 million. Today, together with Norway,
we had the honour to launch the new Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund funding window for women
human rights defenders working for inclusive peace
and humanitarian action. In that framework, Germany
will provide €2 million to support Afghan women
human rights defenders inside and outside the country.
We encourage other Member States to pledge their
support to the new funding window and to the Fund
more broadly.
Thirdly, we believe that strong voices in the Security
Council are crucial to the protection of women human
rights defenders and peacebuilders. That is why, during
our tenure on the Council, we brought many women
briefers from civil society to this Chamber and put
forward resolution 2467 (2019). The vital importance
of that resolution is evident as women human rights
defenders continue to face targeted violence and are at
a higher risk of sexual and gender-based violence.

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

When women human rights defenders are
threatened and hindered in their engagements, we will
see shrinking spaces as well as less sustainable peace.
The United Nations and its Member States must do more
to protect women in peace processes and ensure safe
environments for them. We must put in place protective
measures for women peacebuilders at risk, uphold our
support for their crucial activities, elevate their strong
voices and be united in our action. I assure the Council
that Germany will continue to stand ready to do so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself
with the statements delivered this morning by the
representatives of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer, and Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
I would like to thank Norway for focusing the
attention of the Security Council on an issue as pressing
and long-standing as the participation and protection of
women in peace processes. I also thank the briefers for
their very insightful presentations.
After each annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security, we seem
to follow the same routine. We condemn all forms of
violence against women and girls and express our deep
condolences to the families of victims. But while we
mourn the losses and calculate the damages, we should
not forget the very reason that we are involved in these
discussions in the first place, which is to ensure that we
take action. Here we should define what the working
modes of participation for women peacebuilders are
and how we can ensure their security both offline
and online. Those are the immediate steps we should
take in order to achieve the ultimate goal, which is the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women at
all stages and levels of peace processes. The fact is
that the global statistics for 2021 remain worrisome.
In addition, the effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic regrettably continue to create significant
shortcomings in the systematic integration of gender
perspectives across the political, economic, social and
technological arenas. Structural inequalities not only
persist but are often institutionalized and interpreted
as part of organizational or occupational culture.
Those findings reverberate throughout the women and
peace and security community and call for immediate
collective action.

22-233363/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

As a dedicated international actor, Bulgaria
monitors developments in the field and seeks original
and innovative solutions for achieving an environment
enabling inclusive and participatory security. A prime
example in that regard would be the Crisis Management
and Disaster Response Centre of Excellence in Sofia.
The Centre provides crucial research and analysis,
as well as tailored education and training for senior
experts. It has a long-standing and constantly growing
commitment to supporting gender mainstreaming in the
security and defence sector, particularly in the areas of
crisis management and disaster response. To that end,
the Centre cooperates with the European Security and
Defence College.
Considering that the funds allocated for advancing
the women and peace and security agenda on a global
scale are still insufficient, Bulgaria is currently
exploring ways to increase funding for official
development assistance projects with a gender focus.

18/01/2022

targeting women human rights defenders, gender
equality advocates and civil-society organizations.
Particularly troubling are the reprisals faced by women
who engage with the United Nations and the Security
Council in the context of peace and security processes.
Since 2009 Portugal has had a national action plan to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
that is currently in its third edition, and we are fully
committed to its implementation.
First, we believe that Member States must plan
for action and monitor results, both at the national and
regional levels. Secondly, the role of the United Nations
in coordinating Member States’ efforts in implementing
that agenda is instrumental. Thirdly, the women and
peace and security agenda should be properly funded.

Lastly, I would like to underline that the inclusion
of civil society is crucial to putting effective protection
and prevention measures in place. Only through direct
contact with people on the ground can we understand the
immediate risks they face on a daily basis and identify
ways to strengthen their protection effectively so as to
put an end to threats and violence against human rights
defenders and peacebuilders. We also reiterate our belief
that all relevant United Nations bodies should work
together on such matters and provide regular feedback.

We need the Security Council, in close
collaboration with the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Human Rights Council and UN-Women, to
provide the necessary attention and resources to create
safe environments where women can engage without
the fear of retaliation. Priority should be given to
partnerships with host countries and especially to local,
community-based women’s networks, while ensuring
that the protection of women peacebuilders is explicitly
included in the mandates of United Nations missions.
We can and must strive for a more comprehensive
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and for an end to violence against women in all
its forms.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.

Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Portugal thanks
the Norwegian presidency of the Security Council for
holding this important open debate.

Mr. Lagatie (Belgium): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of Belgium, the Netherlands and
Luxembourg, the Benelux countries.

We align ourselves with the statements made this
morning by the representatives of the European Union,
in its capacity as observer, and Canada, on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

I would like to align myself with the statements
made by the representatives of the European Union, in
its capacity as observer, and Canada, on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

More than 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we are still witnessing critical situations
where women’s voices continue to go unheard. The
current situation in Afghanistan is just one example,
along with those in the Sahel and Myanmar, as
highlighted this morning by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We strongly
condemn the harassment, threats and attacks that
women face worldwide, both online and offline, often

At the outset, I would like to thank the briefers
for their testimonies today. It is alarming to see such
unprecedented and appalling levels of violence,
harassment and reprisals against women human rights
defenders. The Security Council has a responsibility
to ensure a safe and secure environment for civilsociety actors, journalists and trade-union members
in carrying out their essential peacebuilding efforts.
However, at the moment the burden is almost entirely

4/21

22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

on the individuals themselves. According to the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, the
Council has failed to address the root causes of the
issue or to mount an effective response when attacks
on civil society occur. The protection of women human
rights defenders and women peacebuilders remains one
of the starkest gaps in its implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda.
We are very grateful to Norway for the opportunity
to deepen our reflections on measures that the Security
Council can take, building on the discussions that we
started during the Arria Formula meeting on the topic
in February 2020 during Belgium’s presidency of the
Security Council, at which the Benelux countries all
voiced their concerns. Our countries actively support
the work of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, UN-Women and the Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund in preventing and addressing
reprisals, and we call on all Member States to do
the same.
Civil society has also made recommendations
to Member States and the diplomatic community
on lowering risks, such as the guidelines on the
protection of women human rights defenders developed
by Peace Brigades International, Cordaid and the
Dutch Gender Platform WO=MEN, as well as by the
International Service for Human Rights. We see six key
recommendations for Member States going forward.
First, at the international level, we must continue
to advocate for a more enabling environment for civil
society to do its work free from fear, threats, harassment,
violence or reprisals of any kind.
Secondly, we must apply a gender perspective in
peace and security processes, consider the specific
risks faced by different groups of women human rights
defenders and integrate appropriate risk mitigation
where possible.
Thirdly, we must be mindful that merely receiving
diplomatic support or being in contact with diplomats
can put women human rights defenders at risk. Any
action taken to protect or empower women human
rights defenders must be at the expressed wish of those
concerned and in close consultation with them in order
to minimize the possibility of reprisals.
Fourthly, with their consent, we must increase the
visibility of the work of specific civil-society members

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

through media or by bringing up individual cases
directly with the authorities concerned.
Fifthly, we must open avenues for reporting
individual cases, collecting data and strengthening
monitoring mechanisms at both the national and
international levels.
Sixthly, we must support national authorities
through capacity-building in recognizing and addressing
threats to civil society and ensuring accountability.
Finally, in past years we have unfortunately seen
several cases of reprisals against briefers who have
addressed the Council. Belgium, the Netherlands and
Luxembourg are firmly committed to a zero-tolerance
approach to such acts of violence. The engagement
of women human rights defenders with the Security
Council’s work is crucial to deepening our understanding
of local dynamics that can make or break processes
for peace and post-conflict reconstruction. We have
a collective responsibility to protect the people who
have the courage to come to this Chamber and share
their stories with the world in order to end situations of
injustice. That includes taking precautions to mitigate
physical and digital security risks by identifying safe
communication systems for contacting the briefers
concerned, among other things. In case of reprisals,
we need to ensure accountability and protection.
Member States should collectively stand ready to raise
such situations with the countries concerned and give
briefers emergency assistance. Our countries are ready
to continue their engagement on this critical issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank the Norwegian presidency for organizing
this open debate, and I am grateful to the briefers for
their insights.
Women play an important role in the socioeconomic
development and political life of all societies. During
conflicts they are subject to violence and discriminatory
actions, and in post-conflict situations they have an
undeniable potential for contributing to peace and
security processes. In conflict situations, efforts must
therefore be focused on addressing the root causes of
violence against women, particularly conflict-related
sexual violence. In post-conflict situations, the main
approach must be one of protecting their rights and
ensuring their participation in conflict resolution

22-233365/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

18/01/2022

and peace processes, as well as humanitarian and
reconstruction activities.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

We share the view that women’s political, social and
economic empowerment is critical, as it can increase
their resistance to violence in conflict situations and
promote their role in further contributing to peace
and reconciliation processes and to reconstruction and
rehabilitation efforts in post-conflict situations. The
Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great importance to
the role of women in socioeconomic development as
well as in the political and cultural life of our society.
Despite the United States’ imposition of sanctions
on us — which, in addition to violating rules of
international law, breaches the basic rights of women
and girls, especially their right to development — we
have made significant achievements in empowering
women and girls in Iran.

Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I congratulate Norway on its leadership in
organizing this open debate, which is also the first of the
year. I also acknowledge Norway’s efforts to keep the
doors of the Security Council open to the participation
of all States.

Just as an example, I would like to mention
education, which is vital to women’s empowerment. We
have made significant progress in that regard, and as a
result, women and girls currently make up more than
half of all university students, while the numbers of
girls studying medicine and science in Iran are double
those of men. As such, women are active participants
in day-to-day affairs in Iran and are very active in
elections as both candidates and voters. Furthermore,
our Parliament has adopted a charter for women’s rights
and responsibilities, which ensures the protection and
promotion of women’s rights in various areas.
In the Middle East, we unfortunately continue to
witness the devastating effects of foreign occupations
and interventions, as well as terrorist activities targeting
women and girls. The longest-standing case is that of
Palestinian women and girls, who continue to suffer
from the adverse effects of a decades-long occupation
and human rights violations. In Afghanistan, we believe
that the protection of the human rights of all Afghans,
including women and girls, and their participation in the
peace and security process, as well as their legitimate
aspirations, must be ensured.
Finally, we reiterate our principled position
that issues related to women and girls fall under the
mandate of the General Assembly and other United
Nations bodies such as UN-Women. The subject should
therefore be dealt with by the Security Council only
insofar as it is directly linked to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
6/21

On 21 October of last year we discussed this subject
under the Kenyan presidency in another open debate
on women and peace and security (see S/PV.8886). In
that connection, I want to underline the key role played
by the Council’s non-permanent members in the efforts
to achieve increasingly inclusive working methods, on
the one hand, and to ensure that the debates on women
and peace and security are properly and permanently
structured and not limited to commemorating the
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on the other.
In October the Council focused on the need to
promote women’s participation in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Like the majority of participating
countries, Ecuador took advantage of that occasion
to recognize the significant contribution of women
to processes related to peace and security and to
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as the need
to build on that contribution by removing obstacles to
women’s participation.
As I have already stated in the Council, during the
2020 peacebuilding architecture review process Ecuador
contributed to evaluating the situation of women in
contexts of conflict. Regrettably, the pandemic saw an
increase in domestic violence, conflict-related sexual
violence, trafficking, harassment and exploitation. In
order to promote women’s effective participation in
the maintenance of peace and security, it is therefore
essential to create and maintain stable environments,
and in particular to ensure zero tolerance for impunity
for perpetrators. To that end, we must continue
strengthening the capacity of peacekeeping missions
to protect the women working in them. The Security
Council should also lend its strong support to efforts to
prevent intimidation, violence and attacks.
The Council is not starting from scratch. With
resolution 2493 (2019), which encourages the creation
of safe environments for civil society, including in
situations of armed conflict, and the neutralization
of harassment, violence and hate speech, we have
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

tools to intensify efforts in this area. However, the
responsibility is not the Council’s alone but that of
the entire United Nations system. That is why it is
crucial that the Secretary-General’s report entitled
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) centres security
policies on women and girls, based on the abundant
evidence testifying to the link between women’s
equal participation in peacemaking activities and the
effectiveness of those activities.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the delegations of Albania, Brazil, Gabon,
Ghana and the United Arab Emirates on starting their
two-year terms on the Security Council this month
and to wish them and the rest of the Council members
success in their work. Ecuador, which hopes to be
elected to the Council in June for the period from 2023
to 2024, will continue to closely follow the work of this
principal organ with special interest in its efforts to
promote and protect the participation of women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Norway for
convening this public ministerial debate on women and
peace and security, an issue of paramount importance,
during its presidency of the Council. I also thank
the briefers for their interventions this morning. My
delegation would like to underscore the following
five points.
First, the gender issue was addressed in all of its
aspects in resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security, which notably advanced the participation
of women in peace and security initiatives. Each
subsequent Security Council resolution on this topic
has recognized and reaffirmed the rights of women
and gender equality and underscored the importance of
the four Ps — the prevention of conflict, the protection
of women and girls, the participation of women and
the promotion of gender perspectives. Moreover, the
gender perspective has been integrated both upstream
and downstream into actions being taken to ensure
sustainable peace, a more inclusive democracy and a
true rule of law that protects women against all forms
of violence and discrimination.
Secondly, the participation of women in negotiation
processes increases the chances of conflict resolution
and sustainable peace. It was in that framework that
Morocco took the initiative to organize an international

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

conference on women, peace and security that examined
the crucial role of women in peace processes, among
other things. It was also an occasion to identify best
practices for strengthening women’s participation in
negotiations, conflict resolution and peacebuilding and
to renew the international community’s commitment
to women’s inclusion and gender equality in all
peacemaking and conflict-prevention strategies and to
the protection of women against all forms of violence
and intimidation.
Thirdly, under the patronage of His Excellency
King Mohammed VI, from 10 to 12 October 2018
Morocco hosted the third international conference
of the Global Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions, on the theme of expanding civic space
and promoting and protecting human rights defenders,
with a specific focus on women and the role of national
human rights institutions. The conference led to the
adoption of the Marrakech Declaration, which among
other things recalls the General Assembly’s 2013
adoption of resolution 68/181, on women human rights
defenders, and underscores the important role played
by women human rights defenders in the protection and
promotion of all human rights. It is important to note
that Morocco was a pioneer in introducing the issue
of human rights defenders within the United Nations,
leading to the Assembly’s adoption in December 1988
of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility
of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to
Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Morocco remains
indefatigably committed to the promotion and
protection of internationally recognized human rights
and to strengthening its partnership with civil society.
Fourthly, Morocco believes that United Nations
peace operations play a unique and crucial role in conflict
resolution, by supporting States as they emerge from
crises and providing them with multifaceted security,
political and peacebuilding support, which enables the
creation of safe, secure and inclusive environments
conducive to women’s full and meaningful participation
in all areas of peacebuilding. Where mandated by the
Security Council, its peacekeeping operations work to
ensure the full participation of women at all levels and
at every stage of conflict prevention, peace processes
and the protection of civilians.
Lastly, Morocco’s armed forces incorporate a
gender approach in accordance with the internationally
recognized principles that Morocco adheres to and that

22-233367/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

are enshrined in our 2011 Constitution. It also reaffirms
Morocco’s adherence to the Secretary-General’s systemwide Strategy on Gender Parity for the decade from
2018 to 2028 and affirms the crucial role that women
play in peace operations. Within the framework of our
armed forces’ participation, Moroccan Blue Helmets
are deployed in various United Nations peacekeeping
missions, including the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, in
order to protect the universal values of peace on which
our Organization is founded.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you for
this opportunity, Madam President, as well as for your
efforts to mainstream the women and peace and security
agenda in the work of the Council. Women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation at all stages of conflict
prevention and resolution is a key pillar of the women
and peace and security agenda. Resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent decisions bring gender-responsive
approaches to sustaining peace to the forefront and
highlight women’s crucial role as agents of change.
In many parts of the world, women have advanced
political change and contributed to sustainable peace
as peacekeepers, mediators, lawyers, journalists and
human rights defenders, among other vocations. At
the same time, women in those key roles often face
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence,
intimidation, threats, harassment and reprisals for
their work in bringing peace and preventing and
ending conflict.
We are concerned about the increase in verified
killings in 2020 of women human rights defenders,
journalists and trade unionists in conflict-affected
countries, as documented by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
owe it to those women to ensure that their human rights
are respected at all times and that the environments
they operate in are safe and enabling at all stages of
the conflict cycle. That includes overcoming gender
stereotypes and inequalities and moving away from
patriarchal masculinities, which are at the root of
gender-based violence and discrimination. It also means
providing adequate medical, psychosocial and legal
8/21

18/01/2022

assistance for all victims and survivors and ensuring
that perpetrators are held accountable.
We remain deeply concerned about the risk of the
targeted violence that women and girls are exposed to
in many conflicts, including in Yemen, Myanmar and
Ethiopia. We note in particular the precarious situation
of women and girls in Afghanistan, who have fought with
great courage and resolve for their rights and freedoms.
The ongoing financial and humanitarian crises have
disproportionately affected women, children, minority
communities and female-headed households. Violence
against Afghan women is sadly — and yet again — on
the rise. We call for protecting and ensuring respect
for all human rights, including the right of women and
girls to free expression, movement, quality education
and employment. Those who exercise effective control
in a country must comply with their obligations under
international human rights law and the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. Paragraph
4 of resolution 2593 (2021) encourages
“all parties to seek an inclusive, negotiated political
settlement, with the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, that responds to the desire
of Afghans to sustain and build on Afghanistan’s
gains over the last 20 years in adherence to the rule
of law”.
The backsliding in women’s political participation
over the past few months is disastrous for Afghanistan’s
future and its prospects for peace and should be
halted immediately.
We also want to highlight the situation in Belarus,
on which the Council has so far been silent. Many
women have stood up with courage and conviction to
advance political dialogue that is critical for democracy
and respect for human rights. The Women in White
movement is just one example of women’s crucial role
as agents of change around the globe. We condemn
and call for the investigation of the excessive use of
force and unlawful retaliation by the authorities
against peaceful protesters, including mass detentions,
intimidation, torture and sexual and gender-based
violence against those who are seeking political change
and respect for democratic principles. The perpetrators
must be held accountable. It is the obligation of the
United Nations, and the Council in particular, to work
to end impunity for such crimes and to ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

peacemaking, conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
as well as their protection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Madam, on your country’s presidency
and wish you every success in your role. We welcome
this open debate and thank you for organizing it. We
find the topic very relevant and timely, as the number of
cases of targeted violence in the context of women and
peace and security is unprecedentedly high. We consider
such practices unacceptable, and we should take every
measure at our disposal to reverse them immediately.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his 2021 report on women and peace and security
(S/2021/827), and to commend him for his leadership
and strong commitment to fostering the role of women
in all areas and the relevant decision-making processes.
As the report says, there are nearly 100 studies that
indicate some type of link between sex and gender
inequality and violent outcomes, which is particularly
worrisome and deserves our continuing attention. The
call for greater participation by women in peace and
security processes has never been more urgent. Women
contribute to ending conflicts, restoring shattered
communities and sustaining peace. It is therefore
essential to equip them with the necessary skills,
including by providing them with relevant training,
connecting decision-makers with women leaders and
ensuring women’s full participation in all the relevant
decision-making processes.
In that connection, eliminating barriers for
women should be at the top of our agenda, and there
are a number of tangible measures that can be taken
to strengthen the role of women, such as the adoption
of national action plans. As reflected in our own 20212025 national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), Slovakia strongly supports
women’s equal and full participation in all efforts to
create and maintain international peace and security,
while adopting and supporting tangible and targeted
measures aimed at increasing the percentage of women
in our armed forces and their representation in military
structures and leadership positions. We are proud to
lead the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform,
and together with our co-Chair, South Africa, we

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

are committed to working closely with the Group of
Friends of Gender Parity in specifically addressing the
issue of women’s role and participation in armed forces,
including peacekeeping.
With the aim of identifying avenues that can lead
to the creation of a safe and enabling environment and
to preventing and responding to threats, I would like to
briefly highlight four practical points.
The first is active strategic communications.
Emphasizing the role of women in peace and
security processes, supplying social media support
and preventing advocates for women and peace and
security from becoming isolated in their societies and
communities are issues of paramount importance.
Secondly, with regard to deployment, a focus
on understanding the human terrain and operational
challenges must be taken into account, supplemented by
monitoring the social media response and conducting
proactive information campaigns.
Thirdly, Member States could support the prevention
of violence and attacks by providing protection, which
is the main responsibility of host countries, and using
positive examples.
Fourthly, because an understanding of the
environment and the impact of media differs from
operation to operation, a positive approach to
the promotion of women and peace and security
representatives is required, as is ensuring that genderrelated issues are not presented in isolation from
mandated tasks.
Last but not least, I want to emphasize that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights plays an important role in this
regard. We therefore fully support increased and
enhanced cooperation between the Office and the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Madam President, allow
me to join my colleagues in congratulating you on
your assumption of the presidency and expressing
our appreciation for the convening of this debate. My
gratitude also goes to the distinguished briefers.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier today on behalf of the European Union,

22-233369/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

and I would like to add the following comments in my
national capacity.
Sustainable peace cannot be achieved without
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation at
all levels of decision-making. We welcome women’s
increasing participation in areas pertaining to
international peace and security. However, despite
the achievements made so far, progress in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda remains rather slow, and more work is needed
to achieve our objectives. More worryingly, existing
social and economic inequalities, especially for women
in fragile situations, have been worsened by the
ongoing pandemic. The number of killings of women
human rights defenders, journalists and trade unionists
increased in 2020 compared to previous years, as stated
in the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2021/827),
and cases of intimidation, threats and harassment
remain a matter of deep concern.
Ensuring the meaningful engagement of women in
the peace process is a high priority for Georgia. My
Government has been implementing the women and
peace and security agenda since 2011, when we adopted
our first national action plan. Our fourth national action
plan, for the period from 2022 to 2024, is currently being
deliberated on by the Government’s inter-agency team,
with the involvement of the relevant local civil-society
groups and international organizations. The action
plan constitutes a whole-of-Government approach
to integrating gender perspectives into the security
sector and into decision-making processes, using a
gender lens in peace negotiations, protecting the rights
of women and girls and promoting their meaningful
participation in conflict prevention and resolution. In
addition, the national action plan aims to protect the
rights of conflict-affected women through ensuring
their physical, social and economic security as well as
supporting their participation in decision-making.
In that regard, Georgia is working to keep the
issues of women affected by conflict, including
internally displaced persons, on the agenda of the
Geneva international discussions, the only format of
negotiations between Georgia and Russia on security
and humanitarian issues. With the support of UNWomen Georgia, the participants in the Geneva
discussions hold regular meetings with representatives
of civil society, including internally displaced women,
conflict-affected women and women’s rights advocacy
groups, in order to exchange information about the
10/21

18/01/2022

peace negotiations and ensure that the needs and
priorities of conflict-affected women are integrated
into the planning of the peace process. To meet our
commitments under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, we continue to support and promote
conflict-affected women in Georgia as a driving force
for public diplomacy. As a result, more than 65 per cent
of those involved in the peace process in Georgia today
are women. However, those efforts are undermined
by the ongoing occupation of Georgia’s Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali regions, where fundamental human rights
violations occur on a daily basis. Instead of supporting
and advancing the involvement of women, including
women human rights defenders, the occupying regime
brutally intimidates and silences them. The case of
the civil-society activist Ms. Tamar Mearakishvili is a
vivid example.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Georgia’s
commitment to integrating a gender perspective in
decision-making, protecting the rights of women and
promoting their meaningful participation in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I would like to thank
Norway for convening today’s timely open debate and
for its continued leadership on the women and peace
and security agenda.
It is critical that women participate fully, equally
and meaningfully in all peace and security processes
without the threat of reprisals, intimidation or violence.
Women have the right to lead and participate in
restoring, building and maintaining peace and security
and in governing their communities and countries. The
evidence shows that women’s meaningful participation
strengthens protection efforts, advances the human
rights of women and girls, accelerates economic
recovery, supports peacebuilding efforts and leads to
sustainable peace. The role of civil society, women’s
human rights defenders, peacebuilders and mediators is
invaluable. National action plans on women and peace
and security are essential to empowering women and
girls and eliminating violence against them. Through
its second national action plan, Australia continues to
work to ensure that women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace and security processes and the
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

elimination of sexual and gender-based violence are at
the centre of our efforts.
Australia is gravely concerned about the ongoing
escalation of reprisals, intimidation and violence against
women peacebuilders, civil-society representatives
and human rights defenders. The reports of targeted
killings of women’s rights defenders in Afghanistan
and on the situation of women and girls in Myanmar
are tragic reminders of the urgent need for collective
action. The diverse voices and legitimacy of women
must be defended and promoted at every level, and we
must continue to stand by those who need our support.
Australia will continue to do just that by standing with
its partners in order to strengthen women’s participation
and protect those at risk of or subjected to violence.
We commend the work of organizations dedicated
to protecting people under threat and ensuring that
women’s voices continue to be heard, prioritized
and valued. Australia especially acknowledges the
work of women’s rights organizations and human
rights defenders. We support increasing financing,
which is key to effective participation, and recognize
the importance of diverse partnerships, locally led
initiatives and resources in preventing conflict and
violence and promoting participation in peace and
security processes, including through the Women’s
Peace and Humanitarian Fund.
Mechanisms that enable women and girls to
participate meaningfully can also support the
identification and prevention of human rights violations
and abuses. The collection and use of data and research
in evidence-based decision-making and leadership is
important. We must embed gender equality and women’s
empowerment in all United Nations peace operations.
The Council has a critical role to play in leading action
to address the root causes of the intimidation, violence
and attacks that violate the human rights of women and
girls. We thank the women peacebuilders, civil-society
representatives and human rights defenders for their
work and for continuing to speak out.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to thank Norway
sincerely for convening today’s open debate on a
topic as relevant as that of addressing the violence,
intimidation and reprisals that target women involved
in peace processes. Through its resolution 1325 (2000),

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

the Security Council recognized for the first time the
central role that women should play in conflict prevention
and resolution. Since then, the world has become more
aware both of women’s difficult situation as well as of
their positive contributions in conflict situations. The
world is also increasingly aware of why it is so essential
to ensure women’s meaningful participation in conflict
prevention and in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. However, large gaps remain. It has been
more than 20 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and little progress has been made in
fully implementing it. Women continue to be excluded
from peace processes, which necessarily results in
agreements that not only fail to provide for women’s
rights and needs but also undermine the sustainability
of those peace processes.
Let us not forget that there is also a growing
number of armed groups for whom gender inequality
is a strategic goal and for whom misogyny forms part
of their central ideology. Bearing in mind the impact
that conflicts have on women’s lives, it is vital that
those who have the power to decide who gets to sit at
the negotiating table can guarantee women a seat and
that they can participate equitably and substantively.
However, women’s participation cannot be substantive
or meaningful if their physical safety is not also
assured. It is a deeply regrettable fact that women
negotiators, activists, politicians and human rights
defenders continue to be attacked for their involvement
in peace processes, including through sexual violence.
The Secretary-General’s 2021 report on women and
peace and security (S/2021/827) points to 35 verified
killings of women human rights defenders, journalists
and trade unionists in seven countries affected by
conflict in 2020. The threats and harassment visited on
many women in order to silence their voices and deter
them from participating in peace processes force many
of them to abandon their countries of origin.
The role that women play in peace processes must
be protected by States so that they can do their critical
work without fear of intimidation or reprisals. The
right of women to fully participate in every aspect of
public life depends on their ability to do so in a safe
environment. Threats against and attacks on women
peacebuilders are unacceptable. They deter women from
participation and leadership. That is particularly true of
women from marginalized communities, because they
already have to overcome many other barriers to enter
public life. States must take steps both for prevention

22-2333611/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

and to ensure accountability. They should take every
possible measure to avert threats and attacks against
women who participate in peace processes, while also
ensuring that if such acts do take place, the perpetrators
are held accountable.
Peacekeeping operations are another key pillar
of the women and peace and security agenda. On the
one hand, increasing the participation of women in
civil and military contingents is a critical factor in
ensuring the overall success of peace missions. It is
also vital to ensure that peacekeeping operations and
special political missions improve their monitoring
and reporting of threats and violence against women
negotiators, activists and human rights defenders, and
that such monitoring and reporting are included in early
warning system signals of conflict escalation.
The barriers to women’s participation are structural
and rooted in the various forms of discrimination
and violence that women have to deal with. They
are exacerbated by conflicts and crises. Threats and
violence against women peacebuilders are expressions
of misogyny, with the goal of preventing women
from doing their work. Normalizing the participation
of women in peace processes and shining a light on
the important role they play in this field, together
with increasing the cost of attacks on them through
accountability measures, are vital to broadening the
space for women’s participation.
The women and peace and security agenda must
be a priority not only for the Security Council but for
the United Nations as a whole. Women are agents of
change and pillars of their communities. Argentina
remains committed to that vision and views the women
and peace and security agenda as a key component of
efforts to ensure international peace and security.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Chile would like to commend Norway for
convening today’s open debate on the topic of protecting
women who participate in peace and security processes
and addressing the violence targeting them, at a time
when the coronavirus disease pandemic has made
abundantly clear the extent to which women around the
world are vulnerable to gender-based violence. Chile
would also like to thank the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, as well as the
other briefers, for their briefings this morning.
12/21

18/01/2022

Recent figures indicate that in 2020 the number of
verified cases of the murder of women human rights
defenders, journalists and trade unionists surpassed
that of previous years. Chile is deeply alarmed by
that deplorable state of affairs. Furthermore, with
regard to addressing the shadow pandemic of violence
against women, none of the ceasefire agreements that
were reached between 2018 and 2020 included gender
provisions. That means that, although we are aware of
the threats that women face, much remains to be done
to fulfil our commitments to protecting them from
violence, retaliation and intimidation.
In addition, we have not seen any significant
improvement with regard to representation, given that
in 2020 women constituted only 23 per cent of delegates
in peace processes led, or jointly led, by the United
Nations. To respond to that issue, peace processes must
establish guarantees for victims, include new social
compacts that address development inequality in a
structural and multidimensional manner, and protect
and strengthen women’s leadership in peacebuilding.
In addition, there should be a focus not only on
restoring the rights of women victims but also on the
transformational rebuilding of women’s dignity and
their role as active social actors in their communities
and social environments.
With the aim of prioritizing the role of women in
peace processes, Chile established a working group on
resolution 1325 (2000) that includes its Ministry for
Foreign Affairs, Ministry of the Interior and Public
Security, Ministry of Women and Gender Equity and
Ministry of National Defence.
We also currently have two national plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and are also
working on developing a third national plan that has
a broad focus on ensuring women’s participation in
peacebuilding processes, in synergy with the inspiring
work and principles of the Regional Network of Women
Mediators of the Southern Cone, of which Chile has
been a member since its launch in 2021.
In conclusion, Chile is convinced of the
positive impact of women’s participation, ranging
from humanitarian and peacebuilding work in the
field to peace process negotiations and high-level
decision-making. We remain committed to creating a
safe and enabling environment in which all women,
in particular women peacebuilders, human rights
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

defenders and civil society representatives, may carry
out their important work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security. I would now like to add the following remarks
in my national capacity.
Let me begin by expressing our great appreciation
to the Norwegian presidency and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway, Ms. Anniken Huitfeldt,
for convening this open debate on addressing violence
targeting women in peace and security processes and
ensuring that the topic remains high on the agenda of
the Security Council.
I would also like to thank the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, as well as the other briefers, for their
important insights.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has dramatically
changed and affected all areas of our lives, including
health, the economy, security and social protection. We
have also witnessed a significant setback for gender
equality that will require us to multiply our efforts and
set our priorities straight with regard to building back
better. We must acknowledge that gender equality is an
essential factor for security and stability in countries.
It is not only an important element in economic
development but also a critical predictor of stability
and security.
Numerous studies, as well as the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/827) on women and peace
and security, indicate that higher levels of gender
equality are associated with a lower propensity for
conflict both among and within States. Nevertheless,
the numbers in terms of women’s representation in
peace negotiations, mediation and other peacebuilding
efforts remain very low.
Women are frequently denied access to
decision-making, and even when they are involved
they are impacted by gender-based violence, including
assault, threats, abuse and harassment, both online and
offline. Women human rights defenders and journalists,
who are pivotal in promoting sustainable peace, are
killed, threatened and harassed. We do not even have
the complete picture of women experiencing all forms

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

of violence, as they are often hesitant and too scared to
report it. We must be more determined to ensure the
full, effective and accelerated implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. Our consistent
efforts are required at every stage to prevent reversals
and non-compliance.
Lithuania is in the process of implementing the
second instalment of its women and peace and security
national action plan covering the period 2020 to 2024,
which was drafted and implemented in close cooperation
with Lithuanian civil society, including women’s
organizations. This year we envisage a series of events
on women’s inclusion in international peacebuilding
and on the women and peace and security dimensions
of the European Union Common Security and Defence
Policy operations. The appointment of gender advisers
at our national defence and police headquarters, an
important element of our national action plan, is
under consideration.
Lithuania remains committed to implementing
the women and peace and security agenda, both
nationally and internationally. It has continuously
provided financial support to the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund since its launch in 2016.
We are also actively helping women from Belarus
who, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
were attacked, tortured or detained for their participation
in protests. Brave Belarusian women, including former
presidential candidate Mrs. Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya,
have found a temporary home in Lithuania. We regard
hosting exiled female opposition figures and their
political teams in Lithuania as a contribution to the
international women and peace and security agenda.
We urge all Member States to create a safe and
enabling environment for all those who protect
and promote gender equality; fulfil the obligations
to protect women peacebuilders, human rights
defenders and advocates for gender equality; and hold
perpetrators accountable.
We strongly encourage all Member States, including
members of the Council and the United Nations, to
take measures to provide sustained support to women
peacebuilders, human rights defenders and advocates
for gender equality.
The past couple of years have showed us that no
progress made in ensuring gender equality can be
taken for granted. The choices of today will affect our

22-2333613/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

18/01/2022

recovery, peace and stability for years to come, as well
as the international community’s ability to prevent and
respond to future crises. We should therefore choose
wisely, taking into account that only inclusive peace
can be sustainable.

participation in peacekeeping operations of both
uniformed and civilian women, including in senior
leadership positions, and to continue incorporating their
participation in future relevant resolutions, including
peacekeeping mandate renewals.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.

Thirdly, promoting women as mediators and
negotiators is important. Women’s active leadership is
an integral part of sustaining peace in communities.
However, the fact is that peace processes remain
dominated by men. That is why Indonesia initiated the
Southeast Asian Network of Women Peace Negotiators
and Mediators in 2020 to advance the inclusion and
effective participation of women as mediators and
negotiators in peace processes, as a regional effort
to complement the Global Alliance of Regional
Women Mediators Networks. This past week, during
the anniversary of the Southeast Asian Network,
Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, reaffirmed the country’s commitment to
continue championing women’s contributions to peace
and security at the regional and global levels.

Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I take this opportunity
to thank Norway for convening this important open
debate, and I thank all briefers for their presentations.
As we heard from the briefers, 22 years after
the women and peace and security agenda was first
introduced, violence targeting women and girls persists
and has even worsened. I therefore reaffirm Indonesia’s
commitment to fully and effectively implementing the
women and peace and security agenda. On that note, I
would like to highlight the following points.
First, ensuring accountability in combating violence
targeting women is crucial. The primary responsibility
to prevent and address violence targeting women in
conflict lies with national authorities. Governments
must protect victims, with full respect for their human
rights. Strengthening the reach and the capacity of
national authority is therefore vital to facilitating
access to justice and ensuring accountability. Victims
of violence should also be provided with support beyond
the courts, especially in regaining their confidence and
role in society. We commend Governments that have put
in place more protective legal and policy frameworks to
protect women and children at risk.
Secondly, there is a need to enhance the role
of women peacekeepers, who play a strategic role,
particularly in protecting and engaging women in
the affected communities. Indonesia is committed to
increasing the participation of women peacekeepers
as an important strategy for addressing violence
targeting women in conflict. Central to that is the
implementation of resolution 2538 (2020), on women
peacekeepers, a milestone resolution that recognizes
the indispensable role of women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We are proud to have
introduced to the Security Council that resolution,
which received the full support of the Council and the
wider United Nations membership.
We call upon the Council and the Secretariat to
advance the implementation of resolution 2538 (2020)
by promoting the full, effective and meaningful
14/21

Indonesia will also continue its commitment to
increasing the capacity of Afghan women. This year, we
are committed to focusing on the issue of the education
and empowerment of Afghan women, including through
the provision of scholarships.
We stand with the victims and survivors of violence
targeting women and support their human rights.
Indonesia envisions the women and peace and security
agenda as a transformative force to bring about more
effective peacekeeping and peacebuilding. To protect
women, we need to strengthen their role.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): Austria aligns itself
with the statements made on behalf of the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security. We commend Norway for its efforts to address
this important topic concerning the role of women
human rights defenders engaging in conflict resolution
and fostering peace in their communities. We thank the
briefers for sharing their perspectives.
All our intergovernmental efforts to achieve
peace and stability in conflict settings need to build
on local ownership. Austria therefore fully supports
the inclusion in the Security Council of civil society
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

representatives and country-specific discussions in
order to inform its deliberations.
We are appalled by the reported acts of harassment
and intimidation towards representatives of civil
society organizations who have engaged with the
Security Council and the United Nations. Testimony to,
and dialogue with, Member States at the United Nations
must never result in official or hidden reprisals. We
call on Member States to respect, promote and protect
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of their
citizens, in particular the right to be free of fear and the
right of freedom of expression and opinion.
Austria is a strong supporter of active civil-society
participation in peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
mediation and United Nations-led processes, including
through regional organizations such as the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Austrian
Study Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution is
working with women in several Western African
countries to strengthen their capacity and engagement
in humanitarian assistance; it is also developing female
perspectives on water-related conflicts in Libya and
has hosted civil-society-led mediation conferences,
including from the South Caucasus region.
Among the many civil-society partners we support,
Austria would like to highlight the work of the Global
Network of Women Peacebuilders for carrying the
women and peace and security agenda from the Security
Council to the ground level through localization
programmes and national action plans.
As a contributor to the United Nations Voluntary
Fund for Victims of Torture, Austria also underlines the
importance of supporting victims of reprisals who have
faced torture and cruel treatment. We also commend
the role of UN-Women for duly exercising its mandate
to advocate for the active engagement and leadership of
women in all spheres of society and to include girls and
the succeeding generation in all its activities.
In September 2021, Austria pledged €20 million
to ensure humanitarian support for the people of
Afghanistan, €5 million of which is dedicated to
supporting the activities of the UN-Women Afghanistan
country office. Through the various activities of that
office, Afghan women organizations and Afghan
women human rights defenders will receive support
and protection, such as access to safe houses. Through
that Austrian funding, UN-Women will create channels
and open political avenues to enable Afghan women to

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

engage on women’s rights and help shape Afghanistan’s
future. UN-Women will actively seek ways to amplify
the priorities of women and girls at all levels of
decision-making in Afghanistan, including in country
and intergovernmental platforms.
Austria will also continue to engage with the United
Nations Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund and
its rapid response window on women’s participation
in local peace processes, including in Afghanistan,
Liberia, Mali, Iraq and South Sudan. We commend the
Fund on the successful launch on the margins of today’s
meeting of its new funding window for women human
rights defenders. Let us commit together to protecting
women human rights defenders and unite our forces for
the full and effective implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): It is my honour to deliver
this statement before the Security Council and the
Norwegian presidency on the women and peace and
security agenda. We are thankful to Norway, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
excellent civil society briefers for their remarks this
morning. It is vital to the Council and a great tribute to
its presidency that diverse voices are being heard on this
peace and security agenda — one that is fundamental to
its work and success.
Peace operations have been demonstrating
improved integration of humanitarian development
into peacebuilding interventions, which is helpful.
However, far more remains to be done in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) and other associated and relevant
resolutions. The world is witnessing diverse threats to
peace and security fuelled by the development of new
high-technology and highly accessible weapons, the
use of digital tools, climate change and dangerously
growing inequality. However, across all of those
drivers, conflicts always have a more disproportionate,
intense and devastating impact on women and girls.
Fiji is committed to systematically advancing the
women and peace security agenda, as reflected across
our society and politics. Domestically, resolution
1325 (2000) has without a doubt enabled a significant
increase in the number of women in security institutions
across the country, which in turn is reflected in the
growing proportions of women who participate in
police and military engagements in peace operations

22-2333615/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

internationally. Women make up 56 per cent of Fijian
police deployed to peacekeeping duties. We are proud
of the deployment of an all-female section of the Fijian
contingent of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force to manage one of the areas under
the Force.
Fiji is determined to continue systematically
increasing the number of women in its military and
police deployments across peacekeeping operations.
That is not coincidental. As a long-time peacekeeping
nation, it is something that Fiji has learned from its own
deployments. Fiji has participated in United Nations
peace operations for more than 40 years. We have learned
from our own deployments that women peacekeepers
are better at defusing tensions at checkpoints. Women
peacekeepers contribute unique insights to identifying
sexual violence and preventing the appropriation of
humanitarian assistance. They are better at identifying
the weaponization of food and health care.
Throughout the Pacific region, each time the role
of women in peacebuilding has been mainstreamed,
significant outcomes have been achieved. The role of
women in the peaceful political transitions in Papua
New Guinea and Bougainville has provided important
lessons. The role of women in defusing intercommunity
conflicts in the Solomon Islands through a regional
peace operation has been extremely instructive as well.
Across those conflicts, the strong partnerships
between the host Governments, Pacific regional
agencies and the United Nations were compelling
enablers for increasing the participation of women. We
find that when women are engaged, are seated at the
negotiation table and participate across all processes,
settlements are more likely to be inclusive, development
outcomes are more likely to stick, and peace is more
likely to last.
We have been asked to reflect on some ways
forward. The Security Council has observed that women
peacebuilders, mediators and civil society organizations
receive less than 5 per cent of the total financing
available for such work. That primary obstacle, which
is true for both bilateral and multilateral assistance
supporting such work, needs to be addressed. It would
be good to know how far the United Nations itself has
come in redressing that. It would be a very good start.
Resolution 1325 (2000) emphasizes that women
should be involved fully and equally in the prevention
of conflicts. The safety and protection of women
16/21

18/01/2022

peacebuilders and human rights defenders is therefore
fundamental. That calls for strengthened capacities
within and across peace operations in a variety of
areas, as well as for more detailed briefings to the
Security Council and, in turn, to the General Assembly
on violations of the rights of women peacebuilders
and mediators.
Finally, Fiji reiterates that one of the gravest threats
to peace and security is climate change. The impacts
of climate change on conflicts are most intensely
experienced by women and girls. The climate and
security agenda and the women and peace and security
agenda are one and the same. They are not separate
agendas, and they are not silos. The faster the Council
accepts that, the better off we will be in implementing
the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia thanks
Norway for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security. We also thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
We recognize the crucial role of women in efforts
to build sustainable peace; therefore, the issue of
violence targeting women in peace and security
processes is indeed an important issue to address.
Malaysia condemns all forms of violence against
women. We are deeply concerned about the reports of
violence, intimidation and reprisals faced by women
peacebuilders, civil society representatives and
human rights defenders. Such reports are disturbing,
particularly at a time when the coronavirus disease
pandemic has already significantly and negatively
impacted women. In conflict areas, the socioeconomic
impacts that women and children were already suffering
have only grown worse during the pandemic.
Attacks on those who are dedicated to achieving
peace inflict a great setback that undermines the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions. In that regard, we call for those who
perpetrate such attacks against women in peace
processes to be held accountable. Malaysia also believes
there is a need to intensify efforts to promote and
ensure women’s full and equal participation in peace
and security processes, as a prerequisite to achieving
sustainable peace.
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

Malaysia therefore calls for Member States, in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda,
to take greater efforts and initiatives that are womencentred and include gendered analysis. Malaysia fully
supports that agenda through its consistent financial
contributions to UN-Women in its endeavour to promote
women’s meaningful participation and the integration of
gender perspectives into peace and security processes.
Malaysia also co-sponsored resolution 2538
(2020), on women in peacekeeping, in line with our
commitments to the women and peace and security
agenda and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We
believe that the presence of women peacekeepers in
conflict zones can contribute positively to promoting
inclusivity in efforts to pursue sustainable peace and
development, and we are cognizant of the fact that
conflicts affect women disproportionately more than
men. It is appropriate that the number of women
peacekeepers deployed to conflict and post-conflict
areas is increasing to ensure that peacekeeping
operations are more gender-responsive.
Malaysia itself is steadily increasing the number
of women peacekeepers it deploys annually and
hopes to reach by 2028 the targets outlined by the
United Nations concerning the proportion of women
peacekeepers. That is reflected in our latest deployment
under the United Nations banner in Lebanon, where our
contingent, which includes 85 female personnel, has the
largest number of women peacekeepers.
At the regional level, Malaysia is committed
to working closely with other member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to
advance the women and peace and security agenda in
the region, particularly by enhancing the role of women
in conflict prevention and resolution, post-conflict
reconstruction and rehabilitation. ASEAN is currently
finalizing its Regional Plan of Action on Women, Peace
and Security.

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

I convey my best wishes to them all in discharging
the duties entrusted to them by the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing
this open debate on women and peace and security.
I would also like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the two civil
society representatives for their briefings.
We stress the importance of working collectively at
the international level, including with civil society, to
implement and follow up resolution 1325 (2000). That
resolution calls on the international community to adopt
the measures needed to increase women’s participation
in decision-making, conflict prevention and settlement,
as well as in building and maintaining peace, and to
enhance legal protection for victims of armed conflicts,
especially women and girls, including those working to
achieve peace and security, in a way that highlights the
role of women as drivers of peace and development in
their societies.
In our efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000),
Jordan is currently drafting its second national plan
of action for the period 2022 to 2025, which includes
the participation of all segments of civil society and
stakeholders with a view to setting national priorities
according to current and future needs while taking
into account both climate change and comprehensive
security. The plan of action will consider our
international commitments and address the strategic
objectives of the 1995 Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action with regard to armed conflict, including
increasing the participation of women in conflict
resolution and decision-making.

Malaysia remains convinced that women’s
participation is key to the success and longevity
of peace processes. Malaysia reaffirms its strong
commitment to the efforts to advance the women and
peace and security agenda and will work with others to
ensure the safe participation of women at all levels of
peace processes and in mediation efforts.

The plan of action will also take into account the
Kingdom’s commitment to achieving the goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, especially
Goal 5, on achieving gender equality and empowering
all women and girls, and Goal 16, on promoting peaceful
and inclusive societies for sustainable development,
providing access to justice for all and building effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the new members of the Security Council
on their election to the Council for the term 2022-2023.

It is important to disseminate a culture that
promotes gender equality and enhances the role of
women and girls in building a culture of peace, while

22-2333617/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

recognizing the importance of education, training and
rehabilitation in order to advance the skills of women
and focusing at the same time on the role of men and
young people in promoting the women and peace and
security agenda.
Jordan has always been a driver of peace in the
Middle East despite all the current challenges it faces
in the region, including the large flow into Jordan
of refugees as a result of regional conflicts, most of
whom are women, girls and children. That has imposed
significant stress on our local communities and led to
social and behavioural changes, including marriages
involving minors and domestic violence within
the camps.
Jordan has dealt with the challenges resulting
from the Syrian refugee crisis by establishing and
implementing the necessary mechanisms and measures
while launching awareness campaigns in local and
refugee communities. In partnership with UN-Women,
UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, we also launched a
rehabilitation programme to encourage the voluntary,
safe and dignified return of refugees.
It is equally important to provide follow-up
mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as to adopt indicators for performance
evaluation and guarantee the necessary financial
resources for the implementation of national plans,
while also providing psychological support to the
victims of violence and intensifying awarenessraising campaigns.
In conclusion, I emphasize that women should be at
the forefront of leadership and a driver for negotiation
and mediation efforts along with awareness-raising
within their communities. Experience has shown that
the true participation of women will have a positive
impact on the success and sustainability of peace
and security plans. Women play a pivotal role in socalled preventive diplomacy and soft diplomacy, thus
enhancing the trust of communities in the capabilities
of women in terms of assuming the highest leadership
positions and achieving the highest rates of success.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Liepnieks (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the Head of the Delegation
18/21

18/01/2022

of the European Union and the Group of Friends of
Women, Peace and Security.
Let me begin by expressing appreciation for
Norway’s long-standing leadership promoting the
women and peace and security agenda. Also, I extend
special thanks to Ms. Bachelet, Ms. Yaftali and
Ms. Asoka for offering a comprehensive perspective
on the challenges and opportunities regarding women’s
participation in peace processes.
Discussions such as this are crucial to raising
awareness of the obstacles that women face daily
in their efforts to contribute to international peace
and security. As outlined in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2021/827), women peacebuilders and civil activists
are continuously exposed to harassment and attacks.
Latvia is deeply concerned about the surge in killings
of women human rights defenders and journalists in
2020 — surpassing the numbers reported for 2019 and
2018. There is also an alarming level of underreporting
and self-censorship, which results in the majority of
cases being left uncovered. That is not acceptable.
We must pool our efforts to counter those threats
and harassment against women, which are aimed at
silencing them and precluding their participation.
Silence equals powerlessness; when silencing women,
we make them think that they have no rights, no value,
no voice. The international community, including the
Security Council, must redouble its efforts and use
all available means to reaffirm that this is not true.
There should be zero tolerance towards cases where
women who have previously briefed the Security
Council face threats and persecution. As stated in
the Secretary-General’s report, the relevant sanctions
committees continue to be underutilized as a means of
holding accountable those responsible for violations of
women’s rights.
Latvia strongly believes that the empowerment
of women and their inclusive engagement, as well
as gender equality, is an essential foundation for a
peaceful, secure and sustainable society. It also applies
to all aspects of international peace and security. For
those reasons, gender equality and the rights of women
are Latvia’s longstanding priorities.
As a member State elected to the United Nations
Commission on the Status of Women until 2025 and
as a Vice-Chair of the Commission’s Bureau for the
next two sessions, Latvia is committed to continuing
22-23336

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

to play an active role in shaping and enforcing global
standards and policies for gender equality. As of this
year, Latvia has also become an elected member of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Latvia fully
supports the commitment of the PBC to strengthening
the role of women in the post-conflict phase. In addition,
Latvia invests in United Nations efforts in a practical
way by providing financial support to UN-Women.
In 2021, for the first time Latvia made a financial
contribution to UNICEF, which also plays an important
role in broader efforts related to the women and peace
and security agenda.
Latvia recognizes that effective measures leading
to the global empowerment of women begin with
responsive and responsible policies at home. On 14 July
2020, the Latvian Government approved Latvia’s
national action plan on women and peace and security
for the period 2020-2025. The plan foresees three main
tasks, which focus on raising public awareness of gender
equality issues and the elimination of gender-based
violence, especially in the younger generation; training
in the defence and home affairs sector, including the
establishment of a gender adviser’s position; and the
transfer of Latvia’s experience and knowledge. All
those tasks are being implemented in close cooperation
with non-governmental organizations, civil society
and our foreign partners. For example, the Latvian
non-governmental organization MARTA Centre is
actively involved in educating young women on gender
equality, in particular in the European Union Eastern
Partnership countries and Central Asian countries.
Let me conclude by reiterating a simple truth:
women having a voice is a crucial and central premise of
all human rights. The ability of women to speak up and
to participate is an essential element of a prosperous,
equal and safe world. It is important to break the
silence. When the international community witnesses
violence against women and girls, we must not sit back
but act decisively.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, I wish to
thank Norway for having organized this important
open debate. I wish also to extend my thanks to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, for her briefing.
I had the honour to organize last October, in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

an ambassadorial meeting on women, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. The Commission had a very rich
discussion on how to enhance the leading role of women
in efforts at peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Also last November and under the Egyptian
presidency, the African Union Peace and Security
Council held an open session on the implementation
and commemoration of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security.
Egypt is currently developing its first national
action plan on the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. In that regard, Egypt
believes that adopting action plans on women and
peace and security is not sufficient. Adequate resources
should be allocated to the implementation of such plans.
While the coronavirus disease pandemic and its
far-reaching socioeconomic effects brought additional
challenges to the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, Egypt was keen to use
the opportunity of virtual channels to advance the
agenda’s implementation. The Cairo International
Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and
Peacebuilding held a virtual dialogue on “Advancing
the implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda in a new normal: women’s leadership in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace”. The dialogue
addressed the challenges and the opportunities offered
by the response to the pandemic to advance the agenda.
The virtual dialogue shed light on the challenges
hindering women’s meaningful efforts in the area of
peacebuilding, including the need to enhance Africa’s
digital infrastructure to provide better access to
technology to women peacebuilders.
The recommendations of the dialogue fed into the
substantive preparation of the second edition of the
Aswan Forum, where they were presented and discussed
with decision-makers, including African leaders and
high-level officials from international and regional
organizations, the private sector and civil society. Egypt
was keen to make the Aswan Forum gender-balanced
and to present a number of positive examples of women
active in the fields of peace and security.
His Excellency the President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt was one of the first leaders to join the Circle
of Leadership initiative to prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Raising awareness against sexual exploitation and

22-2333619/21

S/PV.8949 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

abuse is an integral part of the comprehensive training
received by Egyptian and African forces prior to their
deployment in peacekeeping operations.
Egypt takes pride in championing the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on United Nations
action on sexual exploitation and abuse since its
seventy-first session, the latest of which is resolution
75/321, adopted last September. The resolution
promotes a system-wide approach to implementing
the zero-tolerance policy aimed at eliminating such
heinous acts.
Egypt reiterates its emphasis on the importance
of women’s participation at the negotiating table
and on building their capacities to enable them to
effectively participate in peace negotiations and
peacebuilding efforts.
In conclusion, Egypt calls for renewed political and
moral commitments to further support and empower
women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
Women are the fundamental agents of change during
the transitional period from conflict to development.
Their empowerment is a must for a healthy and coherent
society aiming to achieve sustainable peace.

18/01/2022

Let us not forget that it is the duty of the international
community and the States Members of the United
Nations present here today to ensure an environment
that enables women human rights defenders to exercise
their right to participate in all aspects of public life
in line with resolutions 2222 (2015), 2467 (2019) and
2493 (2019). That is first and foremost a rights issue,
but it is also a crucial step towards building inclusive
sustainable peace. The role of women human rights
defenders is integral to all four pillars of the women and
peace and security agenda — participation, protection,
prevention and relief.
The increasing number of reprisals against women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders on a global
scale is alarming, as also highlighted by the latest annual
report of the Secretary-General on cooperation with
the United Nations, its representatives and mechanisms
in the field of human rights, which covers reprisals
concerning the United Nations system as a whole.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.

Intimidation and reprisals against women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders have taken
on new forms during the pandemic, both offline and
online. Through Front Line Defenders, the Nordics
support a fast, flexible and effective 24-hour emergency
service that responds to the protection needs of women
human rights defenders who are at immediate risk.

Mr. Hermann (Denmark): The Nordic countries
almost have the final word. I am delivering this statement
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.

In order to address the protection gap faced by
women peacebuilders and human rights defenders,
the Nordics wish to put forward the following points
and recommendations.

The full implementation of the resolutions that
constitute the women and peace and security agenda
is a key priority for the Nordic countries. We thank
successive presidencies of the Security Council for
their commitment to ensuring a sustained focus on
women and peace and security in the Council’s work,
and we welcome today’s focus on addressing the
protection gap that women peacebuilders, human rights
defenders and civil-society representatives face. Their
insights and recommendations are essential and must
feed into actions concerning how to better ensure their
future protection.

First, it is imperative to address the protection gap
through consultations with women peacebuilders and
human rights defenders themselves, factoring in their
unique risk assessments and needs in order to ensure
their protection in a gender-transformative way. That
also pertains to the Security Council. We encourage
Council members to continue inviting women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders to brief
the Council, while engaging in tailored due diligence
measures in order to ensure a safe and enabling space
for their participation and — most important of all — to
act on their recommendations and not just listen and
take note.

The realization of women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in peace and political
processes is at the heart of the women and peace and
security agenda. A safe and enabling environment is a
precondition for that.
20/21

Secondly, where prevention and mitigation fail,
robust accountability measures are key. We call on
Member States to adopt a zero-tolerance policy in
order to address reprisals and follow up with robust
22-23336

Women and peace and security

18/01/2022

and systematic
all perpetrators.

accountability

measures

against

Thirdly, adopting concrete follow-up measures
to reprisals involves ensuring that all relevant
actors are informed of such incidents, including the
Secretary-General, the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council. That entails that all United
Nations representatives and mechanisms include
in their reporting references to credible allegations
of intimidation, reprisals and hampering of United
Nations access.
We therefore welcome Human Rights Council
resolution 48/17, of October 2021, which invites
the Secretary-General to submit the annual report
presented annually to the Human Rights Council on
cooperation with the United Nations, its representatives
and mechanisms in the field of human rights also to
the General Assembly, starting from its seventyseventh session.
We would like to encourage that the report also
be presented to the General Assembly, which would
allow for information-sharing on matters of key
importance for the United Nations system as a whole
and consequently the full United Nations membership
in order to ensure adequate follow-up to reprisals.

S/PV. 8949 (Resumption 1)

The Nordics are committed to working together
with the United Nations at both the Headquarters and
field levels to create a safe and enabling environment
for women peacebuilders and human rights defenders.
We appeal to Council members to incorporate language
on protection mechanisms into the mandates of United
Nations peace operations. We fully support the
important work of human rights components within
peace operations. They have a vital role to play in
ensuring monitoring, reporting and ensuring gendertransformative support for human rights defenders and
peacebuilders at risk on the ground.
The Nordics encourage the provision of rapid,
flexible and targeted funding for the effective protection
of women peacebuilders, human rights defenders and
civil society representatives. We welcome the funding
window for women human rights defenders under the
Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund as an important
new initiative. The threats against women human
rights defenders in Afghanistan acted as a catalyst for
that initiative.
Let me conclude by stating that it is our sincere
aspiration that today’s debate will be a vital first step
towards more effectively addressing violence targeting
women’s participation in peace and security processes.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

22-2333621/21
