S/PV.7231

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7231st meeting

Wednesday, 30 July 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 22 July 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/526)

14-48817 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1448817*

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 22 July 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/526)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/526, which contains a letter dated
22 July 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
At the outset, I will make an introductory statement
summarizing the work of the Council for this month.
Let me start by recalling that during Rwanda’s
current term on the Council — during which my
country has twice presided over the Council, in April
2013 and in July 2014 — we decided to convene a wrapup session at the end of both presidencies. In April 2013,
the meeting was organized under the format of a private
meeting, closed to the public and the media. But this
year, Rwanda decided to convene a wrap-up session
under the format of a public briefing. The convening of
this meeting under this format is based on the need to
enhance transparency and to enable the larger public to
be well apprised of the Council’s work.
We recall that under Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, it is the United Nations general
membership that represents the citizens of all our
countries and that confers on the Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. I state in the concept note circulated
earlier this month that this wrap-up session shall be an
opportunity for Council members to have an exchange
of views on the situations addressed by the Council
and on its methods of work during this month. It is also
useful in helping the United Nations membership and
the public to better understand the activities of and
dynamics in the Security Council.

2/22

30/07/2014

However, as has been the practice since the
Pakistani presidency revived the tradition of wrap-up
sessions in January 2013, this meeting has not been
convened to give Council members an additional
opportunity to reiterate their well-known positions on
substantive items discussed during the month. Rather,
it shall be an opportunity for the Council to assess its
work through country-specific situations and thematic
issues considered during the month and to critically
examine its progress on those issues, its processes and
how it can increase its efficiency and effectiveness.
Turning to the activities of the Council during
July 2014, by the end of the month we will have
held 35 meetings overall, mainly related to conflictspecific situations but also to thematic debates such as
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. Those
meetings included two open debates, which were the
quarterly open debate on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, held on Tuesday, 22 July, and the
open debate on regional partnerships in peacekeeping
and its evolution, held on Monday, 28 July.
With the meeting scheduled tomorrow, we will have
held 10 briefings, including emergency briefings on the
situations in Israel-Palestine and in eastern Ukraine, as
well as a briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding. That
latter briefing was followed by an informal interactive
dialogue among the members of the Security Council,
the chairs of various country configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the chair of the PBC
Working Group on Lessons Learned and the countries
on the PBC’s agenda.
The Security Council also convened 15 consultations
and a meeting of the troop- and police-contributing
countries of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP).
During the month of July 2014, the Security
Council adopted unanimously five resolutions,
including resolution 2165 (2014) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria; resolution 2166 (2014) on the
downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17; resolution
2167 (2014) on regional partnerships in peacekeeping,
and resolutions 2168 (2014) and 2169 (2014), adopted
this morning, extending the mandates of UNFICYP
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
respectively.
Lastly, the Council adopted three presidential
statements, 16 press statements and three press
elements. It is worth noting that the number of press

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

statements adopted this month is the highest since
the introduction of the press statement as a tool of the
Council, in November 2000.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to begin by welcoming your initiative, Sir, in
convening this wrap-up meeting, the sixth one of
the year. I will not repeat the reasons why Argentina
considers these meetings of fundamental importance.
The fact that all non-permanent members and some
permanent members have convened or planned to
convene wrap-up meetings during their presidencies
this year will, we hope, encourage those members who
retain doubts about their usefulness and value to do the
same.
According to your directions, I will evaluate the
Security Council’s working during the month of July
with a view to proposing some recommendations
on how the Council could improve its efficiency and
effectiveness, and also its legitimacy.
I would like to first thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing the open debate on the participation of
regional organizations in peacekeeping operations.
Given that the very Charter of the United Nations
promotes the Council’s use of “regional agencies” in
fulfilling its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the future of United
Nations peacekeeping operations is inextricably linked
to the process of regionalization of peacekeeping
missions.
Also, in view of the significant changes that have
taken place in such operations since Argentina joined
the Council in 2013, with increasingly robust mandates
and the use of new technologies, to cite just a few, these
debates provide the entire membership with a forum
in which to express their views and also to participate,
to the extent to which they set out their views, in the
decision-making process, which my country believes is
how it should be.
You, Mr. President, have had the challenging and
sad privilege of conducting our work during 15 days
that have perhaps been the most dramatic and intense
in recent years. Those 15 days have seen real turning
points in the three conflicts — of the many and very
serious conflicts on the Council’s agenda — that are
keeping the international community in suspense in

S/PV.7231

view of their implications not only for regional peace
and security but also at global level.
During those 15 days, on 14 July the Council
members were able to overcome our differences and
adopt resolution 2165 (2014), by which we decided
that humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and
their international partners could, with notification to
the Syrian authorities, use routes across conflict lines
and the four authorized border crossings, as well as
those already in use, in order to ensure humanitarian
assistance. However, the fact that the resolution was
necessary is the result of systematic and deliberate
non-compliance, by all parties to the Syrian conflict,
with the Council’s prior decisions, including resolution
2139 (2014), adopted barely five months ago.
Two weeks is too soon to evaluate the implementation
of resolution 2165 (2014), but we hope and demand that
it will lead to the change in the trend that we fruitlessly
anticipated after the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014)
and that it will begin to produce a positive change in the
lives of thousands of people.
Three days later, on 17 July, we witnessed one of the
worst tragedies in international commercial aviation, in
which almost 300 people lost their lives while flying
over an area that has been enveloped in violence, in a
crisis situation that holds the international community
and the Security Council in suspense, if not because
of the number of victims — although the latest figures
indicate that more than 700 civilians have died since the
start of the Government’s military campaign against the
separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine in mid-April — at
least because of its geopolitical dimension and potential
ramifications in terms of international peace and
security.
For the first time in four months, the horror
at the consequences of an incident that was not
caused intentionally — at least, we hope that is the
case — enabled Council members, not without difficulty
and after long negotiations, to achieve a consensus
that led to the adoption on 21 July of resolution 2166
(2014). Barely 10 days after adoption of the resolution
the Council’s calls appear not to have been heard, given
the persistent difficulties in accessing the site of the
downed plane to finish recovering the bodies of the
victims and conduct an investigation of the incident,
as military activities in the area have not ceased, as the
Council demanded.

14-488173/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

During those 15 days as we have again seen, for the
third time in less than six years, Gaza being submerged
again in violence — violence suffered mostly by the
civilian population, including children and women.
Despite appeals by the Council, children, women,
disabled persons, innocent civilians have suffered
the worst forms of violence in these days. Not only
the Council but also other voices of the international
community called for moderation.
However, we have seen only an intensification of
the fighting and an open challenge to the obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
and the protection of civilians. Faced with the horror
of more than 1,300 civilian victims, attacks on schools
and the deepening humanitarian crisis that exceeds the
international community’s capacity to respond, Council
members were able to agree on elements for the press,
a press statement (SC/11472) and even a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/13), for the adoption of which
we met at midnight on a Sunday, since we could not
do otherwise given the urgency and gravity of the
situation.
In that most recent statement of 28 July, the Council
called for an immediate ceasefire. Despite that, within
less than 24 hours, just yesterday, Gaza suffered the
worst bombings since the beginning of the recent crisis.
In the same presidential statement, the Council called
on all parties to respect civilian and humanitarian
facilities, including those of the United Nations. This
morning, we woke in New York to the news of the
deaths of 15 people as a result of an attack on a United
Nations school that was sheltering Gaza refugees.
Despite their differences, Syria, Ukraine and
Israel-Palestine have in common the fact that they are
experiencing conflicts in which the Security Council has
a limited, if not marginal, role owing to the differences
among its permanent members, which, in turn,
reflect — it would be unfair not to recognize it — the
differences among the international community. Such
differences are evident not only in the disagreements
but also in the agreements reached within the Council
through its resolutions, presidential statements and
other pronouncements, which, at best, are weak and
ambiguous and are usually completely ignored by the
parties to whom they are addressed. The vacuum left by
the Security Council has been filled, in the best case,
by countries, leaders and regional organizations.

4/22

30/07/2014

In your concept note (S/2014/526, annex),
Mr. President, you asked us to make recommendations
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of our work.
I am not sure that I have specific recommendations to
make but I have a general appeal.
Just as we call for the active role of countries,
leaders and organizations in the various crises, we
require the same of the Security Council. We do so
as a part of it. We say that every time that we meet
to address such situations, and we reiterate it today.
We believe that the Security Council, assuming the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter, can and
should more strongly support the efforts to establish
the conditions for the parties from Ukraine and Syria
to Israel and Palestine to resume dialogue in order to
achieve specific political solutions, which are the only
guarantee for a lasting peace and security.
We far from oppose bilateral diplomacy or
diplomacy among groups of States or that of other
organizations, but not at the expense of leaving the
Security Council as a body empty of content and unable
to act in the settlement of conflicts. It is a question
of finding complementary, convergent and effective
strategies. It is about recovering ethics and of fulfilling
the Charter mandate.
Argentina believes that true multilateralism, such as
that found in the space and scope of the United Nations,
cannot be seen as an obstacle to achieving a more just
and peaceful world. It is not about multilateralism versus
bilateral relations or multilateralism versus regional
organizations. It is about each of those dimensions and
strategies being united and coordinated in a common
goal, while acknowledging, at the same time, that it
is the multilateral aspect that ensures that all States
and their peoples, without exception, can be heard and
recognized as equal in dignity and rights.
I do not know if this is the last meeting over which
you, Sir, will preside but, as it is a necessary meeting
that the Security Council should hold, I would like
most sincerely to thank you, Mr. President, and your
entire team for your leadership of our work during the
month of July. I also avail myself of this opportunity
to wish the United Kingdom the greatest success
in its presidency and to offer it all the support of the
Argentinian delegation that it needs.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like at the start of my statement to thank you,
Mr. President, for having scheduled a wrap-up session

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

on our work this month. As you know, Sir, my delegation
strongly supports such an exercise. It gives us a welcome
opportunity not only to review our work during the
past month but also to look ahead. I also welcome your
initiative, Sir, of holding the meeting for the first time
since 2005 as an open meeting, which helps to enhance
the transparency of the Council’s work. Finally, allow
me congratulate you, Mr. President, and your entire
team on the impeccable way in which you have presided
over the Security Council during the month of July,
which was particularly full of crises.
I will mention three issues that were prominent
on this month’s agenda, starting with Syria. At the
initiative of Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2165 (2014) on 14 July. That resolution is based on
the decisions taken by the Council in resolution 2139
(2014). Its adoption would not have been necessary if
resolution 2139 (2014) had been respected. By deciding
that the United Nations humanitarian agencies and
their implementing partners are authorized to use
routes crossing the lines of conflict and four additional
border crossings so that humanitarian assistance
reaches the people in need throughout Syria by the
most direct routes without requiring the consent of
the Syrian authorities, resolution 2165 (2014) gives
a glimmer of hope to a scenario that remains very
gloomy. The resolution could make it possible to help
as many as 2.9 million people currently beyond the
reach of humanitarian actors in Syria. This morning,
we heard a first encouraging briefing by Valerie Amos
on its implementation, but the Council should remain
vigilant and take additional measures in the case of
non-compliance with resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2139
(2014).
However, humanitarian assistance can still only
be palliative. Only a political settlement in line with
the Geneva communiqué of June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex) will put an end to the indescribable suffering
of the Syrian people. In that context, we welcome the
appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria and of his deputy,
Mr. Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy. We hope that the Security
Council will soon have the opportunity to review with
them their ideas with regard to relaunching the political
process for a democratic transition in Syria.
I will move on to Ukraine. While armed
separatist groups and their external support continue
to destabilize the country and to undermine its

S/PV.7231

sovereignty and territorial integrity, an additional
step in the horror was taken when Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 was shot down over eastern Ukraine on
17 July. A total of 298 innocent civilians were killed in
that tragedy. While the Security Council was able to
reach a consensus on adopting resolution 2166 (2014),
prepared by our Australian colleagues, we continue
to observe the despicable behaviour of illegal armed
groups that refuse or restrict access to the site of the
accident and prevent the dignified treatment of the
remains of the victims. That cannot be tolerated, and
we urge all parties, especially the armed groups and
those who support them, to guarantee without further
delay safe and unimpeded access to the accident site for
the international investigation.
The tragedy of flight MH-17 reminds us of the
importance of redoubling diplomatic efforts to create
conditions conducive to the implementation of the
President Poroshenko’s peace plan. We must find a
solution to that crisis before it is too late.
Diplomacy is also called for and the Security Council
must fully play its role in another context — that of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has erupted again
in Gaza. With more than 1,350 killed, the death toll
and humanitarian misery have already far surpassed
the suffering experienced during Operation Cast Lead
of 2009. Israel has the right to defend itself against
Hamas’ indiscriminate strikes aimed at the Israeli
civilian population. However, that right to defend itself
in no way justifies the disproportionate use of Israeli
military force, which continues to inflict terrible
suffering on the Palestinian civilian population. I am
referring in particular to the more than 200 Palestinian
children who were killed in the past three weeks.
The first priority must be the achievement of a
ceasefire. However, any lasting solution to the crisis
in Gaza must address the deep-rooted causes of the
crisis and give the Palestinian people the chance to
live their lives with dignity. That should involve a
lifting of the blockade to put an end to the inhumane
conditions imposed on the people of the Gaza Strip,
but such a measure is not enough if we want to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The only way to live in
peace will be the acceptance of the two-State solution
by both parties. We hope that after the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/13) that we adopted on the eve
of the Eid celebration, at the initiative of our Jordanian
colleagues, the Security Council will continue to speak

14-488175/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

out to actively contribute to settling the crisis in Gaza
and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
A great deal remains to be said on the various
hotbeds of crisis in Africa, which are on the Security
Council’s agenda. I am referring, in particular, to
South Sudan where the security, humanitarian and
human rights situations are especially serious. South
Sudanese civilians are suffering as a result of the
obstinacy of the leaders of both camps in rejecting
all peace initiatives. Both parties should know that
the international community — the Council — will
tolerate no impunity for violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law committed during
context of the conflict. Perpetrators will be identified
and brought to justice.
I should like to again congratulate Rwanda on
having taken the initiative of organizing an open
debate on the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations in the framework of
peacekeeping (see S/PV.7228). Resolution 2167 (2014),
adopted the day before yesterday, will help us strengthen
that partnership, which is increasingly important.
In conclusion, I have no doubt that August will be
a decisive month for the settlement of the number of
crises that I have just mentioned. Luxembourg is ready
to work actively to that end under the presidency of
the United Kingdom. I want to, as of now, assure my
colleague, Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant, and his team
our full support.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on the
leadership with which you have led the Council’s
work during your term, which is coming to an end,
and to congratulate the team that assisted you in that
endeavour in what was a difficult context.
The Security Council’s activities during this month,
which is nearing an end, were dominated by crises in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and in
Ukraine. Six meetings over two weeks, including two
emergency meetings, were devoted to the Middle East,
and four, including two emergency meetings, were
devoted to Ukraine. Three important resolutions were
adopted unanimously by Security Council members.
A number of press statements were issued without
hindrance, which my delegation welcomes.
With regard to the situation in Syria, Chad welcomes
the successful conduct of the operation aimed at the

6/22

30/07/2014

destruction of chemical weapons, and the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) on the humanitarian
situation in that country. However, we remain deeply
concerned by the human tragedy affecting the Syrian
population, while no political solution is in sight. We
deplore the Security Council’s inability to be able to
assist the parties to the conflict in finding solutions to
the crisis. We welcome the fact that the Security Council
has not lost sight of the impact of the Syrian crisis on
other conflicts in the region and we urge the Council to
continue its efforts to find a lasting political solution.
There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis.
The situation in the Middle East, following the
escalation of violence in Gaza, took up much of the
Council’s time and the Council’s repeated calls for
a ceasefire have unfortunately gone unheeded. The
violence in Gaza has reached unacceptable levels and
the number of civilian victims continues to grow each
day by the hundreds. We regret the Security Council’s
impotence in the face of that tragedy. Like dozens of
other delegations, Chad calls for an immediate cessation
of Israeli military operations and the firing of rockets
at Israel to enable negotiations to resume. The grim
toll of victims resulting from the Israeli operation has
now surpassed 1,200 dead and 6,700 wounded in the
Gaza Strip, the majority of them being civilians. The
number of displaced persons is now in the hundreds of
thousands.
The Council has also considered the thirteenth
report (S/2014/442) presented by Mr. Said Djinnit on
the situation in West Africa, covering the period from
1 January to 30 June 2014. Chad welcomes the progress
achieved in settling the political and security-related
problems, including the implementation of the crossborder security strategy for the Mano River Union, the
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
and the successful execution of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone.
However, many challenges remain, especially
with regard to transnational organized crime, drug
trafficking, terrorism, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and security-related problems. In that respect, the
fight against the Boko Haram terrorist group requires
a pooling of efforts and close cooperation between the
States of the subregion. Chad welcomes the attention the
Security Council has granted to multilateral cooperation
between the States of Economic Community of West
African States faced with the threat posed by Boko

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Haram in north-eastern Nigeria and in neighbouring
countries.
The ebola epidemic that is currently raging in
West Africa is an equally serious threat as it continues
to spread dangerously towards other countries. The
international community must mobilize to prevent its
spread on a larger scale.
Chad welcomes the outstanding cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
especially in peacekeeping. The efforts and sacrifices
made by the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic have
enabled us to prepare the ground for the deployment
of United Nations operations in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.
To further strengthen that partnership, it is
important that the issue of financing the African Union
operations, the difficulties associated with the transition
of the African missions and those of the United Nations
or the role of the African Union in the pre-transition
phase and the appointment of the leadership of the new
mission be subject to greater study in future debates. In
that regard, the support of the Security Council, which
is determinant in the African Union’s efforts aimed at
operationalizing the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises, as African authorities themselves
undertook during the African Union summit held
in Malabo on 26 to 27 June 2014, has proved to be
insufficient.
In conclusion, I would again like to reiterate my
congratulations to the President and the entire Rwandan
team for the tremendous amount of work done, the
relevance of the subjects covered and the courage that
they have shown throughout this particularly difficult
term. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom as
it assumes the presidency of the Council in August and
reiterate the Chadian delegation’s full support for the
entire team and wish it every success.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Mr. President, I
wish to congratulate you on your astute steering of the
Council during the month of July. Our appreciation
goes to you and your team, Sir, for your patient,
professional and diligent work during a demanding

S/PV.7231

and difficult month where multiple crises had to be
tackled simultaneously. We appreciate the number of
open events held by the Rwandan presidency, including
this open wrap-up session in the public briefing format,
the first since 2005. Open debates and public briefings
play a vital role in keeping United Nations membership
abreast of deliberations in the Council, which is only
right, given that the implementation of Council’s
decisions behooves the entire membership.
With respect to sanctions, for example, the Council
may adopt all the sanctions it wants, but if the wider
membership is unaware of the decisions or is unable
or unwilling to engage with them, sanctions, no matter
how well designed, will have no impact on the ground.
Open briefings and direct engagement with a country’s
neighbours and other interested States raises awareness
of existing sanctions regimes and helps to advance their
implementation.
As Chair of the Central African Republic sanctions
regime during an open briefing in July (S/PV.7215), I
stressed the need — and stress it once again — for the
neighbours of the Central African Republic and the
wider membership to cooperate on the implementation
of resolution 2127 (2013), including by providing
full support and access to the Panel of Experts. For
sanctions to work, in this as in other cases, we need
coherent and determined actions by all actors. To do
so, the complexity of targeted sanctions, existing legal
challenges, lack of enforcement capacity and other
relevant issues need to be addressed. In that regard,
we found the informal discussion on sanctions with
Under-Secretary-General Feltman earlier this month
very timely. We encourage the Department of Political
Affairs and other relevant United Nations departments
and entities to continue their efforts and further engage
with the Council on the matter.
Peacekeeping is another area where Council
decisions affect the wider membership, through assessed
contributions, troop and material contributions, and
at times by the loss of peacekeepers’ lives. For some
time now, the Council agenda has been expanding
to unprecedented levels. The risk of peacekeeping
overstretch may no longer be an issue for a distant
future. Unless we manage to reduce the number of
conflicts themselves, questions of how to make do with
available limited resources, how to mobilize ever larger
numbers of peacekeeping troops and handle the ever
constant problem of critical enablers, inter alia, will
become increasingly acute.

14-488177/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We appreciate the organization by the Rwandan
presidency of an open debate on United Nations
partnerships with regional organizations in peacekeeping
(S/PV.7228), which provided an opportunity to explore
the advantages and existing shortcomings as well
as ways forward in making best use of peacekeeping
synergies between the United Nations and regional
organizations. As peacekeeping evolves into ever more
complex, multifunctional and robust operations, we
appreciate the Secretary-General’s initiative to conduct
a wide ranging review of United Nations peacekeeping
ahead of the fifteenth anniversary of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809). The multiplication of conflicts and the
inevitable finiteness of available resources necessary to
tackle them reaffirms the importance of early warning
and prevention. In that respect, the mediation work
undertaken by the Department of Political Affairs
and the mediation and good offices of the SecretaryGeneral deserve our full support.
Right now, efforts are required on multiple fronts.
In Afghanistan, the post-election power crisis needs
to be carefully managed and resolved, and the United
Nations and the Council have a critical role to play in
supporting vote verification and helping the country
steer towards a solution that would strengthen the
political and democratic processes in the country.
In recent days, the Middle East has seen some of
the most dramatic mediation efforts. My delegation
commends the determined and tireless efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and United States
Secretary of State John Kerry to find a solution to
the crisis. The rapidly growing number of civilian
casualties, many of whom are children, is heartbreaking
and a stark reminder of the need by all parties to
respect international humanitarian law and ensure the
protection of civilians.
The Security Council spoke with one voice last
Sunday night by adopting a relevant presidential
statement calling for a humanitarian ceasefire
(S/PRST/2014/13). We urge the Secretary-General, the
United States Secretary of State and all other actors with
an influence an the parties to continue tirelessly their
mediation efforts aimed at establishing a sustainable
ceasefire on the basis of the Egyptian proposal and
addressing the legitimate concerns of the parties.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s critical visit
to Iraq whose unity and territorial integrity are being
threatened by the spread of Islamic State in Iraq and

8/22

30/07/2014

the Sham. In our view, the rare brutality and methods of
operation of that new breed of terrorists requires some
fresh thinking on how best to employ existing counterterrorism toolbox at our disposal in combatting radical
extremism and terrorist threats.
My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura as United Nations mediator for
Syria and hopes that his appointment will reinvigorate
the search for a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
Implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) and of
resolution 2165 (2014), which was adopted unanimously
on 14 July, must remain high on the Council’s agenda.
Although some humanitarian aid has recently entered
Syria from Turkey, significant problems and failures
to implement the resolutions remain, as discussed
earlier today. Continued failure to implement the
two resolutions must have consequences for those
responsible.
An Arria formula meeting last week with the
participation of representatives of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Syria reminded us once
again of the scale and horror of crimes committed
in that country and the imperative of putting an end
to impunity. The flexibility and informality of Arria
formula meetings is a great asset in our work and must
continue unrestricted to provide additional insights
into the issues on the Council’s agenda.
After 20 meetings on Ukraine, in July the Council
managed to adopt resolution 2166 (2014), sponsored
by 13 members of the Council, on the downing of
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17, which cost the lives
of 298 passengers from 11 countries. My delegation
stresses once again the urgency of a full, thorough
and independent international investigation into the
shooting down of MH-17, as stipulated by resolution
2166 (2014). The perpetrators of the downing of the
plane must be identified and brought to account.
The tampering of evidence and obstruction of the
investigation by pro-Russian armed separatists and
the degrading treatment of the remains of the victims,
marauding and theft of personal items of the victims
speak loud and clear to the true nature of the separatists.
They who deny dignity to the dead have also perpetrated
countless abuses and crimes against the living. As the
most recent report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights testifies,
egregious human rights violations continue to take
place in territories controlled by pro-Russian militias,

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

including intimidations, abductions, torture and
killings. In spite of all the ample evidence, Russia has
yet to disown and condemn the illegal armed separatist
groups that bear full responsibility for the bloodshed in
eastern Ukraine. To do any less is to give those illegal
militants a carte blanche to continue their criminal
acts. Detractory finger-pointing elsewhere will not
change the reality of the facts.
To conclude, let me once again thank the Rwandan
team for its dedicated work in the presidency of the
Council during the month of July. At the same time,
I would like to wish the incoming United Kingdom
presidency the greatest of success. It can count on our
full support.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for your steady and very efficient stewardship
of the Council this month. The Rwandan coffee that you
shared with us at the beginning of July has held us in
good stead.
To the delegation of the United Kingdom, we wish
a successful month of August and look forward to
working with it. It has our full support.
Today I would like to address areas where the
Security Council has been productive during this very
eventful month of July. I would also like to look ahead
and touch on a few issues the Council will need to
continue to track closely in August and beyond.
First, I thank the delegation of Rwanda for
organizing an open debate two days ago, Monday,
28 July, on peacekeeping and partnership with regional
and subregional organizations (see S/PV.7228).
The Council’s adoption of the Rwandan-sponsored
resolution 2167 (2014) helped remind us of the essential
role that regional organizations play in peacekeeping,
not only in Africa but elsewhere. These groupings
are often the first responders for severe crises that do
not happen in a vacuum and that have repercussions
across borders. Monday’s meeting was timely, as the
United Nations and many Member States are rightly
taking a fresh look at how to strengthen United Nations
peacekeeping to better meet contemporary challenges.
In that regard, we look forward to the comprehensive
review of United Nations peacekeeping which the
Secretary-General announced in the Council in the past
month and touched on again on Monday.
As I said, July has been an eventful and at times
very tragic month. The Council united on 21 July

S/PV.7231

to adopt resolution 2166 (2014) on the downing of
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 in Ukraine (see
S/PV.7221). That was an important step in our efforts
to determine who was responsible for that horrific
incident and to bring them to justice. The Netherlands
has proposed to lead an international investigation,
and the Netherlands and Australia have offered police
to help secure the crash site. Malaysia is also working
closely with other affected countries to send security
and other personnel. The Dutch-led investigation will
enable expert analysis of the evidence and, we hope,
provide the answers to the questions that citizens and
Governments, and of course, families, are asking about
flight MH-17. To that end, the United States has offered
assistance. Representatives from our Federal Bureau
of Investigations and our National Transportation and
Safety Board are already in Ukraine, ready to work
with investigators.
Further on Ukraine, the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on Ukraine notes
that a total breakdown of law and order and a reign of
fear and terror have been inflicted by armed groups on
the population of eastern Ukraine. The United States
is committed to a diplomatic solution to the situation,
and we remain concerned about Russia’s support of the
pro-Russian separatists, including the flow of heavy
weapons and rocket and artillery fire from Russia into
Ukraine.
Turning to Syria, the Council came together
to support a new resolution to address the ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Resolution 2165 (2014) opened
four crossings on the Syrian border that will allow
United Nations humanitarian agencies and their
implementing partners to enter the country without
needing a green light from the regime. If implemented
fully, the resolution will allow critical aid to reach over
2 million Syrians who have been suffering without
essential assistance over the past year. We were pleased
to see the first of such convoys cross into Syria from
Turkey last week.
Proof of the dire situation in Syria was on prime
display last Friday when the United Kingdom hosted
an Arria formula meeting with the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. As the Commission’s report makes clear,
we need to maintain our focus on Syria as the regime
continues to imprison tens of thousands of Syrians,
including women, children, doctors, humanitarian aid

14-488179/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

workers and journalists, subjecting them to torture,
sexual violence and inhumane treatment.
Although the Al-Assad regime is the most egregious
perpetrator of violations and abuses of international
humanitarian and human rights law in Syria, the rapid
gains of violent extremist groups in Syria, particularly
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), are
alarming. In that context, we welcomed the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/14 on 28 July
on the terrorist oil trade in Syria and Iraq. In the
coming weeks and months, Syria must remain front
and centre. The Council must continue to press for a
political solution to the conflict and for accountability
for violations and abuses of human rights, and to hold
Syria to its commitment to completely eliminating its
chemical weapons programme, including materials and
facilities.
Also, the ISIL threat merits our full attention. The
Council and regional and international partners must
remain focused on supporting the Government of Iraq
as it combats ISIL and other violent extremist groups.
That means working together to support a sound counterterrorism strategy against those groups. It also means
supporting the efforts of Iraq’s elected representatives
to form a new Government that reflects a broad national
consensus. In that regard, we were pleased to adopt just
this morning the one-year extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, whose
work remains absolutely essential to all of those efforts.
Elsewhere in the Middle East, the situation related
to Gaza will require our focus. In his meetings in the
region aimed at securing a ceasefire, Secretary Kerry
expressed support for Israel’s right to defend itself and
called for the end of Hamas rocket fire. Yet he also
expressed our deep concern for civilians on both sides,
especially women and children, affected by hostilities.
We continue to call on the parties to comply with
international humanitarian law, including on respect
for and protection of civilians, as well as civilian and
humanitarian facilities. We condemn Hamas’ use of
civilian facilities for military purposes, and we reiterate
the inviolability of United Nations facilities.
The United States has been clear. President Obama
and Secretary Kerry have both called for an immediate
and unconditional humanitarian ceasefire. A prolonged
humanitarian ceasefire would significantly de-escalate
the situation, allow for the distribution of urgently
needed humanitarian assistance, including medicine

10/22

30/07/2014

and food, and allow for serious negotiations to restore a
permanent cessation of hostilities. Any process aimed at
achieving a lasting and meaning resolution to the crisis
related to Gaza must also result in the disarmament of
Hamas and other terrorist groups. We will work closely
with the international community in support of that
goal.
Finally, we look forward to the Security Council
trip that is coming up next month. The swiftly unfolding
crises we face today do not allow us many moments to
reflect, but taking some time to consider events leading
to and the horrors of the First World War should give
us new impetus as we strive to help end these conflicts.
The second part of the trip to Somalia and South Sudan
will offer us an important chance to push for peace in
places where conflict has persisted far too long.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your fantastic Rwandan team on
a successful presidency for the month of July. You have
led the Council with great stewardship and diplomatic
skills in dealing with an unusual number of difficult
issues. We also welcome your initiative in conducting
this wrap-up session in a public briefing format.
To our frustration, July has been marred by the loss
of a great number of civilian lives in conflicts, as well
as ongoing humanitarian crises in many parts of the
world.
Faced with the escalation of the situation in Gaza,
the Council has met in four emergency meetings and
an open debate on the Middle East (see S/PV.7222).
We commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
tireless efforts to engage the region’s leaders through his
visits. The Republic of Korea deplores the intensification
of hostilities, as well as the tragic loss of life, and urges
the parties to immediately engage in efforts to achieve
a durable ceasefire. In the meantime, the international
community must expedite its humanitarian assistance
to the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea has decided to contribute
$1 million to assist the Palestinian people.
As for Syria, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2165 (2014), regarding cross-line and crossborder humanitarian assistance to Syria. The adoption
represented modest yet meaningful progress. However,
the meaningfulness of the resolution should be judged
not by the unanimity of its adoption but by the degree
of its implementation. The Council must fulfil its
commitment to taking further measures in the event

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

of non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014) or
resolution 2165 (2014). We welcome the appointment of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and look forward to
his efforts to revive the stalled peace negotiations.
The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
was also one of several issues at the top of the Council’s
agenda this month. By unanimously adopting resolution
2166 (2014), the Council spoke with one voice to ensure
that the tragedy would be fully investigated and that
the victims would be afforded the respect they deserve.
While it is encouraging that there has been progress
in recovering bodies since the resolution was adopted,
we remain concerned that the crash site has yet to be
properly investigated. We reiterate that all concerned
parties must comply with their obligations under
resolution 2166 (2014) and must cooperate with the
international investigation.
Last but not least, on 17 July the Security Council
issued a strong and unequivocal warning against
the continued launching of ballistic missiles by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Despite that
solemn warning, however, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea launched another ballistic missile
on 26 July. We condemn the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s unrelenting provocations as
violations of Security Council resolutions and as clear
acts in defiance of the authority of the Council itself.
We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to desist from any acts that could further disrupt
the peace and stability of the region and beyond. In
that vein, the Republic of Korea welcomes the recent
progress made in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea sanctions regime as a result of the Chong Chon
Gang case. That is an example of the United Nations
sanctions regime working properly in response to
serious violations.
We congratulate the Rwandan presidency once
again on its achievements in July, and look forward
to another fruitful month of work in August under the
presidency of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting.
The Security Council has had a very busy programme
of work this month. It has convened open debates on
the Middle East (see S/PV.7222) and on peacekeeping
operations (see S/PV.7228), and considered hot spot
issues in Syria, Lebanon, the Middle East, the Central
African Republic, Libya, Iraq and Cyprus. It has

S/PV.7231

adopted resolutions on United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations in peacekeeping (resolution
2167 (2014)), on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(resolution 2165 (2014)), on the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 (resolution 2166 (2014)) and on
the extension of the mandates of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (resolution 2169 (2014))
and the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(resolution 2168 (2014)).
China highly appreciates the efforts of Rwanda,
as President of the Security Council for this month, in
facilitating the successful conclusion of the Council’s
work.
On the matter of Syria, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2165 (2014), which
identified priority areas for Syrian humanitarian rescue
efforts, thereby restoring international consensus on
the Syrian humanitarian situation, and reiterated the
importance of a political settlement in Syria. China
hopes that the parties concerned will maintain close
cooperation, comprehensively and conscientiously
implement resolution 2165 (2014) and previous Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements, and
effectively improve the humanitarian situation in Syria.
In the meantime, the parties concerned should hew to
the overall direction of political settlement by stepping
up efforts to relaunch the Geneva peace talks as soon
as possible and to seek a comprehensive political
settlement of the issue on the basis of the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). They should blaze
a middle path that is consistent with Syria’s national
conditions and accommodates the interests of all
parties. China stands ready to play a constructive role
in that regard.
On the issue of Palestine and Israel, the Gaza
conflict has caused massive civilian casualties and
destruction, leading to a severe humanitarian crisis. We
urge all parties to implement an immediate ceasefire.
We condemn all acts of force against innocent civilians.
We urge the parties to stop answering violence with
violence and to implement a sustained ceasefire. China
has consistently held that peace talks represent the only
way to achieve peaceful coexistence between the two
countries. We urge the parties to create the conditions
necessary to a resumption of talks. We appreciate the
efforts of Secretary-General Ban ki-Moon, Egypt and
the other Arab countries, as well as the international
community, to improve the situation. China’s special
envoy on the Middle East has also been conducting

14-4881711/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

shuttle mediation between Israel and Palestine. China
stands ready to work with the international community
to promote a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the issue of Palestine in order to end the current crisis
in Gaza as soon as possible.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking Ambassadeur Gasana and his entire
team for their work this month. This second Rwandan
presidency, which has been just as professional as the
first, has unfortunately been marked by the tragedies in
Ukraine and the Middle East. In a heated climate, Sir,
you have worked with a cool head day and night, seven
days a week. For that we thank you.
I also wish to congratulate you on having made
this month’s wrap-up session a public meeting. I am
sure that future Presidents will be eager to follow your
example.
Fighting has continued in Ukraine after the
separatists have refused to lay down their arms. Even
worse, signs of outside support for the separatists have
multiplied, especially with respect to the transfer of
long-range weapons. On the one hand, Russia claims
to be working for peace, yet on the other it continues to
arm and support thugs. That is the context in which the
European Union has decided to significantly strengthen
its sanctions. The double game must cease, because
when one arms bandits, anything can happen.
Unfortunately, the crash of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 on 17 July is tragic proof of that. The
Council held an emergency meeting the next day
to express its horror and outrage in the face of the
disaster (see S/PV.7219). We wish once again to offer
our deepest solidarity to the many countries that lost
citizens in the catastrophe. The Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2166 (2014), confirming Ukraine’s
responsibility to conduct the investigation and
demanding that the Secretary-General file periodic
reports. The presence of three foreign ministers at the
meeting was evidence that the public attaches great
importance to full light being shed on the matter. Due
to the lack of security, the investigators have not yet
been able to begin their mission. It is urgent to establish
the conditions necessary for the international mission
to conduct its investigation. That will require the
parties to respect a ceasefire. The victims must receive
a dignified burial. The investigation must be able to
proceed unhindered. Justice must be done.

12/22

30/07/2014

The tragedy of the crisis in Gaza demands that we
stand firm. The catastrophic human toll, with more
than 1,200 victims on the Palestinian side, most of them
civilians, requires us to increase pressure on the parties.
As French Minister of Foreign Affairs Fabius remarked
on the occasion of the meeting in Paris on 26 July,
the urgency of the situation demands an immediate,
unconditional and renewable humanitarian ceasefire
that will provide relief to the civilian population and
delivery of the assistance they require.
That can be only a first step. Our common goal must
be to obtain, as quickly as possible, a lasting, negotiated
ceasefire that meets the legitimate Israeli security
needs and the legitimate Palestinian needs for the
protection of civilians, free access and socioeconomic
reconstruction. The Palestinian Authority must be
brought in to help achieve that goal, on the basis of the
Egyptian initiative. The crisis underscores yet again
the urgency of restoring a political outlook to both
Palestinians and Israelis. Only credible negotiations
between the parties can lead to the signing of a just,
definitive agreement establishing two democratic
States living side by side in peace and security within
recognized borders.
Despite all the efforts made so far, armed force
continues to prevail over political dialogue in Syria. The
Syrian regime bears overwhelming responsibility in
that regard. It has never sought anything but a military
victory. It has refused to take part in negotiations,
preferring to continue laying siege, bombarding
and torturing all those who have resisted it or those
who — peacefully at the outset — demanded reforms.
The independent international commission of inquiry
on Syria led by Mr. Pinheiro made that clear again on
Friday. The regime has chosen instead to encourage
the efforts of terrorist groups, to which it is now losing
control and that are threatening the stability of the entire
region. Given that situation, the moderate opposition
continues alone to fight two forms of extremism; it is
battling the regime on the one hand and the terrorists
on the other. Only by giving it additional support will
we be able to promote the emergence of a free and
democratic Syria that is respectful of all its citizens.
Civilians are bearing the brunt of the current
situation. Humanitarian aid must reach them without
any impediment, without political considerations and
by the most direct routes, as required by resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014). But it is also important
to relaunch a process aimed at finding a way out of

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

the crisis, with a view to reaching a political transition
solution that is based on the Geneva communiqué. We
welcome in that regard the appointment of Staffan
de Mistura as the Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab
Republic, succeeding Mr. Brahimi, whom we thank for
his efforts.
France is deeply concerned by the advance of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which poses
a threat to the integrity of the country and the stability
of the entire region. We have strongly condemned
the atrocities committed by ISIL against ethnic and
religious minorities and all those who do not adhere to
its barbarous ideology, as well as the ultimatum given
the Christians in Mosul. This is yet another illustration
of the true nature of that terrorist organization. The
Council, on the initiative of France, made itself clear
on this issue. What ISIL has undertaken to eradicate in
Iraq is a centuries-old tradition.
The Council usefully recalled the obligations of
States in the fight against the financing of terrorism
and expressed its concern about access to oil zones
and refineries by terrorist groups that are under the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, in particular ISIL and the
al-Nusra Front.
France supports the Iraqi State in this fight against
terrorism and believes that the only lasting solution
to the crisis is a political one. Only the formation of a
national unity Government on the basis of an agreement
involving all communities will allow for a political
solution to be reached.
Finally, in the context of this overview of the North
Africa and the Middle East region, I would cite Libya
as another example of a deteriorating security situation
and continued political confusion. We have asked all of
our nationals to leave Libya and have temporarily closed
our embassy. After the elections, our priority must be to
help the Libyans to relaunch a political process. They
must unite around a common political project, through
an inclusive process of national reconciliation. Today
violence threatens this institutional perspective, and
we must therefore help the Libyans reach a ceasefire as
quickly as possible.
To that end, the Libyans require greater support
from the international community. We must act in
a consistent and coordinated manner, and the United
Nations has a key role to play in this process. It is of
paramount importance that it continue its involvement

S/PV.7231

in Libya and bring together all the efforts of the
international community.
The scant good news this month comes, for once,
from Africa, and this must be stressed.
First, Mali saw the consensus-based adoption in
Algiers of the road map on inter-Malian negotiations.
That is an encouraging and long-awaited step which the
Council welcomed and which must be continued.
Good news comes also from the Central African
Republic, with the holding of the reconciliation forum
from 21 to 23 July. That, along with the increase in the
strength of and the preparations for the United Nations
force, will make it possible to envisage a peaceful
transition in that country.
I would conclude by issuing a warning on South
Sudan. For more than six months now, the Security
Council has been stepping up its efforts to help resolve
the crisis there, by doubling the size of the Mission last
December, under the French presidency of the Council;
building its capacity; revising its mandate; supporting
the mediation of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development; and integrating the troops of the
countries of the region to endeavour to enforce respect
of the ceasefire. Unfortunately, experience has shown
that the parties do not want peace. We heard Ms. Amos
sound the alarm for the people of South Sudan; indeed, a
million people have been displaced, there are hundreds
of thousands of refugees, and now famine looms large.
The Mission’s mandate was therefore tightened as
concerns the protection of civilians, human rights and
the facilitating of access to humanitarian aid. But we
must continue to reflect together on the best way for the
Security Council to have an impact on the disastrous
situation in the country and to save lives. We must
urgently devise concrete humanitarian initiatives and
take action against those who make civilians pay such
a high price for their unquenchable thirst for power and
riches.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for your
work this month, and I wish the United Kingdom good
luck.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
your leadership of the Security Council during this past
month.

14-4881713/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The Council’s work in July took place against the
backdrop of a number of regional crises. Unfortunately,
the Security Council was not able to play the role that
the international community rightfully expects of
it. Operations in the Gaza Strip continue, causing a
significant number of casualties among the Palestinians.
Rockets continue to be fired against Israel.
The presidential statement adopted on 28 July on
the situation around Gaza (S/PRST/2014/13), although
accurate, is not up to the situation and came just a tad
late. It is clear that the Council’s effectiveness in such
cases hinges largely on the proactive work of penholders
and delegations from the region.
As experience has shown, crises between Israelis
and Palestinians often erupt as a result of the fact
that unilateral efforts by the United States aimed at
reconciling the parties have yet again failed. We have
repeatedly pointed out that secretive methods of work
have outlived their usefulness. The need to devise
more effective mechanisms for a settlement is long
overdue. We expect that in September, on the margins
of the political discussion in the General Assembly,
an in-depth consideration in this respect will take
place, including extensive discussion of prospects for a
settlement in the Middle East within the framework of
a ministerial meeting of the Quartet.
We would propose that in August we hold an
informal brainstorming session in the Security
Council, inviting high-level representatives from
Washington, D.C., who are directly involved in the
process of the Middle East settlement, for a detailed
discussion of the current situation and the obstacles
hampering progress within the framework of the peace
process. Clearly, the primary task today is the rapid
achievement of a sustainable ceasefire between Israelis
and the Gaza Strip.
On 17 July, we all were shocked by the terrible
tragedy that took place in the skies above Ukraine in
which all 298 individuals aboard the Malaysia Airlines
flight perished. The Security Council rapidly adopted
resolution 2166 (2014), requiring a full, painstaking and
independent international investigation into that event,
in keeping with the guiding principles of international
civil aviation, with an appropriate role being played by
the International Civil Aviation Organization.
One of the important provisions of the resolution
that was incorporated at the insistence of the Russian
delegation is the requirement to immediately cease, in

14/22

30/07/2014

the region directly adjoining the crash zone, all military
activities so as to secure and safeguard the area during
the conduct of the international investigation. The
President of Ukraine stated that military operations
would cease within a radius of 40 kilometres around
the crash site. That promise was, however, immediately
broken, and Ukrainian officials quite publicly spoke
of a new task — cleansing the territory of militias
and taking it over. Such actions are a direct violation
of Security Council resolution 2166 (2014) and are
fraught with the most dangerous of consequences for
the conduct of an objective and impartial international
investigation. We fear that the authorities in Kyiv are
driven by a desire to destroy any evidence that would
point to their role in the Malaysia airlines disaster.
On 28 July, the Russian delegation proposed that
the members of the Security Council adopt a simple,
unambiguous press statement that would bolster the
provisions of resolution 2166 (2014) on the ceasefire.
However, it was quite unceremoniously blocked by
some Security Council members which were clearly not
interested in seeing that resolution implemented fully.
We welcome today’s statement by the SecretaryGeneral calling for an immediate cessation of
combat activities around the crash site. We note that
the Netherlands, Australia and Malaysia mobilized
significant resources to carry out investigations at the
crash site and deployed groups of experts to Kyiv and
Donetsk. Many of them have established solid contacts
with the militias. For example, the special envoy of the
Prime Minister of Australia, Angus Houston, noted the
militia members’ professionalism and their constructive
attitude regarding cooperation and the investigation.
In that respect, I would ask the representative of
Luxembourg to familiarize herself a little better with
those statements and the statements of those who are
present on the ground, so as to ensure that she does
not come here with claims regarding what is taking
place over there. The statement made here by the
representative of Lithuania is something on which I
simply will not comment. No objectivity or impartiality
can be expected from that delegation. And thus, as
before, the investigators were unable to reach the site
of the disaster.
Russia is cooperating in every way with the
investigation. Our relevant organization, Rosaviatsiya,
on the basis of its wealth of experience, has come up
with a series of questions that must be clarified in order

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to elicit a full picture of the tragedy. Our specialists
began working as soon as they were asked to by
Holland, taking on a leadership role in the conduct of the
international investigations. We have handed over our
monitoring data from the disaster area to international
organizations, including the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). We hope that others too will take such
concrete and constructive action instead of spreading
unsubstantiated accusations and insinuations.
Early in the month there were glimmers of hope
that the vicious circle of violence in Ukraine might
finally be broken. On 2 July the Foreign Ministers of
Russia, Germany, France and Ukraine issued the Berlin
declaration. In a remarkable statement, President
Poroshenko said that the hardworking and peaceful
people who make up the majority of the residents of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions had their sympathy,
love and respect; that the Ukrainian armed forces and
its national guard and other units would never permit
themselves to use force against civilians or attack
residential neighbourhoods; that Ukrainian soldiers and
guards would risk their own lives rather than threaten
women, children and elderly men. Such, he said, had
always been the chivalrous nature of Ukraine’s armies.
Beautiful, no? In practice, however, the cruelty of
the Kyiv authorities’ attacks simply spiraled. Donetsk,
Luhansk, Horlivka and many other residential areas
have suffered massive bombardments, including
indiscriminate firing of Grad rockets and aerial
bombing. Strikes are hitting civilian targets, including
transport and public routes, hospitals and residential
areas. In Horlivka alone, dozens of civilians have died.
And in most cases there are no militias to be found
anywhere near. Does the information that we have
been seeing on the use of Ukrainian military ballistic
missiles not speak to rampant military escalation?
All of this fully supports our description of the Kyiv
authorities’ actions as a punitive operation against its
own people.
Even according to the official data, the number
of casualties among the civilian population already
exceeds 1,000, and unofficially there are many more.
At least 19 people have died just today. A stream of
refugees continue to arrive on Russian territory, with
more than 150,000 so far seeking temporary asylum,
residence permits or citizenship. The number of those
who are crossing the border and staying in the Russian
Federation has reached the hundreds of thousands.

S/PV.7231

Rockets launched by Ukrainian forces continue to
fall on Russian territory. On 29 July, Russian customs
personnel at the Gukovo border crossing were again
deliberately fired on. It appears that Kyiv does not want
the OSCE observer mission to conduct its normal work
monitoring the situation on the Russian-Ukrainian
border. We demand that Kyiv stop firing on Russian
territory and ensure the international observers’ safety.
We have repeatedly warned against the disastrous
attempts to solve the political crisis in Ukraine by force
and called for establishing a mutually respectful and
inclusive dialogue between all the principal political
forces and between Kyiv and the regions. The priority
now should become a speedy cessation of hostilities
and the establishment of a peaceful negotiation process
on the basis of the Geneva process of 17 April and the
Berlin declaration of 2 July.
Among other topics, the international community
took an important step in the fight against terrorism on
28 July with the Russian-initiated presidential statement
condemning the illegal trading in oil with terrorist
groups occurring in Syria and Iraq (S/PRST/2014/14).
We hope that the successful implementation of
resolution 2165 (2014), adopted on 14 July, will enable
us in some way to alleviate the suffering of Syria’s
civilian population.
The statements on 17 July by Special Representative
Mitri and Mr. Mohamed Abdulaziz, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Libya, confirmed that the situation
in that country is deteriorating rapidly. We cannot rule
out the possibility that it will splinter into warring
territorial entities. Extremists who feel free there to act
as they wish have laid channels of communication with
their comrades throughout the Middle East and North
Africa. The closing of the United Nations mission and
the evacuation of the staff of a number of Western
embassies are clear evidence of the escalation of the
current situation. We may want to rethink the nature
and objectives of the United Nations presence in Libya.
The situation in Iraq remains deeply worrying.
The external support being given to terrorists in Syria
has become a catalyst for the current worsening of the
situation, though its roots lie considerably deeper, at
least as far back as the events of 2003. Now Islamists
are threatening the entire Middle East and beyond. The
process of creating new State authorities should belong
entirely to Iraq. That is the only way that national
reconciliation can be achieved.

14-4881715/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

We note the meeting held on 28 July at the initiative
of the Rwandan presidency on the issue of interaction
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the area of peacekeeping (S/PV.7228). We support
the intensification of such cooperation on the basis of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we would like to wish the delegation
of the United Kingdom, which will lead the Council in
August, every possible success.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for all of your and your team’s hard
work during this month’s presidency, and for convening
today’s wrap-up session. I particularly welcome the
fact that this meeting is being held in public. It is good
to see that the Council can build on its past practice and
enhance the transparency of these discussions. I hope
to repeat this format at the end of our presidency next
month.
Comparing the programme of work issued at the
start of the month with the current one, it is clear how
much of the Council’s time this month has been taken
up with emerging and worsening crises. We have had
emergency meetings on weekends and late into the night,
and unforeseen adoptions at short notice. This included
the unanimous adoption on 14 July of resolution 2165
(2014), which marked a major step forward in our efforts
to respond to the suffering in Syria and cut through
the obstructions that the regime had been putting in
the way of the delivery of humanitarian aid directly to
those in need.
The shooting down of Malaysian Airlines Flight
MH-17 over eastern Ukraine shocked us all. The
Council came together quickly to respond through a
press statement, and followed that up in short order
with the adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), demanding
dignified and respectful treatment of the bodies of the
victims, immediate access to the crash site and the
full cooperation of all States with the investigation
and efforts to establish accountability. Disgracefully,
the pro-Russian separatists in control of the crash site
have, from the very first day, tried to cover up what
happened. They treated the victims’ bodies with
appalling disrespect. They were deliberately slow to
provide access, preventing the professional and rapid
follow-up action that was needed to secure evidence at
the site. Those actions created untold additional distress
to the families of the victims.

16/22

30/07/2014

The Council has a collective responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but
every member also has an individual responsibility
to meet the obligations set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. The Russian Federation has not lived
up to those responsibilities. Quite apart from illegally
annexing Crimea, the Russian Federation could
have brought about the end of the fighting in eastern
Ukraine weeks ago. Instead, it has sought to foment
the unrest, providing weapons and political support to
the separatists, with predictably tragic consequences.
Against this, President Poroshenko has provided
repeated opportunities for the separatists to engage in
dialogue, removing entirely their basis for taking up
arms. For that reason, the Council will have to keep its
attention on the situation in eastern Ukraine during the
month of August.
The Council has also had to respond with emergency
meetings this month to the terrible situation in Gaza. It
is deeply tragic that so many innocent civilians have
been killed or injured in the current crisis. Both sides
must do their utmost to de-escalate the situation and
avoid further injury and loss of innocent life. The
people of Israel have the right to live without constant
fear for their security, but the people of Gaza also have
the right to live safely in peace. The adoption late on
Sunday night, on the eve of Eid Al-Fitr, of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/13 underlined the Council’s
concern about the conflict and echoed the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an immediate and unconditional
humanitarian ceasefire.
While we must do all that we can to alleviate the
suffering — and the United Kingdom is providing
$3 million to help the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in that
regard — the priority must be to achieve a durable
ceasefire that will end this cycle of violence. A ceasefire
agreement must therefore address the underlying causes
of the crisis. It needs to secure full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009) and the November 2012 ceasefire
agreement. Concerted action will be needed to get a grip
on the security situation and open up Gaza’s economy.
The Palestinian Authority must return to Gaza. Until
the crisis is resolved, the Council must remain ready to
do what it can, reinforcing the messages and actions of
international partners to bring about a comprehensive
and lasting peace.
Finally, Mr. President, let me congratulate you
on convening the open debate on peacekeeping and

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

regional partnerships on Monday (see S/PV.7228).
This was a welcome and thoughtful follow-up to the
debate on new trends in peacekeeping held under the
Russian presidency in June (see S/PV.7196). Making
peacekeeping operations efficient and effective
remains a vital strand of work for the Council and for
the Secretariat. The Secretary-General’s review of
peacekeeping will form a central part of this quest.
At the same time, the more this Council can do to
prevent conflict, the less we will have to turn to the last
resort of deploying a peacekeeping operation. Looking
ahead to our presidency, we plan to hold an open debate
on this topic to ask questions about what more the
Council should be doing to respond to the early warning
signs we can all see and to take the early action that
would help to prevent conflicts from escalating.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like express our thanks and appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for your efficient stewardship of
the Council’s affairs in July, which has witnessed grave
developments in the international arena with respect to
various issues falling within the scope of the Council’s
work, especially the tragic developments in the Middle
East, notably in Syria, Gaza and Iraq.
The Council has continued to follow the
developments in Ukraine, in addition to issues related
to the important and diverse African files. I would be
remiss not to commend the convening of the debate on
peacekeeping operations (see S/PV.7228). In that respect,
my delegation will not delve into the details of the
aforementioned important thematic issues, concerning
which my delegation has expressed its position in detail
during the Council’s debates. It has also engaged with
all Council members in a constructive, positive manner
to explain positions and to reach a consensus with a
view to shouldering the responsibilities on the Council
in that respect.
Our intervention will focus only on the procedural
matters alluded to by our delegation in the meeting
held in March. We have reiterated those issues and our
three proposals on procedural matters in subsequent
meetings in order to improve the work of the Council
through its Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes every success
to the United Kingdom during its presidency next
month.

S/PV.7231

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I too want to join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, and your very efficient
team not only for your spirit of endurance in a tumultuous
month, but especially for a superlative performance even
in the face of the numerous demands for your attention.
The wrap-up session offers us an opportunity for selfassessment, and you have gone further by providing
a concept note to guide our discussion (S/2014/536,
annex). I believe that we could utilize this opportunity
for self-assessment as a springboard for the future.
The month of July has been characterized by very
robust engagement on numerous rapidly developing
situations all around the globe. I want to limit my
intervention to three issues, namely, the Central African
Republic, the situation in Gaza, and Ukraine.
Regarding the Central African Republic, the
Council noted the state of preparations for the full
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic as it is poised to assume full authority from
the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic on 15 September. The
violence has imposed a very heavy humanitarian toll
on the Central African Republic. It is important to note
that this spate of tragedies in other theatres of conflict
appeared for a while to distract the Council from the
traditional arenas of conflict.
Some time ago, I talked about the forgotten
conflicts in Yemen, the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I believe that
the challenge for the Council in the future will be how
to maintain a prudent balance in its attention to threats
to international peace and security. There is a tendency
for us to concentrate our attention on the immediate
conflicts while we forget others that are still going on.
I draw on the analogy to the mother with sextuplets, all
of them crying for attention. She has to be very creative
in dealing with them. I think we are encouraged, in
spite of this omission, by the regional initiatives that
were taking place while we were paying attention to
other things.
For instance, in the Central African Republic, the
signing of the agreement on cessation of hostilities
and violence in Brazzaville on 23 July should serve
as a point of departure in the search for peace in that
country. This brings me to the debate that we held a few
days ago on partnerships in peacekeeping operations
(S/PV.7228). While we were distracted the regional

14-4881717/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

arrangement was in full force, and that served to
bridge the gap. I think that this phenomenon and such
developments must be encouraged.
The tensions over the kidnapping and killing of
three Israeli students and the apparent revenge killing
of a Palestinian teenager evolved into a major conflict
between Israel and Palestine. The story has been
replayed in this Chamber on and off. We regret that,
despite the calls by well-meaning leaders around the
world for de-escalation and restraint, the conflict has
continued to deepen both in intensity and in its scope,
claiming numerous lives, including those of women and
children. As we speak, the death toll on both sides is on
the increase.
I believe that our concern at this point must be to do
everything possible to propel the parties to respect their
commitments to a ceasefire that will permit the creation
of corridors for the delivery of humanitarian supplies.
While the Council responded swiftly by holding two
emergency meetings, it is unfortunate that it could only
agree on a presidential statement, three weeks after the
outbreak of hostilities. In the future, the Council should
aim for a quick and robust action — action designed to
avoid colossal loss of life and alleviate human suffering.
The third issue, the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 on 17 July, was a very regrettable, tragic
and unfortunate incident. In the face of what seemed
like an apocalyptic end of the world, the Council kept
the world in suspense for a while over an obviously
amoral act capable of being replicated in other parts
of the world. We can see the copy-cat tendency in the
world today.
The Council’s eventual unified stance in denouncing
and condemning the incident, with the adoption
of resolution 2166 (2014), must be commended. In
adopting the resolution, the Council has demonstrated
that it is capable of speaking with one voice when it
so chooses. That is precisely the higher moral ground
that the world expects from this Council. Indeed, it
must constitute the pattern for the future. It must serve
as credible scaffolding on which the future of global
peace and security will be built. We want to take the
opportunity to present that scaffolding to the United
Kingdom delegation as it assumes the presidency, and
we do it with tremendous confidence, hoping that this
will be the pattern for the future in the Council.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and

18/22

30/07/2014

your team on your continuing leadership and successful
presidency in July. We welcome the convening of this
open wrap-up meeting, which we consider an essential
tool in the Council’s work. We urge that it be maintained.
I wish to begin by mentioning two lessons learned
in July that we believe contribute to improving the way
the Council addresses challenges to international peace
and security.
The crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
on Thursday, 17 July in eastern Ukraine again put
pressure on the Council to confront a crisis, one
that caused the death of dozens of civilians and is a
threat to international stability. Despite existing
differences regarding the issue, we were able to adopt
a press statement on 18 July that sought to ensure the
conduct of a complete and impartial international
investigation of the incident. That call was reaffirmed
shortly afterwards through the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2166 (2014).
Moreover, the adoption on 14 July of resolution
2165 (2014), on the humanitarian situation in Syria, also
showed that when we decide to focus our discussions on
specific issues and concrete measures on the ground,
it is possible to make progress and achieve results.
In that particular case, discussions were focused
on opening four border crossings and establishing
a monitoring mechanism and responsibility for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance once it enters
Syrian territory — all concrete and pragmatic issues.
It was possible to see in those discussions ways in
which member States showed flexibility and worked
constructively to achieve consensus.
While it is too early to analyze the implementation
of the resolution, the entry of the first convoy of
humanitarian aid through the Bab al-Salam border
crossing on 24 July is an encouraging sign. We hope
it is the beginning of a process to help alleviate the
critical humanitarian situation affecting millions of
Syrians and that the resolution will continue to be
implemented — unlike resolution 2139 (2014) and
the presidential statement of 2 October of last year
(S/PRST/2013/15).
Nevertheless, we are aware that only a political
solution will put an end to the humanitarian crisis. The
unanimous approval of both resolutions bolstered the
Council in creating a sign of unity. It also showed that
it is possible that the Council can be capable of forging
a common vision to fulfil its responsibility.

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

However, one cannot address only the positive
aspects. If we are to take a moment to analyse
the Council’s effectiveness in the maintenance of
international peace and security, there is no better
example than the situation in the Middle East, including
the peace process, to demonstrate that the Council is
not completely fulfilling its role under the Charter of
the United Nations. Indeed, the situation in the Middle
East has been addressed by the Security Council nearly
since the earliest days of the United Nations, with the
first resolution on the matter dating back to 1948. Yet
today the Council appears irrelevant when it comes
to preventing the ongoing escalation of violence that,
since 8 July and the launch of Operation Protective
Edge, has caused more than 1,000 fatalities, including
civilians — women and children — in Palestine and
more than 50 in Israel, through the disproportionate
use of force in Gaza and continuous rocket attacks on
Israel.
To us it seems crucial that this body do everything in
its power to achieve an immediate ceasefire and impose
respect for international humanitarian law, preventing
a worsening of the conflict. In that sense, the adoption
on 28 July of the presidential statement introduced by
Jordan (S/PRST/2014/13) is highly important as this
body resumes its rightful role in regard to the conflict,
but it does not exhaust the ongoing discussions on other
actions. As that conflict persists, the Council should
consider new options, especially strengthening the
Quartet’s role. We also underscore that the Council
must firmly demand compliance with its resolutions
under Article 25 of the Charter. We particularly wish to
emphasize compliance with resolution 2143 (2014). We
repeat that it is crucial that the Council address the root
causes of conflict and echo the call of the SecretaryGeneral for a comprehensive solution to this grave
crisis, including the political, humanitarian, security
and development aspects, to enable the peaceful
coexistence of Israel and Palestine within secure,
internationally recognized borders.
Finally, we wish the United Kingdom every success
in its upcoming presidency.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): This month has been a
hard one. On 17 July, we learned of the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over Ukrainian territory
controlled by separatists, killing all 298 passengers and
crew. Eighty of the victims were children. The victims
were citizens of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,

S/PV.7231

the Philippines and the United Kingdom. A number
were dual nationals of other countries.
That devastating incident reminds us that in an
increasingly globalized world, the individual stake of
each Member State in international peace and security
is greater than ever before. It reminds us that we all
have an interest in a Security Council that can respond
effectively.
On 18 July, the following day, the Council
unanimously condemned the downing of Flight MH-17
(see S/PV.7219). That was followed quickly, on 21 July,
by the decisive resolution 2166 (2014) to ensure a full,
thorough and independent international investigation,
to demand immediate and unrestricted access to the
site to allow for the recovery of the bodies and the work
of the investigation to proceed, to prohibit any actions
that would compromise the integrity of the crash site,
most notably by local armed groups, and to insist that
those responsible be held accountable. That was what
the international community expected of the Council.
That is what the Council agreed.
However, in itself, as we know, it is not enough.
We now need the full and urgent implementation of
resolution 2166 (2014). At the request of Ukraine, the
Netherlands has taken the lead in the investigation
with the assistance of the International Civil Aviation
Organization and other international partners. Dutch
and Australian unarmed personnel have been deployed
in numbers to provide protection to the investigators at
the crash site, to assist with the removal of the remaining
bodies and belongings and to secure the wreckage and
physical evidence.
In that, we, the Australian deployment, as well
as the Dutch deployment, and the Australian Special
Envoy Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, who was just
mentioned by Ambassador Churkin, have meticulously
worked through the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe as the sole contact on our
behalf with the local armed separatists. Unfortunately,
the Australian and Dutch personnel have not yet been
able to access the site because of the local conditions.
However, urgent access remains imperative, while the
conditions at the site deteriorate. All that makes it clear
that the full and immediate implementation of resolution
2166 (2014) is a serious obligation. Certainly, my own
country is determined to bring home our 38 dead, to
identify those responsible and to pursue justice.

14-4881719/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

While the Council’s progress in delivering resolution
2165 (2014) on humanitarian relief to the people of
Syria was measured in weeks rather than in days, as in
the case of Flight MH-17 and the relevant resolution,
that humanitarian resolution again demonstrates, as
our Chilean colleague has just noted, that the Council
can break new ground in resolving even seemingly
intractable issues. Resolution 2165 (2014) authorizes
cross-border access by United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners to enable them to reach
an estimated 2.9 million people in need. As we were
informed by Under-Secretary-General Amos earlier
today, the first humanitarian convoy has crossed the
Turkish border under the new arrangements.
The adoption of resolutions such as those is a
primordial part of the Council’s work. However,
it needs to constantly remind itself that securing
agreement on a text is of little use if it does not also
relentlessly pursue the implementation of its decisions.
The adoption in February of resolution 2139 (2014) on
humanitarian issues in Syria was a direct response to
the Syrian regime’s failure to abide by the provisions of
the Council’s earlier presidential statement of 2 October
of last year (S/PRST/2013/15).
The Council received reports systematically each
month from the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014), which laid out starkly how
dramatically the humanitarian situation continued to
deteriorate. It was unchallengeable from those reports
that the parties were not implementing the obligations
under the resolution and that a stronger Council response
was therefore needed. We accomplished that through
the groundbreaking resolution 2165 (2014). As the
Council, we have the responsibility to ensure that that
resolution and its parent resolution 2139 (2014), which
remains fully in force, are implemented in full and to
take further measures if non-compliance continues.
In order to pursue implementation, the Council of
course needs the correct information at the right time.
It must not be hostage to routine reporting cycles.
Rather, it should increase its attention on threats to
international peace and security as they emerge and as
situations demand. The Council has recently increased
the pace of its consideration of Libya and used any
other business to consider a number of immediate
developments, including with regard to Yemen and
Iraq. That is how the Council should work consistently.

20/22

30/07/2014

The Council also needs access to a broad range of
information, not only from the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and the Department of
Political Affairs but also from other actors, including
the Special Envoys of the Secretary-General. As the
Rights up Front initiative has affirmed, understanding
the human rights dimensions of a situation is a crucial
element of the Council’s work. That means that it should
look at what commissions of inquiry and the human
rights special mechanisms can provide to the Council.
In order to pursue implementation, the Council
needs to be ready to fully utilize the tools that are
available to it. The Council’s willingness to establish
new sanctions regimes in Yemen and the Central
African Republic and to consider doing so in South
Sudan, which is overdue, has been welcome. However,
sanctions will work as a policy tool only if they are
properly implemented. That requires closer engagement
with the affected States, including assistance to meet
the conditions and to implement the obligations of
Council sanctions, and better coordination with the
other Council responses to the specific situation and
across sanctions regimes generally. Australia hopes
that the high-level review of United Nations sanctions,
which we are co-chairing, can help deliver that.
The Council also needs to support the
implementation of mandates that it gives to other
actors, such as the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council took the right decision in referring the
situations in Darfur and in Libya to the ICC but, like all
decisions of the Council, those referrals need followup action by the Council in order to be effective. The
Council must shoulder its responsibility to support the
Court’s efforts to fulfil the mandates that we, as the
Council, gave it. A good start would be to respond to
the Court’s eight letters about the failure of some States
to cooperate with the ICC in relation to the Darfur
referral.
Finally, the Council must be ready to innovate so as
to ensure implementation. It must also cooperate with
regional organizations and other relevant institutions,
including the ICC, to achieve the Council’s objectives.
The world is now experiencing more simultaneous
crises with regard to peace and security with a broader
impact across the globe than for decades. Major
humanitarian crises inevitably occur as a result and
themselves become the source of further instability.
The demand for peacekeeping is increasing. Civilians

14-48817

30/07/2014

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

face a greater threat in larger numbers than at any time
since the Second World War. Some 51 million people are
displaced. In such a world, the protection of civilians
becomes a even more central and compelling part of
the work of the Council and the Council’s success in
protecting people has become the measure to which
we are held. Failure is always close by. Only through a
relentless focus on the implementation of the Council’s
decisions will we be able to meet that measure.
I congratulate you, Sir, and your entire team on
a successful and helpful presidency and wish the
incoming United Kingdom presidency good luck for
another possible difficult month.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.
Allow me to start by thanking my colleagues,
members of the Security Council, for their continued
support for the Rwandan presidency and for their
full cooperation. which enabled us to carry out the
programme of this busy and unpredictable month of
July. Indeed, tomorrow, we have another emergency
meeting on Gaza.
I would also like to congratulate Sir Mark Lyall
Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, on his assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August. I
am particularly pleased that the United Kingdom
presidency is proposing to organize an open debate on
the prevention of conflict in line with the briefing that
Rwanda organized in April 2013 on the prevention of
conflicts in Africa by addressing their root causes (see
S/PV.6946). I also appreciate the fact that Ambassador
Lyall Grant and his team will continue to hold wrap-up
sessions in the format of a public briefing.
As members know, the main topic of the month of
July was the thematic debate on peacekeeping, as this
very month Rwanda celebrates its tenth anniversary of
participating in peacekeeping operations. Members will
recall that two days ago, on Monday 28 July, Rwanda
convened an open debate on regional partnership and
its evolution, during which resolution 2167 (2014) was
unanimously adopted (see S/PV.7228). In that resolution
the Council expressed its determination to take effective
steps to further enhance the relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. It further stressed the need to enhance

S/PV.7231

the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a Security Council mandate.
Furthermore, Rwanda firmly believes that
peacekeeping, multidimensional and robust as it
may be, cannot alone resolve conflicts. Indeed, the
maintenance of international peace and security
requires concrete, coordinated and sustained action,
from the stage of conflict prevention to that of postconflict peacebuilding.
It is in that context that on Tuesday, 15 July, the
Security Council held a briefing on post-conflict
peacebuilding (see S/PV.7217). That meeting was
followed by an informal interactive dialogue among
members of the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) Chairs Group and countries on the
PBC agenda and with the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support. The meeting was frank,
direct and fruitful, as it was an opportunity to further
discuss how to strengthen the PBC advisory function to
the Security Council and on how to address the recurring
relapse into conflict. Nonetheless, Rwanda regretted
that while all PBC configurations were represented
at an ambassadorial level, most Council members
were represented at a lower level, not to mention that
among the six countries on the PBC agenda — all of
which are African — only Sierra Leone, represented
by its Permanent Representative, attended the informal
interactive dialogue.
During the month of July, the Security Council also
considered a number of country-specific situations. It
is important to know that although African conflicts
continue to be present in our work, they were not the
majority of situations considered in the programme
of work for the month. However, that was due not to
the reduction of conflicts in Africa, which is always
dominated by crises in South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, but to the worsening situations in
other parts of the world, particularly in the Middle East
and Ukraine.
In Syria, following the violation of resolution 2139
(2014) by all sides, the Council unanimously adopted
this month another humanitarian resolution, resolution
2165 (2014), by which it authorized United Nations
humanitarian agencies to use routes across conflict
lines and four additional border crossings in order to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches people in
need throughout Syria through the most direct routes.

14-4881721/22

S/PV.7231

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

On Ukraine, the Security Council held an
emergency meeting on Friday 18 July (see S/PV.7219)
following the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine, which resulted in
the tragic loss of 298 lives. The Council also adopted a
press statement (SC/11480) followed by resolution 2166
(2014), calling for a full, thorough, independent and
unhindered international investigation.
In the Middle East, the Council was yet again
confronted with the resumption of hostilities related
to Gaza. Given the magnitude of the conflict, which
has taken more than 1,300 lives so far, mostly
civilians — women and children — the Council
adopted for the first time since 2009 a Council product
on the Palestinian question, in this case a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/13) calling for an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire. Unfortunately, that
presidential statement was not implemented on the
ground, and tomorrow morning the Council will
again convene an emergency meeting to consider the
humanitarian consequences of the conflict.
It is worth noting that those three situations — in
Syria, Ukraine and Gaza/Israel — brought to light in
a single month the division among Council members,
especially when the interests of the permanent
members were involved. To be fair, the Council should
be commended for overcoming its divisions and
adopting critical decisions, such as resolution 2165
(2014) on Syria, resolution 2166 (2014) on Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 and the presidential statement
on Gaza. But, nonetheless, it is clear that in July 2014,
as in previous months, Council members were once
again unable or unwilling to use their influence to find
a sustainable political solution to all those crises.
In that regard, Rwanda believes that as far as the
work of the Security Council is concerned, initial
consultations among the permanent members alone or
between penholders and countries of the region on a
particular situation are important to clear the ground and
facilitate a smooth decision by the Council. However,
we also believe — as reminded by the 2014 FIFA World
Cup, which ended this month — that team spirit, more
than individuals, is the best chance for success. We
therefore recall that the Council comprises 15 members
and that all of them should be given enough time to
consult and contribute to its work and to its decisions.

22/22

30/07/2014

In conclusion, I would like to thank Member States
for participating in this wrap-up meeting and in other
public meetings convened by the Council this month,
sometimes on short notice. I wish particularly to
commend the United Nations Members who actively
participated in and contributed to the two open debates
organized this month. However, I would encourage
African Members of the Organization to participate
more in the Council’s open debates, particularly those
related to issues concerning Africa, such as the open
debate on regional partnerships held on Monday (see
S/PV.7228). Indeed, Rwanda believes that the Security
Council needs, more than ever, the contribution of the
wider United Nations membership and their various
experiences, which will help the Council to effectively
carry out its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
Before adjourning the meeting — which was
scheduled to be the Council’s last meeting for the
month of July, before the situation in the Middle
East decided otherwise — I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Rwanda to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives and their respective staff,
and to the Council’s secretariat for all the support they
have given to us. Indeed, it has been a busy month
and one in which we rallied to consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone and without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation, the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the
Secretariat, as well as our very precious interpreters,
translators, meeting services and sound engineers.
As we end our second and last presidency of
Rwanda’s current term in the Security Council, I know
I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing Sir Mark
Lyall Grant and the delegation of the United Kingdom
good luck in the month of August.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

14-48817
