A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/66
24 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 18
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/53/594)]
53/66.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Tokelau,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the question of Tokelau,1
Recalling the solemn declaration on the future status of Tokelau, delivered by the Ulu-o-Tokelau (the
highest authority on Tokelau) on 30 July 1994, that an act of self-determination in Tokelau is now under
active consideration, together with the constitution of a self-governing Tokelau, and that the present
preference of Tokelau is for a status of free association with New Zealand,
Recalling also its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations relating to those Territories, including, in particular, General Assembly resolution 52/77
of 10 December 1997,

1

A/53/23 (Part VII), chap. XI. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third
Session, Supplement No. 23.
99-76681

/...

A/RES/53/66
Page 2

Recalling further the emphasis placed in the solemn declaration on the terms of Tokelau's intended
free association relationship with New Zealand, including the expectation that the form of help Tokelau
could continue to expect from New Zealand in promoting the well-being of its people, besides its external
interests, would be clearly established in the framework of that relationship,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New Zealand as the administering
Power with regard to the work of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United Nations visiting missions to the Territory,
Noting also with appreciation the collaborative contribution to the development of Tokelau by New
Zealand and the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in particular
the United Nations Development Programme and the International Telecommunication Union,
Recalling the dispatch in 1994 of a United Nations visiting mission to Tokelau,
Noting that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the situation of most remaining
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting also that, as a case study pointing to successful decolonization, Tokelau has wider significance
for the United Nations as it seeks to complete its work in decolonization,
1. Notes that Tokelau remains firmly committed to the development of self-government and to an
act of self-determination that would result in Tokelau assuming a status in accordance with the options
on future status for Non-Self-Governing Territories contained in principle VI of the annex to General
Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960;
2.

Also notes Tokelau's desire to move at its own pace towards an act of self-determination;

3. Commends Tokelau's ongoing work in charting a distinctive constitutional course, reflecting its
unique traditions and environment;
4. Also commends Tokelau for current initiatives and endeavours, based on wide consultation with
its people, to construct a true “house of Tokelau”, acknowledging the role of the village as the foundation
of Tokelau, as well as the need to continue the process of strengthening the basis of national selfgovernment;
5. Acknowledges the attention being given to broader matters of governance, including Tokelau's
efforts to establish clear local channels of responsibility and accountability in national and village
government;
6. Notes the desire of Tokelau, in consultation with the Government of New Zealand, to take over
responsibility for the Tokelau public service and the willingness of the Government of New Zealand to
make the necessary legislative changes, reflecting its already well-advanced policy of devolving that part
of government which deals with the interests of all of Tokelau;
7. Acknowledges Tokelau's need for reassurance, given that local resources cannot adequately cover
the material side of self-determination, and the ongoing responsibility of Tokelau's external partners to
/...

A/RES/53/66
Page 3

assist Tokelau in balancing its desire to be self-reliant to the greatest extent possible with its need for
external assistance;
8. Welcomes the assurances of the Government of New Zealand that it will meet its obligations to
the United Nations with respect to Tokelau and abide by the freely expressed wishes of the people of
Tokelau with regard to their future status;
9. Invites the administering Power and United Nations agencies to continue their assistance to the
social and economic development of Tokelau;
10. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to continue to examine
this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.
78th plenary meeting
3 December 1998
