UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/24
15 May 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3664th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 May 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Burundi, dated 3 May 1996 (S/1996/335)
submitted pursuant to resolution 1049 (1996).
"The Security Council is gravely concerned at the continued
deterioration of the security situation in Burundi, in particular at
reports of a downward spiral of violence which has resulted in further
large-scale killings in Buhoro and Kivyuka, and at the increasing flow of
refugees from Burundi. The Council is deeply concerned that relief
organizations have been prevented from delivering vital humanitarian and
development assistance in Burundi, and at the suffering which this imposes
on the people of Burundi. It calls on the parties and all concerned to
refrain from any action that could aggravate the problem of refugees.
"The Security Council strongly condemns any use of violence and
emphasizes its conviction that a lasting settlement of the situation in
Burundi can only be found through peaceful means. The Council calls on the
parties to engage in a comprehensive political dialogue aimed at achieving
national reconciliation in Burundi. The Council urges once again the
authorities and all parties concerned in Burundi to set aside their
differences, renounce the use of force and demonstrate a firm political
will for a prompt settlement of the conflict.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of the commencement of
the National Debate provided for in the Convention of Government, as an
appropriate mechanism for a wide-ranging political dialogue in which all
parties to the conflict should participate without any preconditions. The
Council reaffirms its support for the convening of the Regional Conference
on Peace, Security and Development in the Great Lakes Region and calls upon
all the States concerned to render their cooperation for the convening of
the conference.

96-12298 (E)

150596

/...

S/PRST/1996/24
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reiterates its full support for the ongoing
efforts of former President Nyerere to facilitate negotiations and
political dialogue to resolve the crisis in Burundi and looks forward to a
successful outcome of the upcoming meeting in Mwanza, Tanzania, on
22 May 1996. The Council calls upon the parties to make full use of the
meeting to achieve progress towards national reconciliation. It also
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to that end.
"The Council emphasizes the importance of the continued cooperation of
the United Nations with the Organization of African Unity, the European
Union and other interested countries and organizations in coordination with
former President Nyerere aimed at achieving the objective of a
comprehensive political dialogue between the parties in Burundi. In this
regard, the Council expresses its support for the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and its observer mission (MIOB) and
calls upon all States to contribute generously to the OAU Peace Fund in
order to enable the OAU to increase the size of the mission and to extend
its mandate beyond July 1996.
"The Security Council welcomes the endorsement by the SecretaryGeneral of the conclusions of the technical mission providing for United
Nations radio broadcasts in Burundi and looks forward to being kept
informed by him of progress made in the implementation of their
recommendations.
"The Security Council reiterates the importance it attaches to the
contingency planning called for in paragraph 13 of resolution 1049 (1996),
and notes the consultations which have already taken place. In the light
of recent developments, it requests the Secretary-General and Member States
concerned to continue to facilitate, as a matter of urgency, contingency
planning for a rapid humanitarian response in the event of widespread
violence or a serious deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
Burundi. It also encourages the Secretary-General further to pursue
planning for steps that might be taken to support a possible political
agreement.
"The Security Council reminds all parties of their responsibilities
for restoring peace and stability in Burundi, and recalls its readiness, as
set out in resolution 1040 (1996), to consider the adoption of further
measures should the parties fail to demonstrate the necessary political
will for a peaceful solution to the crisis. The Council will remain seized
of the matter."

-----
