THE QUESTION OF HOSTAGE-TAKING .\ND ABDUCTION
Decision

At its 2872nd meeting, on 31 July 1989, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The question of hostagetaking and abduction".
At the same meeting, as agreed in the Council's prior
consultations, the President made the following statement prior to the adopt ion of rcsol u tion 638 ( 1989): 10~
"As we consider the adoption of the draft resolution on hostage-taking and abduction,'°' we meet
under the shadow of recent events and the cruel
reports that Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins, who served
the United Nations on a peace-keeping mission in
Lebanon, may have been murdered today. I wish to
express the full support of the Security Council for
the statement made by the Secretary-General yesterday, 30 July, in this connection.
"The Council will seek further facts on the devel-opments of today, and urges those involved to acl
with reason, restraint and a proper respect for human
life and dignity. The Council feels that it should
proceed without delay to the adoption of the draft
resolution that we have been discussing in private on
the subject of hostage-taking and abduction.
"There is a most tragic irony that our efforts to
adopt a text on this matter should have coincided
with the grave events of recent days.
"This illustrates, with utmost clarity, that we need
to underline the necessity for effective international
action on the subject of hostage-taking and abduction. Indeed, the expression of the unanimous view
of the Security Council will, I am sure, serve to defer
such unlawful, criminal and nucl act;, in the future."

Resolution 638 ( 1989)
oLII July 191'9

The Security Council,
Deeply disturbl'd by the prevalence of incidents of
hostage-taking and abduction, and the continued protracted incarceration of many of those held hostage,
Considering that the taking of hostages and abductions are offences of ~rave concern to all States and
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
having severe adverse consequences for the human
rights of the victims and their families and for the

promotion of friendly relations and co-operation
among States,
Recalling its resolutions 579 (1985) of 18 December
I 985 and 618 ( I 988) of 29 July 1988 condemning all acts
ol hostage taking and abduction,
Bearing in mind the International Convention against
the Taking of Hostages, adopted on 17 December
1979, 104 the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, adopted on 14
December 1973, 1" 1 1he Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts agamst the Safety of Civil Aviation,
signed on 23 September 1971, tu~ the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed on
16 December I 970. 107 and other relevant conventions.
I. Condemns 1111cquivocally all acts of hostage-taking and abduction;
) Demands the immediate safe release of all hosI ages and abducted persons, wherever and by whomever they arc being hc:ld;
3. Calls upon all States to use their political influence in accordance with the Charter of the United
:\Jations and the principles of international law to secure the safe release of all hostages and abducted persons and to prevent the commission of acts of
hostage-taking and abduction;
4. Expresses appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General in seeking the release of all hostages
and abducted pcr~ons and invites him to continue such
efforts whenever so requested by a State;
5. Appeals to all States that have not yet done so to
consider becoming parties to the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages, the Convention on
1hc Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic
Agents, the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, the Con\Cntion for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of
Aircraft and othcr relevant conventions;
I>. Urgt'S the further development of international
co-operation am,rng States in devising and adopting
effective measures which arc in accordance with the
rules of international law to facilitate the prevention,
prosecution and punishment of all acts of hostage-taking and abductinn a~ manifestations of terrorism.
Adopted 1wani111uusly al rhe
2H72nd 1t1t'<'ling
1
'"' (icncral Assembly resolution 34/146, annex.

102 See Official Re, ords of 1hc '>t'curir\' Cu1mci/. Fnrrv-fourth Yea,,

2872nd meeting, par,1 '.\
103
S/20757.

!oS Cicncr.tl Assembly resolution ~ 166 (XXVIII), annex.

·n1, l'nitcd Nalinn,. Trrnrv Series, vol. '174, No. 14118.
7
'' /hid., \ii) 8()0, "'>Jll 12.~2).
