A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/26
12 December 1996

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 35
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.36 and Add.1)]
51/26.

Peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 submitted
pursuant to the request made in its resolution 50/84 D of 15 December 1995,
Convinced that achieving a final and peaceful settlement of the question
of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is imperative for the
attainment of a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East,
Aware that the principle of equal rights and self-determination of
peoples is among the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Affirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by war,
Affirming also the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the
territory occupied since 1967 and of Israeli actions aimed at changing the
status of Jerusalem,

1

A/51/678-S/1996/953.

96-77569

/...

A/RES/51/26
Page 2

Affirming once again the right of all States in the region to live in
peace within secure and internationally recognized borders,
Aware of the mutual recognition between the Government of the State of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the
Palestinian people, and the signing by the two parties of the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements2 in Washington, D.C., on
13 September 1993, as well as the subsequent implementation agreements,
including the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip signed in Washington, D.C., on 28 September 1995,
Noting with satisfaction the withdrawal of the Israeli army, which took
place in the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area in accordance with the agreements
reached by the parties, and the initiation of the Palestinian Authority in
those areas, as well as the beginning of the redeployment of the Israeli army
in the rest of the West Bank,
Noting also with satisfaction the successful holding of the first
Palestinian general elections,
Aware that the United Nations has participated as a full, extraregional
participant in the work of the multilateral working groups of the Middle East
peace process,
Noting the establishment of the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator in the Occupied Territories and its positive contribution,
Welcoming the convening of the Conference to Support Middle East Peace
in Washington, D.C., on 1 October 1993, and all follow-up meetings,
Concerned over the serious difficulties facing the Middle East peace
process and the deterioration of the socio-economic conditions of the
Palestinian people as a result of the Israeli positions and measures,
1.
Reaffirms the necessity of achieving a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in all its
aspects;
2.
Expresses its full support for the ongoing peace process which
began in Madrid and the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements2 of 1993, as well as the subsequent implementation agreements,
including the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip of 1995, and expresses the hope that the process will lead to the
establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East;
3.
Stresses the necessity for the immediate and scrupulous
implementation of the agreements reached between the parties and the
commencement of the negotiations on the final settlement;
4.
Calls upon the concerned parties, the co-sponsors of the peace
process and the entire international community to exert all the necessary
efforts to ensure the success of the peace process;

2

A/48/486-S/26560, annex.
/...

A/RES/51/26
Page 3

5.

Stresses the need for:

(a)
The realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, primarily the right to self-determination;
(b)
The withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967;
6.
Also stresses the need for resolving the problem of the Palestine
refugees in conformity with its resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948;
7.
Urges Member States to expedite the provision of economic and
technical assistance to the Palestinian people during this critical period;
8.
Emphasizes the importance for the United Nations to play a more
active and expanded role in the current peace process and in the
implementation of the Declaration of Principles;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts with the
parties concerned, and in consultation with the Security Council, for the
promotion of peace in the region and to submit progress reports on
developments in this matter.
72nd plenary meeting
4 December 1996
