General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the necessary material resources in order to help alleviate the sufferings and mitigate the damages inflicted on Yemen as a
result of the earthquake;
3. Appeals to Member States to contribute generously
to the relief efforts, through bilateral and/or multilateral
channels, for the reconstruction of the affected areas in
Yemen;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through
the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator, his efforts in mobilizing all emergency assistance
to Yemen;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Economic
Commission for Western Asia, the World Bank, the World
Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization-to maintain and expand their
programmes of assistance to Yemen and to co-operate closely
with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective programme of assistance to that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations to give urgent relief contributions to Yemen.
109th plenary meeting
17 December I 982

37/167.

United Nations Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy 81

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles and provisions of its resolutions
32/50 of 8 December 1977, 33/4 of 2 November 1978, 34/
63 of 29 November 1979, 35/ 112 of 5 December 1980 and
36/78 of 9 December 1981 regarding the United Nations
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and the relevant
paragraphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 82
Taking note with satisfaction of the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the Conference,
Recalling the experience gained during the last three decades of applications of nuclear energy and technology for
power production and other uses,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States that are advanced
in the nuclear field to promote the fulfilment of the legitimate
nuclear energy needs of the developing countries by participating in the fullest possible transfer of nuclear equipment,
materials and technology under agreed and appropriate international safeguards applied through the International
Atomic Energy Agency on a non-discriminatory basis in
order to prevent effectively the proliferation of nuclear
weapons,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference on its second and third sessions, 8 -1
Expressing concern at the lack of progress and recognizing the pressing need to speed up and complete substantive
81

110th plenary meeting
17 December 1982
37/233.

Question of Namibia 84
A

SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia"~ and the relevant chapters of the report of the

See also sect. X.B.1, decisions 37/453 and 37/454.

82 Resolution S-10/2.
13

preparations for the Conference, its provisional agenda, its
documentation and its rules of procedure, so as to ensure
a successful conference which would achieve the objectives envisaged in General Assembly resolutions 32/50 and
35/l 12,
l. Decides that the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy shall meet
twice during 1983, once early in the year for ten working
days in New York and, subsequently, for an appropriate
duration prior to the Conference;
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee and the Secretary-General of the Conference, in order to speed up substantive preparations, to make appropriate arrangements,
including as necessary through intersessional work by States
members of the Committee under the guidance of its Chairman and also through regional efforts and appropriate public
information activities, with a view to ensuring meaningful
results from the Conference;
3. Decides to take suitable decisions in regard to the
date of the Conference in the light of the results of the
session of the Preparatory Committee to be held early in
1983;
4. Reiterates that the aim of the Conference is to promote international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and, to this end, to establish universally
acceptable principles for such co-operation in accordance
with the objectives contained in General Assembly resolution 32/50;
5. Reaffirms the provision of paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 36/78 that the outcome of the Conference should be embodied in appropriate documents, in a
suitable format, pertaining, inter alia, to ways and means
of promoting such international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy;
6. Decides that the necessary resources should be provided to ensure successful preparations for the Conference,
including adequate staffing of the secretariat and the availability of expert support in the substantive fields to be covered by the Conference;
7. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency to
contribute to the Conference in terms of paragraph 3 of
resolution 32/50 and paragraph l l of resolution 36/78 in
accordance with its responsibilities under its statute;
8. Urges all States to co-operate actively in the preparation and the holding of the Conference and to respect
and observe the principles set forth in resolution 32/50;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".

Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 48 (A/37/48)

"' See also sect. I. footnote 7. and sect. X.B.6, decision 37/426.
" Official Record.,· of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 24 (1\1.17124).
·
·
