Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

and international organizations and the first reading of
draft articles on succession of States in respect of treaties before the end of the term of office of its· present
members,
Noting with appreciation that the United Nations
Office at Geneva organized, during the twenty-second
session of the International Law Commission, a sixth
session of the Seminar on International Law,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its twenty-second session;
2. Expresses its profound gratitude to the International Law Commission, on the occasion of the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, for its outstanding contribution to the achievements of the Organization during this period, particularly through the preparation of drafts which have
served as the basis for the adoption of important
codification conventions, and expresses its appreciation
to the Commission for the valuable work it accomplished during its twenty-second session;
3. Approves the programme and organization of
work of the session planned by the International Law
Com.mission for 1971, as well as its intention to bring
up to date its long-term programme of work;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on relations between States
and international organizations, taking into account the
views expressed at the twenty-third, twenty-fourth and
twenty-fifth sessions of the General Assembly and the
comments which may be submitted by Governments,
with the object of presenting in 1971 a final draft on
the topic;
(b) Continue its work on succession of States,
taking into account the views and considerations
referred to in General Assembly resolutions 1765
(XVII) of 20 November 1962 and 1902 (XVIII) of
18 November 1963, with a view to completing in 1971
the first reading of draft articles on succession of States
in respect of treaties and making progress in the consideration of succession of States in respect of matters
other than treaties;
(c) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the views and considerations referred to
in General Assembly resolutions 1765 (XVII) of 20
November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2400 (XXIII) of 11 December 1968;
(d) Continue its study of the most-favoured-nation
clause;
(e) Continue its consideration of the question of
treaties concluded between States and international
organizations or between two or more international organizations;
5. Endorses the decision of the International Law
Commission to request the Secretary-General to pr~
pare new editions, brought up to date, of the publication entitled The Work of the International Law Commission3 and of the document entitled "Summary of the
practice of the Secretary-General as depositary of multilateral agreements";•
6. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing number of nationals of developing countries, and supports
a United Nations publication, Sales No.: 67.V.4.
•ST/LEG/7.

125

the suggestion contained in the Commission's report
concerning the use of Spanish as a working language
of the Seminar on International Law;11
7. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the twentyfifth session of the General Assembly.
1903rd plenary meeting,
12 November 1970.
2635 (XXV). Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its third session, 6
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 establishing the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law and defining the object
and terms of reference of the Commission,
Recalling its resolution 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November 1969 with respect to the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the
work of its second session, in which the General Assembly recommended that the Commission should keep
its programme of work under constant review, bearing
in mind the important contribution that the progressive
harmonization and unification of international trade
law can make to economic co-operation among all peoples and, thereby, to their well-being,
Noting the forthcoming publication of the Register
of Texts7 and of the first volume of the Yearbook of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law, 8
Noting that the Trade and Development Board, at
its tenth session, expressed its appreciation of the report
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law, 9
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on its third session and of the progress made in
its work;
2. Notes with appreciation that the desire, expressed
in General Assembly resolution 2502 (XXIV), that
there be the widest possible participation by the members of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law in the preparatory work to be done by
working groups has been fulfilled, and that this participation has substantially advanced the work of the
Commission;
3. Endorses the desire expressed by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to obtain,
where necessary, the services of consultants or organizations with special expertise in technical matters
dealt with by the Commission, it being understood that
recourse to such services is made only in special circumstances;
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/8010/Rev.1), para. 109.
6 fbid., Supplement No. 17 (A/8017).
7 United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.V.3.
s United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.V.1, vol. I.
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/8015/Rev.1 and Rev.1/
Corr.I), part two, para. 232.

General Assembly-Twenty-fifth Se.1ion

126

4. Expresses the hope that, in accordance with the
desire set forth in the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law, it will prove
possible to staff the Commission's secretariat appropriately so as to cope with any increases in the
work-load involved in servicing the Commission, provided that this does not entail supplemental appropriation;
S. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the topics to which it has
decided to give priority, that is, the intern~ional sale
of goods, international payments, international commercial arbitration and international legislation on
shipping;
( b) Continue to give attention to ways and means of
promoting training and assistance in the field of international trade law;
(c) Continue to collaborate fully with international
organizations active in the field of international trade
law;
(d) Continue to develop working methods which
will enhance the efficiency of working groups and ensure full consideration of the commercial practices and
needs of all regions;
( e) Continue to give special consideration, in promoting the harmonization and unification of international trade law, to the interests of developing and landlocked countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions on the Commission's
third report at the twenty-fifth session of the General

Assembly.

1903rd plenary meeting,
12 November 1970.
2644 (XXV). Report of the S~ial Committee on
the Question of Defining Aggression

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its session held at Geneva from 13 July to
14 August 1970,10
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of
defining aggression and on the draft definition, as reftected in the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task, in particular its consideration of the proposals concerning a d.raft definition of aggression submitted to the Special Committee
during its sessions held in 1969 and 1970,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXII) of
18 December 1967, 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968 and 2549 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 the
General Assembly recognized the widespread conviction of the need to expedite the definition of aggression,
Considering the urgency of bringing the work of the
Special Committee to a successful conclusion and the
desirability of achieving the definition of aggression as
soon as possible,
Noting also the common desire of the members of
the Special Committee to continue their work on the
10 Ibid., Supplement No.

19 (A/8019).

basis of the results achieved and to arrive at a draft
definition,
1. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
(XXII), as early as possible in 1971;
2. Reque~ts the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-sixth session an item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression".
1914th plenary meeting,
25 November 1970.
2645 (XXV).

Aerial hijacking or interference
with civil air travel

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that international civil aviation is a vital
link in the promotion and preservation of friendly relations among States and that its safe and orderly
functioning is in the interest of all peoples,
Gravely concerned over acts of aerial hijacking or
other wrongful interference with civil air travel,
Recognizing that such acts jeopardize the lives and
safety of the passengers and crew and constitute a
violation of their human rights,
Aware that international civil aviation can only
function properly in conditions guaranteeing the safety
of its operations and the due exercise of the freedom
of air travel,
Endorsing the solemn declaration11 of the extraordinary session of the Assembly of the International
Civil Aviation Organization held at Montreal from 16
to 30 June 1970,
Bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 2551
(XXIV) of 12 December 1969 and Security Council
resolution 286 (1970) of 9 September 1970 adoeted
by consensus at the 1552nd meeting of the Council,
1. Condemns, without exception whatsoever, all
acts of aerial bijackinJ or other interference with civil
air travel, whether onginally national or international,
through the threat or use of force, and all acts of
violence which may be directed against passengers,
crew and aircraft en,aged in, and air navigation
facilities and aeronautical communications used by,
civil air transport;
2. Calls upon States to take all appropriate measures
to deter, prevent or suppress such acts within their
jurisdiction, at every stage of the execution of those
acts, and to provide for the prosecution and punishment of persons who perpetrate such acts, in a manner
commensurate with the gravity of those crimes, or,
without prejudice to the rights and obligations of States
under existing international instruments relating to the
matter, for the extradition of such persons for the purpose of their prosecution and punishment;
3. Declares that the exploitation of unlawful seizure
of aircraft for the purpose of taking hostages is to be
condemned;
11 International Civil Aviation Organization, Re,olutlona
adopted by the Assembly, Seventeenth Session (Extraordinary) (Montreal, 1970), resolution A17-1.
