S/PV.7219

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7219th meeting

Friday, 18 July 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-47337 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1447337*

Ukraine

S/PV.7219

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

In my briefing to the Council today, I will focus
on developments in eastern Ukraine, as well as on
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution.

Expression of sympathy with regard to Malaysia
Airlines flight MH-17
The President: At the outset of the meeting, I should
like, on behalf of the members of the Security Council
to express the deepest sympathies and condolences to
the families of those who lost their lives aboard the
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 on 17 July 2014, and to
the people and Governments of all those countries who
lost their citizens in the crash.
I now ask that all those present stand and join in
observing a minute of silence in the memory of those
who lost their lives.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Belgium, Canada, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Ukraine and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: As we face a rapidly deteriorating
crisis in Ukraine that bears consequences far beyond
the country’s borders, we deeply regret that the glimpse
of hope that followed the announcement of President
Poroshenko’s peace plan, including the unilateral
ceasefire and peace talks with the armed groups, has
quickly dissipated.

2/22

18/07/2014

First, with respect to the situation in eastern
Ukraine, while the United Nations has at this point
no independent verification of the circumstances
regarding the tragic crash yesterday of a Malaysia
Airlines passenger plane, the Secretary-General is
alarmed at what seem to be credible, numerous reports
that suggest that a sophisticated surface-to-air missile
was used. The Secretary-General strongly condemns
this apparently deliberate downing of a civilian aircraft.
This horrifying incident serves as the starkest
reminder of how dire the situation in eastern Ukraine
has become and how it affects countries and families
well beyond Ukraine’s borders. Nearly 300 innocent
people from many countries, some of whom are
represented by members of the Council, were killed.
The casualties include a professional staff member of
the World Health Organization. I was shocked to learn
just now that nearly two-thirds of the victims come from
the Netherlands, and that there were 80 children on
board that flight. We convey our deepest condolences
to the families and friends of the victims.
The Secretary-General stated yesterday that there
is clearly a need for a full and transparent international
investigation. The United Nations is fully ready to
cooperate. We have been in touch yesterday and today
with the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), and ICAO has offered to Ukrainian officials
its investigative capacity in order to put together an
international team. ICAO and Ukrainian officials are
speaking today, and the Secretary-General is scheduled
to speak with Ukrainian President Poroshenko
tomorrow.
Following the 30 June announcement by President
Poroshenko of the end of the 10-day ceasefire and the
subsequent resumption of security and law enforcement
operations in the eastern parts of the country, the
fighting between Government forces and armed groups
has intensified dangerously, resulting in numerous
deaths. According to the Ukrainian authorities, a
number of towns, including notably the cities of
Slovyansk and Kramatorsk, as well as various smaller
villages in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, have been
returned to their control.
However, relentless fighting has continued
particularly in and around the cities of Luhansk and

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

Donetsk, where the armed groups appear to have
consolidated their presence. Earlier this week, a fierce
battle was also fought over the international airport in
Luhansk, which now appears to be under the Ukrainian
Government’s control. The situation on and around the
border between Ukraine and the Russian Federation
is of particular concern. While it is impossible for the
United Nations to independently verify these accounts,
in recent days a number of fatal incidents and intense
fighting have been reported.
On 13 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation issued a statement noting that one
Russian national died and two were seriously injured
when a Ukrainian army shell hit a residential house.
Ukraine has rejected this claim. In the same statement,
the Ministry also warned that
“tensions in the area of the Russian-Ukrainian
border have dangerously escalated and may have
irreversible consequences, for which Ukraine will
be held responsible”.
According to the Ukrainian authorities, the country’s
border guard units have reportedly come under
continuous attack with rockets and mortars by armed
groups. There are also reports that several Ukrainian
military aircraft have been shot down over the past
weeks, most recently on 16 July.
As the Secretary-General has reiterated on countless
occasions, armed groups need to disarm immediately
and to stop engaging in unlawful and violent acts. At the
same time, we continue to strongly urge the Ukrainian
authorities to act with maximum restraint and to
make every effort possible to ensure the protection of
civilians caught in the fighting. Estimations of the total
number of civilian casualties vary, but according to the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
there have been approximately 500 casualties so far and
1,400 injured. Furthermore, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates
that the crisis had displaced some tens of thousands of
people as of 11 July. Grievances can and must never
justify endangering the lives of those one claims and
aims to represent and protect.
The Secretary-General welcomes the intensive
diplomatic efforts undertaken by many members of
the Council and others in recent weeks with a view to
de-escalating the crisis. The 2 July joint Berlin declaration
agreed upon by the Foreign Ministers of the Russian
Federation, Germany, France and Ukraine — similar

S/PV.7219

to the 17 April Geneva statement — provides a clear
and constructive way forward. As the declaration
underlines, there is an urgent need for a sustainable
ceasefire in eastern Ukraine to be agreed and fully
observed by all concerned, as well as to secure and
effectively control the Russian-Ukrainian border.
As the fighting continues, however, we are
disconcerted by the apparent lack of tangible progress
towards a political solution. A first, critical step would
be the immediate resumption of a ceasefire. The
Secretary-General calls on the international community
to come together in support of Ukraine, in accordance
with the principles of the United Nations Charter, and
to preserve peace and security for the broader region.
We will continue do our part. the Secretary-General is
in close contact with world leaders and has asked me to
return to Kyiv and Moscow in the coming days in the
spirit of his good offices.
Establishing a path to peace in Ukraine, as in
areas of conflict elsewhere in the world, will require
a concerted effort by national actors from across the
political spectrum, backed by the strong and unified
support of the international community. While the
security, political, economic, social, and human rights
issues in Ukraine that should be addressed are indeed
complicated, we hope that the shock of the downing
of the civilian passenger jet yesterday will prompt a
serious and sustained effort to end the fighting and
concentrate positively on Ukraine’s future.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We meet
today in the most tragic of circumstances. Yesterday,
Malaysia Airlines passenger flight MH-17 appears to
have been shot down over eastern Ukraine, killing
all passengers and crew. Our deepest, most heartfelt
condolences go to the families of the victims and to the
people and Governments of those countries affected.
In the United Kingdom, we are mourning the loss of
at least nine British citizens who were passengers on
the flight. This is a dark moment for the international
community. The senseless violence unleashed by armed
separatists in eastern Ukraine has reached monstrous
proportions.
The precise circumstances and causes of this tragic
event must be established quickly and beyond any doubt.
As the Council has affirmed this morning, that will

14-473373/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

require a full, thorough and independent international
investigation, in accordance with international civil
aviation guidelines. The International Civil Aviation
Organization, which provides the international legal
framework for the investigation of air accidents, should
have a central role to play in ensuring that there is
credible and independent international involvement.
We welcome the indications from the Ukrainian
authorities that they want international investigators
to join their efforts. The United Kingdom will
provide whatever assistance is necessary to support
that investigation. The immediate priority has to
be for investigators to gain access to the crash site
so they can start their work. They must be able to
operate unhindered and in security. There must be no
interference or tampering with the evidence. Armed
separatist groups in the vicinity must allow such
access. Despite assurances made yesterday evening,
we understand that has not yet happened. We call on
Russia to use its influence with those groups to ensure
that it happens. The special monitoring mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
already present in eastern Ukraine can play a key role
in facilitating and safeguarding access.
Early indications are that Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 was brought down by a surface-to-air missile.
The MH-17 is not the first aircraft to be brought
down in the area. On 14 June, armed separatists
claimed responsibility for — indeed, gloated publicly
over — the shooting down of a Ukrainian Il-76 transport
aircraft, with a loss of all 49 aboard. On 14 July, armed
separatists shot down an An-26 transport aircraft with
a surface-to-air missile. And, on 16 July, a Ukrainian
Su-25 jet was shot down in circumstances that have yet
to be fully clarified.
We have to ask searching questions about why
we are now confronting this tragic situation. Russian
officials have claimed that armed separatists in eastern
Ukraine represent a spontaneous local insurgency. We
know that is not the case. We know that the three leading
figures of the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic are
Russian citizens who have come from outside Ukraine.
We know that weapons, equipment and logistical
support have been systematically provided to armed
separatist groups by Russia, including up to 100 manportable air defence systems and 15 to 25 main battle
tanks, not to mention artillery pieces, rocket launchers
and other armoured vehicles.

4/22

18/07/2014

The United Kingdom urges Russia to reflect
carefully on the situation it has created. We urge Russia
to cease its policy of supporting armed separatist
groups and their violent actions of destabilizing a
neighbouring country and of generating displacement
and social and economic hardship. Let us hear today a
clear and unequivocal condemnation from Russia of the
actions of these armed groups. These armed groups do
not represent the people of Ukraine; without Russian
support, they would wither.
It is the Council’s responsibility to respond to such
tragedies by drawing the right lessons and working
together with commitment and conviction to prevent
their repetition. It is clear where responsibility lies:
with the senseless violence of armed separatists and
with those who have supported, equipped and advised
them. The Council must be united in condemning these
actions and in demanding that these groups disarm,
desist from violence and intimidation and engage in
dialogue through the democratic mechanisms that are
available to them. They have been given opportunities
to do so, most recently through President Poroshenko’s
peace plan. Those opportunities have all been spurned.
In the press statement agreed earlier today, the
members of the Security Council expressed their
condolences and called for an international investigation
and appropriate accountability. That is welcome, but it
is not enough. The Council must go further. It should
come together behind a clear demand that the armed
separatist groups should lay down their arms and
pursue whatever political legitimate objectives they
may have through exclusively peaceful and democratic
means, and that the flow of arms, fighters and logistical
support to the armed separatists be fully halted and the
borders secured. In the light of yesterday’s tragedy, any
other course of action would be unconscionable.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing on the recent tragic events in Ukraine.
Chad expresses its deepest sympathy and
condolences to the families of the 298 victims of the
crash of the Malaysia Airlines aircraft. Given the
numerous nationalities among the victims, this tragic
event has an impact on peace and security throughout
the entire international community. Whatever the
nature and perpetrators of this incident, this is about
human lives. Chad joins the rest of the international
community in calling for the launch a full and

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

transparent international investigation to shed light
on the circumstances surrounding the crash and to
establish responsibility for the catastrophe. In that
regard, we welcome the willingness of Ukrainian
authorities to expand the investigation to include
independent international experts.
At this time sensitive time of grief, Chad reiterates
its call on all parties involved to exercise calm and
restraint. We urge countries with influence on the
parties to the conflict to encourage dialogue and
reconciliation. Chad takes note of the announcement
by the insurgents that they would observe a ceasefire
to allow for the removal of bodies, as well as the
willingness of the Ukrainian Government to implement
a peace plan with a view to establishing the foundation
for an inclusive political dialogue, which is the only
possible way to resolve this serious crisis.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Yesterday
we were all shocked by the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight 17. All 298 people aboard — 283 passangers and
15 crew members — were killed. As we stared at the
passanger list yesterday, we saw next to three of the
passangers’ names a capital “I”. As we now know, that
letter stands for “infant”. To the families and friends
of the victims, it is impossible to find words to express
our condolences. We can only commit to them that we
will not rest until we find out what happened. A full,
credible and unimpeded international investigation
must begin immediately. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice; they must not be sheltered by any
State Member of the United Nations.
Let me share with the Council our assesment of the
evidence so far.
We assess that Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, carrying
298 people from Amsterdan to Kuala Lumpur, was
likely downed by a surface-to-air missile (SAM) — an
SA-11 — operated from a separatist-held location in
eastern Ukraine. The airliner was travelling at a cruise
altitude of 33,000 feet, and its speed was typical for an
airliner along an established flight corridor frequented
by commercial traffic. The flight was transmiting
its assigned transponder code, corresponding with
its flight plan, and flight tracking data was publicly
available on the Internet. There was nothing threatening
or provocative about MH-17.
Of the operational SAM systems located near the
border, only the SA-11, SA-20 and SA-22 systems are
capable of hitting an aircraft at the flight’s altitude

S/PV.7219

of 33,000 feet. We can rule out shorter-range SAMSs
known to be in separatist hands, including manportable air defence systems, and SA-8 and SA-13
systems, which are not capable of hitting an aircraft at
that altitude. Early Thursday, an SA-11 SAM system
was reported near Zahnitkiv by a western reporter, and
separatists were spotted hours before the incident with
an SA-11 system at a location close to the site where the
plane went down.
Separatists initially claimed responsibility for
shooting down a military transport plane, and posted
videos that are now being connected to the Malaysia
Airlines crash. Separatist leaders also boasted on social
media about shooting down a plane, but later deleted
those messages. Because of the technical complexity
of the SA-11, it is unlikely that the separatists could
effectively operate the system without assistance from
knowledgeable personnel. Therefore, we cannot rule
out technical assistance from Russian personnel in
operating the systems. The Ukrainians do have SA-11
systems in their inventory; however, we are not aware
of any Ukrainian SAM systems in the area of the shootdown. More important, since the beginning of the crisis
Ukrainian air defences have not fired a single missile,
despite several alleged violations of their airspace by
Russian aircraft.
This also follows a pattern of actions by Russianbacked separatists. On 13 June, separatists shot down
a Ukrainian transport plane carrying 40 paratroopers
and 9 crew members. On 24 June, as the Council was
meeting to welcome Ukraine’s unilateral ceasefire
(see S/PV.7205), we received word that separatists
had downed a Ukrainian helicopter, killing all nine
aboard. On 14 July, separatists claimed credit for
downing a Ukrainian military cargo plane flying at
6,000 metres. And on 16 July they claimed credit
for the downing of a Ukrainian fighter jet. If indeed
Russian-backed separatists were behind this attack on
a civilian airliner, they and their backers would have
good reason to cover up evidence of their crime. It is
therefore extremely important that an investigation be
commenced immediately.
In the first instance, the special monitoring
mission the of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe should act as a first responder,
thereby laying the foundation for efforts by other
international organizations and individual nations,
including those whose citizens were victims of the
tragedy. Yesterday, President Obama assured Ukraine’s

14-473375/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

President Poroshenko that United States experts would
offer all possible assistance upon his request. President
Poroshenko has invited the independent and credible
International Civil Aviation Organization to join an
investigation. International investigators must be
granted immediate, full and unfettered access to the
crash site. All those concerned — Russia, pro-Russian
separatists and Ukraine — should agree to support an
immediate ceasefire to facilitate access by international
investigators. In that regard, we look to the monitoring
misson also to reach agreement with separatists and
others in the region to make that possible. All evidence
must remain undisturbed and any evidence removed
from the site by the Russian-backed separatists
operating in the area should be promptly returned and
handed over. Russia needs to help make that happen.
While it make take us some time to firmly establish
who shot down a plane filled with innocents, most
Council members and most members of the international
community have been warning for months about the
devastation that would come if Russia did not stop what
it started — if it did not reign in what it unleashed.
The context for yesterday’s horror is clear: separatist
forces backed by the Russian Government continue
to destabilize Ukraine and undermine the efforts of
Ukraine’s elected leaders to build a democratic Ukraine
that is stable, unified, secure and able to determine its
own future.
Russia says that it seeks peace in Ukraine, but we
have repeatedly provided the Council with evidence
of Russia’s continued support to the separatists. Time
after time, we have called on the Russian Government
to de-escalate the situation by stopping the flow of
fighters and weapons into Ukraine, pressing separatists
to agree to a ceasefire and release all hostages, and
support a road map for negotiations. Time after time,
President Putin has committed to working towards
dialogue and peace — in Geneva in April, in Normandy
in June and in Berlin earlier this month — and every
single time he has broken that commitment.
Here is what we know. In the past few weeks, Russia
has increased the number of tanks, armoured vehicles
and rocket launchers in south-west Russia. More
advanced air defence systems have also arrived. Moscow
recently transferred Soviet- era tanks and artillery to
the separatists, and several military vehicles crossed
the border. After recapturing several Ukrainian cities
last weekend, Ukrainian officials discovered caches
of weapons long associated with Russian stockpiles,

6/22

18/07/2014

including MANPADs, mines, grenades, meals ready
to eat, vehicles and a pontoon bridge. Ukrainian forces
have discovered large amounts of other Russianprovided military equipment, including accompanying
documentation verifying Russian origin, in the areas
they have liberated from separatists in recent days.
Recruiting efforts for separatist fighters are expanding
inside Russia, and separatists have openly said that
they were looking for volunteers with experience in
operating heavy weapons such as tanks and air defences.
Russia has allowed officials from the Donetsk People’s
Republic to establish a recruiting office in Moscow.
Ukrainian pilot Nadia Savchenko, who has long had
a distinguished career in the Ukrainian military, was
taken by separatists in mid-June. She is now being
held — where? — in a prison in Voronezh, Russia.
According to the Ukrainian Government, she was
transferred to Russia by separatists. Russia continues to
redeploy new forces extremely close to the Ukrainian
border. In addition, on Monday, a Ukrainian air force
cargo plane was shot down in Ukrainian air space, and
on Wednesday a Ukrainian fighter jet was also shot
down in Ukrainian air space. In both instances, the
Ukrainian Government believes that the planes were
fired on from Russian territory.
It is because of such continued destabilizing Russian
actions that the United States imposed sanctions on the
defence, energy and financial sectors of the Russian
economy, including financial institutions. The measures
include freezing the assets of Russian defence companies
and blocking new financing of some of Russia’s most
important banks and energy companies. The sanctions
are significant, but they are also targeted and designed
to have the maximum impact on the Russian calculus
while limiting the impact on the Russian people and
any spillover effects on our interests or those of our
allies. This week, the European Union also announced
expanded sanctions on Russia.
The message is unified and clear: if President Putin
continues to choose escalation over de-escalation, the
international community will continue to impose costs
on Russia. But that is not what any of us want. We and
our allies remain committed to a diplomatic solution,
as are the Ukrainian Government and the Ukrainian
people, who have seen their neighbours, friends and
family members killed in a needless conflict.
President Poroshenko has consistently backed up his
words with actions. He proposed a comprehensive peace
plan and declared a unilateral ceasefire, both of which

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

were cynically rejected by the illegal armed groups
and their backers in Moscow. President Poroshenko’s
plan offered amnesty to separatists who voluntarily
laid down their arms and who are not guilty of capital
crimes. He committed to providing a safe corridor for
Russian fighters to return to Russia. He established a
job-creation programme for the affected areas, made
an offer of broad decentralization and dialogue with
eastern regions, including the promise of early local
elections, and granted increased local control over
language, holidays and customs. President Poroshenko
has also reached out to the regions of eastern Ukraine
and is pursuing constitutional reforms that will give
local regions more authority to choose their regional
leaders and protect locally spoken languages. He has
said that he will meet with separatists in any safe
location, inside or outside Ukraine.
The goal of the United States throughout the crisis
in Ukraine has been consistent, namely, to support a
stable, peaceful and democratic Ukraine. We will not
be satisfied with a temporary halt to violence. Russia
must stop destabilizing Ukraine and allow all the people
of Ukraine to decide their country’s future through a
democratic political process. As we sit here, the remains
of nearly 300 people — innocent infants, children,
women and men — are strewn across a blackened,
smouldering landscape in Ukraine. The victims came
from at least nine different nations; they could just as
easily have come from any of ours. We must treat all of
them as our own victims. We have a duty to each and
every one of those individuals, their families and their
countries to determine why that jet fell out of the sky
and to hold the perpetrators accountable. We must stop
at nothing to bring those responsible to justice.
This appalling attack occurred in the context of
a crisis that has been fuelled by Russian support for
separatists through arms, weapons and training, by the
Russian failure to follow through on its commitments
and by its failure to adhere to the fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter. The tragedy
only underscores the urgency and the determination
with which we insist that Russia immediately take
concrete steps to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine,
support a sustainable ceasefire and follow the path
towards peace that the Ukrainian Government has
consistently offered. This war can be ended. Russia can
end this war. Russia must end this war.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): We are deeply shocked
by yesterday’s downing of a Malaysia Airlines Boeing

S/PV.7219

777 in eastern Ukraine. We express our sincere
condolences to Malaysia, the Netherlands, Australia,
Indonesia, the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium,
the Philippines, Canada and the other nations whose
citizens were among the 298 people who perished. Our
deepest sympathies go to the families of the victims.
The circumstances of the downing must be established
by an independent, international investigaton, in
accordance with international civil aviation guidelines.
The perpetrators cannot escape responsibility.
Investigators must immediately be granted access to the
crash site and the black boxes must be handed over to
independent authorities in order to prevent the evidence
being tampered with.
The circumstances are impossible to ignore. They
all point in one direction, namely, that this horrible
crime was committed as part of the armed aggression
against Ukraine. The responsibility for that terror act
lies with those who are aggressively preventing Ukraine
from effectively exercising its sovereign rights over
its territory and airspace. It would not have happened
had Russia not armed and instigated the presence of
separatist groups in Donetsk and Luhansk provinces.
The international community cannot stand by in the
face of such aggression. The country has become a
threat to international peace and security. We have said
that all along since the occupation of Crimea.
The debris of the Malaysian plane lies in an area
controlled by pro-Russian separatists. This week alone,
a Ukrainian AN-26 cargo plane and an Su-25 fighter
jet were shot down by pro-Russian separatists from
a high altitude. The third — a Malaysian passenger
plane — was deliberately shot down. An Il-76 transport
plane and half a dozen helicopters were brought down
by pro-Russian separatists at Luhansk airport and
elsewhere. In June, separatists boasted of possessing
an SA-11 Buk missile system. They claimed to have
used the system to shoot down the An-26 cargo plane
at high altitude. Separatist commander Igor Strelkov
claimed to the media to have shot down another aircraft
at the same time as the Malaysian Airlines flight was
overflying the area.
We are truly shocked by the number of victims
among the civilian population in eastern Ukraine.
Armed separatists, terrorists and foreign fighters and
their supporters bear the responsibility for the deaths
and injuries among the civilian population, including
children, women and the elderly. The carnage must end.
President Poroshenko proposed a peace plan. Ukraine

14-473377/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

declared a unilateral ceasefire. The agreement in Berlin
on 2 July provided a vehicle for talks. Yet separatists
and terrorists in the eastern part of Ukraine continued
to sow terror, loot, rob banks, racketeer, kidnap people
and traffic in human beings.
The massive and continuous influx of foreign
fighters from across the Russian border into the
neighbouring Luhansk and Donetsk regions has gone
unabated. That influx has been accompanied by T-65
tanks, Grad multiple rocket launchers, anti-aircraft
guns, towed anti-tank guns, BTR armoured personnel
carriers, man-portable air defence systems and small
arms. In fact, the terrorists in Donbas hardly bothered
to remove the markings of Russian military units from
their heavy weapons. Russian military helicopters and
drones violate Ukrainian airspace, while 40,000 troops
are encamped within minutes of the Ukrainian border,
in addition to the 20,000 troops stationed in occupied
Crimea. Russian citizens, many of whom are veterans
of the conflicts in Chechnya and Transdnistria, lead
many of the terrorist groups.
The Russian media channels are putting out
ongoing anti-Ukrainian propaganda. The mouthpiece of
the separatists, Life News, boasts of the agility of rebels
to shoot down any plane in sight. The terrorists and
separatists continue to take hostages. The abducted and
hooded Ukrainian pilot Nadia Savchenko was trafficked
by separatists from Ukraine straight to the Russian
Voronezh pretrial detention centre. We condemn the
unlawful detention of Ukrainian citizens in Russia.
Russia must respect the norms of international law and
release Savchenko immediately. We remain appalled by
the deteriorating human rights situation in Crimea.
Lithuania urges the holding of a full, thorough
and independent investigation into the downing of
the Malaysian Airlines flight, as agreed today by the
Council. Lithuania urges Russia to unequivocally
distance itself from any kind of direct or indirect
support for terrorists, separatists and foreign fighters.
The insurgents must lay down their weapons. Lithuania
calls on Russia to cooperate with Ukraine in order to
ensure the security of the borders and to prevent weapons
and armed terrorists from entering the territory of
Ukraine. We call on Russia to constructively cooperate
on the implementation of the peace plan put forward
by President Petro Poroshenko. A diplomatic solution
is possible. Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized

8/22

18/07/2014

borders, including Crimea, are non-negotiable and must
be respected by all.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing.
China is shocked and grieved by the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine.
On behalf of the Chinese Government and people, I
express our sincere condolences and deep sympathy to
the victims and their families.
The safety of international civil aviation must
be guaranteed. Our priority now is to establish the
facts. Pending that, it is not advisable to jump to any
conclusion, make any assumptions or trade accusations.
We support the holding of an independent, fair and
objective investigation into the incident. We also call
on all parties to coordinate and cooperate during the
investigation.
The recent situation in Ukraine remains turbulent.
Armed conflict and incidents of violence frequently
occur, causing loss of life and destruction of property.
China is deeply concerned about the situation. We hope
that the parties concerned will take into account the
well-being of the entire population of Ukraine, focus
on maintaining regional peace and stability, stay calm
and exercise restraint to prevent the further escalation
of the conflict and confrontation.
The crisis in Ukraine is rooted in a complex
situation that is both historical and contemporary. A
political solution is the only way out. China notes the
recent constructive efforts of the parties concerned to
achieve a ceasefire through dialogue and to promote a
political solution. We hope that the parties concerned
will remain committed to dialogue and negotiations,
take the rights and aspirations of all regions and etnic
groups of Ukraine fully into account and bear in mind
the legitimate concerns of all the parties involved
so that the rights of all parties can be respected in
a balanced way. We urge the parties concerned to
effectively implement the agreed ceasefire and to
strengthen dialogue and consultation on the basis of the
Geneva agreement in pursuit of a political solution and
the prompt achievement of stability and development
in Ukraine.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries, including Ukraine. China
will continue to adopt a fair and objective approach and

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

actively participate in any proposal or initiative that
will reduce tension and promote a political solution. We
will play a constructive role in that process.
Ms. King (Australia): The downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 in Ukrainian territory on 17 July
has shocked the world. We have witnessed the tragic
death of 298 people. There were 28 Australians on board
Flight MH-17. Our nation is in mourning for all the
victims. The news that the lives of 80 children were lost
is devastating. Tomorrow, flags will be flown at halfmast across Australia. We extend our heartfelt sympathy
and condolences to the families of all the victims of
the tragedy and to their countries of nationality. Our
particular thoughts are with the Governments and the
people of the Netherlands and Malaysia.
There is mounting evidence that the crash was
caused by a missile strike and that the aeroplane was
brought down over territory not controlled by the
Ukrainian authorities. There is increasing credible
information that that was conducted by separatist
militia groups, acting with the assistance of others. We
owe it to the victims of this tragedy and their families
to unequivocally establish the facts behind the incident
and to find out exactly what happened and who is
responsible. If, as appears increasingly likely, Flight
MH-17 was brought down by a missile, then that is,
as Australia’s Prime Minister Tony Abbott has said,
“an unspeakable crime”, and the perpetrators must be
brought swiftly to justice.
There must be a full, thorough and impartial
international investigation. We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his message that the United Nations
is fully prepared to cooperate with any investigation
and that the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) has offered its investigative capacity. We also
welcome Mr. Feltman’s information that ICAO and
the Government of Ukraine are communicating on the
issue of an investigation.
There must be immediate preservation of the crash
site, and unfettered access for independent investigators.
Safe access must also be provided to allow fro the
recovery of the bodies of those who lost their lives in
the tragedy. Undertakings brokered by the trilateral
contact group with armed separatists who control the
territory in which the crash occurred to allow access
must be upheld. Our Prime Minister has made it clear
that Russia’s full cooperation with all investigations is
expected.

S/PV.7219

The Council has just issued a press statement
calling for investigation, accountability and immediate
access to the crash site. That is welcome, but Australia
believes, given the gravity of the incident, that it is not a
sufficient indication of the Council’s resolve. Australia
believes the Council should adopt a draft resolution
that emphasizes the need for access to be granted to
the crash site and for a full, thorough, independent and
international investigation to be carried out.
This is the nineteenth time that the Council has
met to discuss the situation in Ukraine since the
crisis began. Time and time again, the overwhelming
majority of the Security Council has called for a end to
the violence and destablization. Council members have
consistently called for a de-escalation of tensions, for
separatists to lay down their weapons and for genuine
dialogue to commence. It is time for the equivocation
and dissembling and false narratives of some to stop.
In the three weeks since the Council last discussed
the situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7205), the security
situation in the east has become increasingly dire.
Separatists have ignored repeated calls to disarm and
have continued their attacks on Ukrainian military
forces, facilities and border posts. Two Ukrainian
military cargo planes were downed in eastern Ukraine
in the past week alone. The Ukrainian armed forces
have responded firmly to those attacks. They has every
right to restore law and order, and they have underlined
their commitment to do so in proportionate manner.
Russia has a crucial role to play in de-escalating
this persistently dangerous crisis. It must end its
provocations and any support for separatist forces. It
must control its border with Ukraine and prevent the
flow of weapons, equipment and fighters from Russia
into Ukraine. Russia must withdraw the large number
of troops it has again amassed on the Ukrainian border.
It must actively work to de-escalate tensions and use
its considerable influence with separatist groups in
Ukraine to that end.
Further political efforts are essential. The fourparty talks in Berlin in the past two weeks showed
some promise. The parties agreed on the need for a
sustainable ceasefire, the resumption of the contact
group, control of border crossing points monitored
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and an extension of the work of the
OSCE observer mission to include border monitoring

14-473379/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

activities. But we have yet to see results; those efforts
must be redoubled.
We thought that the situation in Ukraine had
already caused too much tragedy. The horrific loss of
Flight MH-17 has added immeasurably to that toll. It is
time for the international community to stand as one to
ensure that those responsible for that tragic crime are
held to account and to make every effort to bring to an
end the violence and destabilization in Ukraine.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
also thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing.
At the start of my remarks, I wish to express, on behalf
of the Government and the people of Luxembourg, my
most sincere condolences to the families and relatives
of the 298 people aboard the Malaysia Airlines aircraft
that crashed yesterday afternoon near the village
of Grabovo in eastern Ukraine. Among the victims
was a Dutch-English family living in Luxembourg.
Our sympathy also goes out to the Governments and
the peoples of the Netherlands, Malaysia, Germany,
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Indonesia, New Zealand,
the Philippines and the United Kingdom.
The international community owes it to the victims
to shed light on the circumstances that led to this tragic
event. A transparent and independent comprehensive
international investigation must be completed as soon
as possible. Safe and unhindered access must be granted
to international investigators, as well as to observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and representatives of affected
countries. All parties involved should fully cooperate
to that end. We commend the Ukrainian authorities
in that regard. Those who committed this heinous act
must be held accountable.
This air disaster took place in a context of the
ongoing deterioration of the situation in the east of
Ukraine. Day after day, we receive reports of civilians
killed in fighting between the Ukrainian armed forces
and illegal armed groups. The pro-Russian separatist
militias continue to occupy buildings and border posts,
hold dozens of innocent people hostage and threaten the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of
Ukraine. The living conditions of people living in areas
affected by the hostilities continue to deteriorate, and
the number of internally displaced persons has steadily
increased.

10/22

18/07/2014

The escalation of violence in recent days, until its
tragic climax yesterday, demonstrates once again that
active armed groups in eastern Ukraine are actually
well-equipped and well-trained paramilitary forces
who enjoy clear external support.
We urge the Russian Federation to actively use its
influence on the illegal armed groups and ensure that
weapons and fighters can no longer cross the border, in
order to bring about a de-escalation as soon as possible.
Throughout the past few months, Ukraine has
demonstrated its commitment to finding a peaceful
solution to the crisis and to implementing the agreements
concluded, in particular the joint declaration adopted
on 17 April in Geneva between Ukraine, Russia, the
European Union and the United States. Ukraine has
established a national dialogue and guarantees for
national minorities. Once elected, President Poroshenko
put forward a comprehensive peace plan and put in place
a unilateral ceasefire to create the conditions necessary
for its implementation. Unfortunately, illegal armed
groups, whose sole aim is to destabilize Ukraine, chose
not to take that outstretched hand.
Diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
crisis in eastern Ukraine must continue. In that regard,
the personal commitment of the Secretary-General
since the beginning of the crisis is essential and must
continue.
It is important to urgently reach an agreement
on a real and lasting ceasefire that is observed by all
parties, so as to create the conditions necessary for the
implementation of President Poroshenko’s peace plan.
We welcome the efforts made ​​in that regard by
France, Germany and the OSCE to promote dialogue
between Russia and Ukraine. We sincerely hope that
those efforts will contribute to a de-escalation and
put an end to a crisis that has gone on for too long.
Yesterday’s plane crash demonstrated the incalculable
consequences that the crisis can have. It is high time for
all stakeholders, including the Russian Federation, to
mobilize all energies to put an end to this crisis.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I wish to extend my deepest condolences to all the
Permanent Representatives of the countries that lost
citizens in this tragic event. I would like in particular
to extend our condolences to our colleagues from the

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

Netherlands and Malaysia. We also mourn with the
people of the Netherlands.
Yesterday a Malaysia Airlines flight with nearly 300
passengers aboard crashed in the separatist-controlled
area of Ukraine, and the French President expressed his
enormous sorrow at the announcement of the disaster.
Today I reiterate France’s solidarity with the victims’
families in the ordeal they are experiencing.
Given this tragedy and the already chaotic situation,
France requests that all efforts be brought forth to
shed light on the circumstances that led to the tragedy.
We call for an independent international inquiry that
would allow the facts to be established and to draw the
necessary conclusions.
We ask that all measures be taken to facilitate the
work of the investigators on the ground. In particular,
we expect the separatists to cooperate with the
Ukrainian authorities in the investigation and to allow
safe, immediate and full access to the investigators, in
accordance with the decision made yesterday during
the video tele-conference between the contact group
involving Ukraine, Russia and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
separatist representatives.
A glimmer of hope had begun to dawn in
Ukraine at the end of last month. With the election of
Mr. Poroshenko, a process of political normalization
had begun. A unilateral ceasefire, declared by Kiev
on 20 June, hinted at a possible end to the general
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in the
east. On that same day, President Poroshenko initiated
a comprehensive peace plan in order to arrive at a
peaceful resolution of the situation.
Furthermore, following their meeting on the
sidelines of the ceremonies marking the Normandy
landing, a process of almost daily exchanges between
Presidents Poroshenko and Putin and Chancellor Merkel
and President Hollande led to the start of a useful
dialogue. Moreover, a joint statement was adopted
in Berlin on 2 July that provided for the quest of a
lasting ceasefire via the meeting between the contact
group and the separatists, strengthened border control
on the Russian-Ukrainian border to curb the flow of
weapons and fighters, and the agreement of the OSCE
to participate in that effort.
Nevertheless, today the situation continues to
deteriorate. For several days, fighting has escalated in
eastern Ukraine because the separatists have refused to

S/PV.7219

clasp the hand being extended to them. Every day the
attacks are ever more deadly. Weapons never used until
now have begun to be used and have struck Ukrainian
territory. Two Ukrainian planes were shot down in their
own airspace. That could happen only if one of the
parties possessed sophisticated anti-aircraft weaponry.
Moreover, this unprecedented deterioration is also due
to the presence of armed fighters coming from outside
Ukraine. The question of outside support in terms of
recruitment, supplies of materials and training cannot
be avoided. The answer is too obvious. It is irrefutable.
Weapon systems with significant firepower are
being used, which can lead to tragic blunders. Those
who are responsible for arming those who use those
weapons bear the responsibility for this conflagration.
As I said in an earlier statement, when bandits are given
weapons we cannot be surprised that they behave like
bandits.
All those events point to the pressing need for
full cooperation by the international community in
order to stabilize Ukraine and ensure its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We also call for a sincere
commitment from Russia, one that so far has been
lacking. The day before yesterday, the Heads of State
and Government of the European Union acknowledged
that the many appeals made to Moscow to end its
non-cooperative stance had not been heard. That is the
reason for the European Union’s decision to impose
tougher sanctions.
However, the strengthening of those sanctions has
one and the same goal: to facilitate the emergence of
a political solution. Our priority remains, first, to end
the escalation and establish a lasting ceasefire that is
respected by all parties. That is why we call on Russia
to engage constructively in that endeavour and to bring
its influence to bear on the illegal armed groups to lay
down their arms and engage in dialogue.
Separatist activity must end. In order to slow down
the flow of weapons and fighters that cross through the
Russian-Ukrainian border on a daily basis, we call for
negotiations between Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE
in order to allow the rapid deployment of a monitoring
mission at the border.
Let this tragedy at least serve as a warning to
all the parties. Once the bullets have been shot, they
strike indiscriminately and escape all control. We have
reached such moment. It should still be possible to
avoid the worst.

14-4733711/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
expresses its deep regret over the criminal incident
that led to the downing of the Malaysia Airline aircraft
over eastern Ukraine yesterday. We also express our
deepest condolence to the Government of Malaysia and
to all the families of the victims who were killed in that
disastrous incident.
Jordan calls for an independent, full and
comprehensive investigation of yesterday’s incident,
including the participation of the relevant Ukrainian
authorities and cooperation with other relevant
authorities, including the Malaysian authorities.
The Jordanian Government is gravely concerned
over the deteriorating situation in eastern Ukraine,
which has taken a new and very dangerous turn following
yesterday’s events. Previously, Jordan expressed its
great concern for the deteriorating situation in eastern
Ukraine. We hereby reaffirm our call for all influential
parties in Ukraine to act in order to end the deterioration,
to exert pressure on the insurgents to disarm and to
withdraw from the facilities and buildings they are
occupying, and to find a peaceful solution to the crisis
in order to restore stability to eastern Ukraine. We also
call for a guarantee that the displaced people can return
to their homes as soon as possible.
Jordan urges all the parties to the Geneva statement
and the Berlin joint declaration to abide by their
provisions. We call upon all the relevant parties to
facilitate the work of the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine, especially in eastern
Ukraine.
Jordan reaffirms the importance of respecting the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
In conclusion, we urge the Ukrainian Government
to continue its efforts aimed at promoting the political
participation of all Ukrainians and ensuring the full
implementation of international conventions on human
rights while taking into consideration the concerns of
minorities and non-Ukranian speakers.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
on the latest events in Ukraine and for expressing
the constant willingness of the Secretary-General to
contribute to peace and dialogue.
The Government and the people of Argentina
express their profound sadness, pain, solidarity and
deepest condolences to the families of the victims

12/22

18/07/2014

of yesterday’s tragic Malaysia Airlines crash. We
also express our condolences to the people and the
Government of Ukraine and to the Governments and the
peoples of the other countries whose citizens lost their
lives. In particular, we ask that our colleagues among
the Permanent Representatives of the countries whose
citizens were aboard that flight convey our condolences
to the families, especially to those who saw the hopes
for their children’s futures extinguished.
The severity of this event clearly demands
action. Like our colleagues, Argentina calls for an
impartial international investigation that objectively
and unequivocally establishes what happened.
Responsibility and the facts must be determined as
soon as possible, and investigators must be granted
immediate, unhindered access.
Although it is not today’s topic, I should like to say
that, while there had been encouraging indications that
the crisis in Ukraine was entering a phase of waning
tension, fears that violent confrontation would continue
have not dissipated. But the topic today does involve
calling once again for the armed groups to cease their
violence and demanding that they halt unilateral actions
and their violations and trampling of human rights,
which do nothing but deepen the crisis and worsen the
situation, especially for the civilian population and for
the innocent.
We reiterate the need to safeguard due respect
for Ukraine’s conduct of its internal affairs without
interference — whether military, political or
economic — in matters under its jurisdiction. Argentina
seeks to promote full respect by everyone for the
principles of international law and human rights law as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
These are sad and difficult times. Argentina
therefore calls for prudence. We will not join in using
the language of geopolitical disputes. We will not join
in a pointless blame game. This is a time for sorrow,
reflection and an urgent search for the truth behind
the incident to determine those responsible. May the
victims rest in peace.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I first want to say to our
colleagues whose citizens were involved that we convey
our deepest condolences to their families, citizens and
Governments.
Yesterday at noon, the world watched in horror
the downing of the Malaysian jetliner. What happened
yesterday seemed to be an apocalyptic end to the world.
14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

I think Ambassador Power described it similarly. The
spectacle is graphically described, respectively, in
chapters 8 and 9 of the Book of Revelation: “hail and
fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the
Earth”, “the sun and the air were darkened”. That was
what I saw yesterday.
No matter our religious beliefs, that scenario may
become a self-fulfilling prophesy if States continue to
choose to open or support theatres of war and conflict
in every corner of the world. What will happen is that
the world will self-annihilate. Enough is enough.
The fact that this incident occurred as the plane
flew over eastern Ukraine, which, for some time now,
has been a zone of conflict, indicates that the accident
may be connected, in one way or another, to the conflict.
But this is not the time to play the blame game.
If it is established that the plane was shot down
deliberately, it will mark a new dimension in the
Ukraine crisis, one that represents a grave threat to the
safety of international civil aviation.
At this point, it is of critical importance for the
facts surrounding the crash to be dispassionately wellascertained. In that regard, we would like to express
our full support for an independent international
investigation, as called for by the Secretary-General.
Noting that the plane went down in an area under
the control of armed rebel groups, we urge that those
groups cooperate fully and unconditionally with the
investigation into the crash.
We have no doubt that, without the ongoing
conflict in Ukraine and the widespread insecurity and
lawlessness engendered by the activities of the rebel
groups in the eastern part of the country, this tragic
accident would not have occurred.
We want to renew our call for a cessation of
hostilities in Ukraine and a return to dialogue and
negotiation, within the framework of the Geneva
statement of 17 April and the 2 July four-party talks in
Berlin.
Let us together resolve this issue. Let us together
close this war front, before its reverberations become
manifest in other parts of the world.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, we would like to express our heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved families and friends of the
passengers and crew of the Malaysia Airlines flight that

S/PV.7219

crashed in Donetsk, as well as to the Governments of
the countries whose citizens were on the list of victims
of the tragedy.
An open and impartial investigation of the
incident is necessary. There must be no pressure
placed on the investigation, or attempts to prejudge
its outcome through broad statements or unfounded
allegations. Given the complexity of the situation, we
believe it would be proper to establish an international
commission under the aegis of International Civil
Aviation Organization.
I am certain that any normal person would, first and
foremost, ask the question as to what led a Ukrainian
aviation dispatcher to send a passenger flight through
an area of military clashes — an area being used to
carry out strikes against civilian targets, among others,
and where anti-aircraft systems were operating. In line
with international standards, ensuring the security of
civilian aviation in a State’s airspace is that State’s
responsibility. The State over whose territory a flight
is planned must provide the information necessary to
ensure the safety of aviation.
International law provides for a State’s timely
ability to close off areas deemed dangerous for flights.
It would seem that an investigation is necessary not only
of the disaster, but also of the extent to which Ukrainian
aviation authorities carried out their obligations to
exercise the relevant law and did everything necessary
to ensure that Kyiv’s military campaign prevented
disasters. Today Kyiv announced the full closure of its
airspace to conduct a so-called anti-terrorist operation.
Why could that not have been done earlier, instead of
waiting for there to be hundreds of victims?
During our previous meeting on Ukraine (see
S/PV.7205), some Western members of the Council
talked about the restraint exercised by the Kyiv
authorities in using force. They have fully demonstrated
that “restraint” now. There have been indiscriminate
air strikes, rocket fire and attacks by artillery tanks
in Donetsk and Luhansk. This punitive operation is
becoming increasingly destructive for the civilian
population and infrastructure. Dozens of civilians have
been killed, including children. Transport systems,
community facilities and medical centres have been
destroyed.
According to data of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
there are more than 4.5 million people in eastern

14-4733713/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

Ukraine in the area of the clashes. However, Kyiv has
not evacuated civilians from those areas. Instead, people
must risk their lives to flee the areas of military clashes
by themselves. There are many reports of people being
intentionally targeted by the Ukrainian armed forces as
they flee the war, in particular to seek refuge in Russia.
To date, Russia has hosted more than 110,000 refugees
from eastern Ukraine. That figure continues to grow
daily. Those facts have been confirmed by UNCHR.
In that regard, six Russian regions have declared
a state of emergency. Artillery and mortar shelling by
the Ukrainian armed forces into Russian territory has
become a regular occurrence. The targets include border
crossing points and peaceful civilians. Our citizens
have been killed and wounded. We consider those
provocations acts of aggression on the part of Ukraine
against Russian citizens and against its sovereign
territory. We place all blame on the Kyiv authorities and
call for the Ukrainian side to take decisive measures to
prevent such incidents in future.
We have repeatedly issued warnings about the
danger of trying to resolve the political crisis in
Ukraine by force. We called for a mutually respectful
and inclusive dialogue among all major political forces,
Kyiv and the regions. However, the Kyiv authorities
have chosen the wrong the path at every turn, with the
support of its Western colleagues. I am talking about
the United States, of course, which pushed Kyiv to
escalate the crisis. They are trying to lay the blame on
Russia for the catastrophe caused by the course chosen.
Kyiv cast aside the agreement of 21 February and
the road map proposed by the Chair of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The
Geneva statement of 17 April and the Berlin declaration
of 2 July were also dismissed, although representatives
from the Kyiv Government took part in drafting
them. The widely acclaimed peace plan of President
Poroshenko became the pretext for military preparations
and the deployment of a large-scale punitive operation.
The Kyiv authorities have chosen to suppress
dissent. Immediately after the February uprising, Kyiv
began to call dissenters “bandits” and “terrorists”, and
then “subhumans” and “insects”. Was it fortuitous that
on Channel 5, the Ukrainian television channel owned
by Mr. Poroshenko, a commercial was aired showing the
stamping out of insects with a map of eastern Ukraine
in the background? Protesters have been massacred in
Mariupol and Odesa. The number of victims continues
to rise and no genuine investigation has been carried
14/22

18/07/2014

out. Dozens of people who politically opposed Kyiv
have disappeared.
The promised reform of the Constitution is being
prepared in secret. It appears that Kyiv would like to
enlist the support of European structures and then give
it to its lucky people. Indeed, according to reports,
the redistribution of powers from the President to the
Parliament, which was the source of the fighting in
Maidan for months, is not actually being planned for. Is
it any wonder that violence has been the result of such
strategy? The political representatives of those regions
are well known. They have long been a part of Ukraine’s
political life, and have come to the forefront through the
protest movements in recent months. Involving them in
the dialogue would prevent a further escalation of the
current serious crisis, but instead Kyiv chose to arrest,
beat and threaten them.
With regard to the Ukrainian crisis, international
institutions have not risen to the occasion. The reason
lies with our Western partners. Much has been said, but
nothing has been done to resolve the situation. We are
working hard in the OSCE. In the Security Council, the
Russian delegation proposed three times the serious
drafting of a resolution that would put an end to the
violence in Ukraine. But Western colleagues responded
to our proposals with blatant cynicism. It seems that
whatever the Ukrainian Government arbitrarily does is
judged favourably, but the victims of the geopolitical
ambitions of the Ukrainian regime are actually an
entire nation — the people of Ukraine.
The punitive operation in eastern Ukraine must be
stopped immediately. Negotiating a resolution to the
crisis is still possible, but the right choice must be made.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my country, I would like to begin by expressing
our outrage at the attack carried out yesterday in which
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down in
eastern Ukraine, killing 298 people, including children.
We condemn that act in the strongest terms, and we
extend our sympathy and condolences to the victims’
family members and to the Governments whose citizens
were among the victims. No cause can justify an act of
that magnitude and cruelty.
We are closely following the information that is
emerging about what happened. In that context, we
call for carrying out a comprehensive, transparent
and independent investigation in accordance with
international civil aviation standards, in order to ensure

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

accountability. It is also necessary that all facilities be
provided and security be ensured for the immediate
access of investigators to the crash site in order to
determine its cause with certainty.
There can be no impunity for this type of act. Its
perpetrators must face justice. The victims’ family
members have the right to know the truth. We therefore
call upon all States, in accordance with their obligations
under international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, to actively cooperate with the
relevant authorities.
The downing of this aircraft, in an area where
there is a high level of political tension, increases the
danger of escalating the current violence and drawing
new actors into the fray. Therefore, more than ever,
we emphatically call on the parties to exercise the
utmost restraint in order to contain the crisis in eastern
Ukraine.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing on the tragic incident in Ukraine.
The Republic of Korea expresses its utmost shock
and outrage at the downing of the Malaysia Airlines
passenger plane in eastern Ukraine yesterday. We
deplore the loss of nearly 300 innocent civilian lives
aboard that commercial airliner. On behalf of the
people and the Government of the Republic of Korea,
I extend my deepest condolences to the people and
Governments of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Netherlands, the Philippines
and the United Kingdom and other affected countries.
Our hearts go out to the families of the victims at this
difficult time.
A thorough and independent international
investigation,
involving,
among
others,
the
International Civil Aviation Organization, must be
conducted immediately. Whoever is responsible for the
tragedy must be held fully accountable. If this incident
turns out to have been caused by a deliberate attack, the
Republic of Korea, itself a former victim of hostilities
against a civilian airlines, believes that the international
community should do everything in its power to bring
the perpetrators to justice as quickly as possible. No
one should be allowed, for any reason, to get away with
killing so many innocent people, who had nothing to do
with what is happening on the ground.
We support the ongoing efforts to bring stability to
Ukraine, in particular the efforts of the United Nations,

S/PV.7219

the European Union, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and bilateral partners.
Such efforts, aimed at de-escalating the violence in
eastern Ukraine, should continue despite the daunting
challenges.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.
I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his availability and for
his detailed briefing, prepared on such short notice.
Allow me, first of all, to express my deep sorrow
over the loss of the 298 lives, including 80 children,
who were killed on Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
which was shot down in eastern Ukraine. On behalf
of the Government of Rwanda, I express my deepest
condolences to the families who lost loved ones,
as well as to the people and the Governments of the
victims. The loss of those innocent civilians is beyond
comprehension. Their lives were cut off in the middle
of a crisis on which this very Council has been unable
to take action since it began in February.
With the shooting down of a civilian airplane
carrying civilians, the Ukrainian crisis is no longer
a conflict between the Ukrainian military and armed
separatists. The conflict has crossed a red line by
endangering all our lives, as if did in the case of the
men, women and children from different countries who
were aboard Flight MH-17. We condemn in the strongest
terms this reckless attack and call for a comprehensive,
independent, international investigation in accordance
with international guidelines, as agreed in the press
statement adopted this morning. Such an investigaton
should establish responsibility so that the perpetrators
can be held accountable. In that context, we further
urge all parties to cease fire, to fully cooperate with
the investigation and to grant unhindered access to the
crash site in order to allow international investigators
to carry out their work.
We note that yesterday’s criminal act follows the
downing of a Ukrainian fighter jet on Wednesday and
that of a military cargo plane on Monday. The frequent
use of surface-to-air missiles during the past few
months raises the question of access to such weapons,
which, as we have now seen, are capable of downing a
civilian airplane flying at over 30,000 feet. Therefore,
the Security Council and the broader international
community can no longer afford to turn a blind eye on
the matter.

14-4733715/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

It is unfortunate that this tragic event comes at
a time when national and regional efforts are under
way to find a political and diplomatic solution to
the Ukrainian crisis. This act undermines valuable
initiatives of the trilateral contact group of senior
representatives of Ukraine, the Russian Federation
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, who were making all necessary efforts for a
resumption of consultations with separatists in eastern
Ukraine. On Tuesday, the group reconfirmed its support
for President Petro Poroshenko’s peace plan, as well as
its commitment to a sustainable ceasefire, as stated in
the joint declaration issued in Berlin on 2 July by the
Foreign Ministers of Germany, France, the Russian
Federation and Ukraine.
In conclusion, let me renew our call to the armed
groups to respect the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. They must lay down their weapons
and engage in constructive dialogue with the Ukrainian
Government. In the same vein, we urge all parties to
immediately cease fire and support the ongoing efforts
to de-escalate the crisis and bring peace to Ukraine and
the region.
The shooting down of a civilian plane in the midst
of the conflict in eastern Ukraine is a stark reminder of
the moral responsibility of Security Council members
to set aside their divisions on this crisis, to hold the
perpetrators of this criminal act to account and to
uphold their mandate to maintain international peace
and security.
The President: I now resume my functions as
President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing.
I would like to start by expressing my Government’s
sorrow and deep condolences to all the Missions whose
citizens were killed in the terrible crash of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17. Ukraine shares the pain of
their loss and grieves with their bereaved families and
friends. My country extends its profound sympathy to
those affected by the accident. Today, all of Ukraine
is mourning. Ukrainians are visiting the Embassies of
the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia, Indonesia, the
United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium, the Philippines

16/22

18/07/2014

and Canada in order to leave flowers and express their
sorrow.
The Ukrainian authorities have already called on
international organizations, including the International
Civil Aviation Organization, Interpol and others, to
undertake a thorough international investigation of the
accident. We believe that an impartial investigation
will reveal the truth and that all perpetrators will be
punished.
Yesterday, the Ukrainian leadership announced a
basic version of what happened with the flight: it was
an act of terror. The position of our Government is
based on converging data from different intelligence
and open sources, which show that the aircraft was
shot down over territory controlled by terrorists. Two
Ukrainian jets were shot down near the same location
several days before, with terrorist leaders claiming
responsibility for those acts. Intercepted telephone
conversations between the terrorist leaders and their
coordinator — Russian military intelligence colonel
Vasili Geranin — confirm that terrorists are behind
this crime. That conversation was recorded, and the
Secretariat has promised to convey it to members of the
Security Council.
Immediately after the crash, the military leader of
the terrorists, Igor Girkin Strelkov, who is of Russian
origin, boasting on social networks, commented on
having shot down what he believed to be a Ukrainian
jet, saying the following.
“In Torez, Ukraine, an AN-26 has been shot down.
It is lying somewhere near the Progress coal mine.
We have warned everyone not to fly in our skies”.
To target and shoot down an aeroplane at an
altitude of as high as 10 kilometres would be possible
only by using a sophisticated anti-aircraft system, such
as the SA-11 Buk missile system, or a similar system.
It has been affirmed both by the radio interception
of terrorist leaders and by photographs and videorecordings obtained from citizens of cities in the area,
that the terrorists have at least two SA-11 Buk missile
systems. The question is, where did they get those
sophisticated anti-defence systems? I reiterate that
radio interceptions, photographs and the confessions
of detained terrorists, including two recently detained
Russian citizens who were going to join the terrorists as
military experts, state that the Buk system came from
Russia. All that and other evidence and information
will be provided to the international investigation.

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

This tragedy would not have been possible if Russia
had not supported the terrorists and if a sophisticated
anti-aircraft system had not been provided to them from
Russia. On many occasions, the Ukrainian Mission to
the United Nations has addressed the Security Council
and all States Members of the United Nations and has
given them information about Russia’s support for
the terrorists in eastern Ukraine. Only yesterday, we
presented new evidence to United Nations-accredited
media. The huge supply of weapons of Russian origin
being used by terrorists in Donbas, which has been
documented by the Ukrainian intelligence agencies,
the media and the general public, is no longer a secret
to anyone. A large exhibition of confiscated modern
weapons, seized by the Ukrainian military forces from
terrorist groups, took place in Kyiv a few days ago. In
most cases, the actual military units of the Russian
armed forces are specified as the origin of those
weapons. The documentation can be accessed on the
website of the Ukrainian Mission and from my press
conference yesterday, which can be found on the United
Nations website.
We have raised our concern several times here
in the Chamber that Russian nationals are directly
participating in destabilizing the situation in eastern
Ukraine. Some colleagues have today given some
information about the Luhansk and Donetsk leaders
proclaiming republics. All their military commanders
are of Russian origin. Illegal armed groups of fighters
are stepping up their recruitment efforts within Russia.
They seek volunteers with experience in operating heavy
weapons, such as tanks and air defence equipment.
Russia has allowed the establishment of recruitment
offices in Moscow and Rostov, which are openly
recruiting and sending Russian nationals to Ukraine’s
eastern regions. Yesterday at the press conference, we
described all the websites that are calling for recruits.
Numerous groups of Russian paramilitary formations,
including Russian Cossacks, are actively supporting the
terrorists in spreading terror and chaos in the eastern
part of Ukraine.
Throughout the entire period of such articifically
created confrontations, supported by Russia, that
country has never publically called on its citizens to
refrain from joining the illegal armed groups operating
on the territory of Ukraine. That fact speaks for itself.
Paragraph 2 of article 208 of the criminal code of the
Russian Federation states the following.

S/PV.7219

“Participation in armed groups that are not
governed by federal law, as well as participation
in such armed groups on the territory of a foreign
State for any purpose against the interests of the
Russian Federation, is punishable by 5 to 10 years’
imprisonment”.
Since no Russian national has been brought to
justice for such actions, there is only one conclusion:
their participation in illegal armed groups on the
territory of Ukraine does not contradict the interests of
the Russian Federation.
The situation on the Ukrainian-Russian State
border has significantly deteriorated in recent days as a
result of systematic violations coming from the Russian
side of the border, as well as the provocative actions of
armed terrorist groups in the border areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. Several times a day, columns of
military vehicles and Russian mercenaries attempt to
break through the Ukrainian State border from the
Russian side. Such attempts are actively facilitated
by Russian border protection units. The anti-terrorist
forces in Ukraine have been repeatedly shelled from the
territory of Russia. Ukraine has documented evidence
of all those facts for the appropriate international
response.
The number of provocations on the UkrainianRussian State border has increased substantially.
Illegal armed groups systematically fire towards the
territory of Russia in order to create the false image
of Ukrainian military fire. That caused the death of a
Russian citizen. The Russian side accused the armed
forces of Ukraine of shelling on Russian territory on
28 June, namely, Mine No. 24 of Vasetskaya village in
the Krasnosulynsky district of the Rostov region and
the Gukovo border checkpoint. The Ukrainian armed
forces have never attacked or fired on the territory
of Russia. All such provocations are committed by
pro-Russian terrorists in order to find grounds for a
further escalation. Today’s statement by the Russian
Foreign Minister, Sergey Lavrov, about the possibility
of carrying out strikes against the territory of Ukraine
sounds like a new provocation.
Today, colleagues have presented some evidence
of the deteriorating situation on the Ukrainian-Russian
border. Every day during the month of July, we have
observed such violations, including the shooting-down
of Ukrainian jets. I would like to take this opportunity
to once again draw the attention of members of the

14-4733717/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

Security Council to the fact that Russia continues to
redeploy new forces extremely close to the Ukrainian
border. As of 14 July, the total number of groups of
Russian armed forces in the areas bordering Ukraine
has significantly increased. They comprise 33 battalion
tactical groups, with a total of at least 40,000 troops
directly around Ukraine, including up to 18,000 troops
in Transnistria and up to 21,000 troops in the occupied
territory of Crimea. Those and similar actions constitute
a flagrant violation by Russia of its obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and other universally
recognized principles and norms of international law.
Those actions are incompatible with the obligations of
the Russian Federation under the Geneva agreement of
17 April and the Berlin declaration of 2 June.
Despite all the international efforts, supported by
the strong Ukrainian will to prevent a further escalation
and further strengthened by the President’s peace plan,
the foreign terrorists and their Russian supporters have
no intention of leaving us in peace or laying down their
arms. We are still struggling against high-capacity
military saboteurs who are willing to destroy Ukraine
and to establish havens for chaos and instability.
Ukraine demands that the Russian side immediately
cease provocations on the State border of Ukraine, stop
hindering the efforts of the Ukrainian side and the
international community to put an end to terrorism and
other violence in Donetsk and Luhansk regions, return
to President Poroshenko’s peace plan, withdraw its
forces from the Ukrainian border and stop threatening
peace and security in our country, the region and the
world as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Republic of
Rwanda on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank you, Sir, for
convening this emergency meeting of the Council on
Ukraine. I also wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing earlier. For my delegation, the convening of
this meeting is indeed timely given the tragic incident
involving Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
Malaysia is deeply touched by the expressions of
condolences, sympathy and support from across the
world. At this difficult time, we also wish to express
our profound sorrow and convey our deepest sympathy

18/22

18/07/2014

and condolences to the families and friends of those
who were aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
Malaysia is shocked and distraught by the downing
of Flight MH-17. The scheduled flight, which departed
Amsterdam yesterday afternoon Amsterdam local time,
was expected to arrive at Kuala Lumpur International
Airport this morning. Unfortunately, it crashed near the
town of Torez in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine.
Two hundred and ninety-eight people perished in
the incident. One hundred and eighty-nine of those
who perished were from the Netherlands, 44 from
Malaysia, 27 from Australia, 12 from Indonesia, 9 from
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, 4 from Germany, 4 from Belgium, 3 from the
Philippines, 1 from Canada and 1 from New Zealand.
The nationalities of four passengers have not yet been
verified.
The Amsterdam-Kuala Lumpur route, which
regularly crosses Ukrainian airspace, was one of
Malaysia Airlines most popular routes. According to
the International Air Transport Association, at the time
that contact with Flight MH-17 was lost, the aircraft
was flying over non-restricted air space. Furthermore,
the International Civil Aviation Organization had
declared the flight path to be safe. Malaysia Airlines
also confirmed that the aircraft had not made any
distress calls.
The Government of Malaysia has taken immediate
action to dispatch a special Malaysia disaster assistance
and rescue team to Kyiv. The team includes personnel
from the Royal Malaysian Air Force, Malaysia Airlines,
the Department of Civil Aviation as well as medical
staff. In addition, 40 Malaysia Airlines staff have
been despatched to Amsterdam to support the victims’
families and next of kin. In that regard, Malaysia
welcomes the pledges of support and assistance made
by other countries to aid in the search, rescue, recovery
and investigation efforts.
Yesterday, Prime Minister Razak spoke to President
Poroshenko of Ukraine, Prime Minister Rutte of the
Netherlands, President Obama of the United States of
America and President Putin of the Russian Federation.
In those conversations, Prime Minister Razak stressed
that, if indeed Flight MH-17 had been shot down,
the perpetrators must be swiftly brought to justice.
Malaysia condemns in the strongest possible terms any
such action as a flagrant violation of international law
and an outrage against human decency.

14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7219

Malaysia demands a full, independent and transparent
international investigation into the incident, involving
the relevant international authorities, including the
International Civil Aviation Organization. I wish to
inform the Security Council that Malaysia has been
formally invited by the Ukrainian authorities to take
part in the investigation and that we will be sending two
representatives to Kyiv as soon as possible.

Yesterday almost 300 innocent men, women and
children lost their lives aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, travelling from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur
when the plane crashed on Ukrainian soil. This horrible
event has shocked the world and deeply saddened all
countries that have lost compatriots. Our thoughts and
prayers are with all those who mourn the death of loved
ones, wherever their cradle may have stood.

We urge the parties in conflict in the area of the
crash site to provide the fullest cooperation. Such
cooperation also entails facilitating safe and unhindered
access for the investigators and humanitarian personnel
to carry out their missions, including collecting the
relevant data, evidence, remains and personal effects
of the victims.

At least 189 victims were Dutch nationals. Today,
many thousands in my country, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, grieve for the loss of parents, children,
loved ones, friends and co-workers. This is a dark
hour in our national history. We are a nation in shock
and in tears. But we are also a nation united in our
determination to seek the truth about what happened.

We wish to underscore that there must be no
interference at the crash site or any movement of debris
from the area, including the flight data recorders, or
black boxes. The integrity of the crash site must be
preserved. Malaysia also urges the Security Council
to undertake the necessary measures to ensure the
safety and security of humanitarian and investigative
personnel at the crash site in order for them to discharge
their duties and responsibilities.

We call on all parties that have any influence on
the matter to grant unfettered access to the crash site to
emergency responders and investigators alike. We call
on the Security Council, the world’s highest authority,
to mandate a full, thorough and impartial international
investigation into the exact circumstances surrounding
the crash of Flight MH-17. All the relevant materials
recovered from the site, including the airplane’s black
boxes, should be made available to the international
investigation immediately and without interference.

No further facts have been established at this
point, but the fact that the plane might have been shot
down has made the matter even more painful for us.
Again, this is a grave reminder of how the escalation of
disputes and threats to international peace and security
can claim innocent lives in a most tragic and senseless
manner. In that regard, we urge the Security Council to
step up its role in facilitating a peaceful resolution to
the conflict between Russia and Ukraine with a view
to preventing the recurrence of such a tragic incident.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government and
the people of Malaysia, I wish to reiterate our deep
appreciation for all the expressions of support, sympathy
and solidarity in this difficult and trying time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for granting me this opportunity to
deliver a message from my Minister under these
exceptional circumstances. I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for their words of
compassion and the condolences expressed by them.

Should an investigation show that the tragedy is
the result of the use of weapons, the Netherlands will
condemn that despicable act in the strongest terms and
will demand that all those responsible, both directly
and indirectly, be held accountable and brought to
justice. That is our moral obligation to the memory of
the victims, and our duty in the light of international
law and justice. My country will not rest until justice
is served.
We want to bring the victims’ remains home to
their loved ones as soon as possible. We ask the United
Nations to help us achieve that. Those who mourn,
wherever they may reside, deserve to know what caused
the deaths of their loved ones. Our nations deserve to
know what happened. The world has a right to know.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank the President for
convening today’s meeting.
As a matter of priority, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Indonesia, I wish to express our
deepest condolences to all affected nations, especially

14-4733719/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

our good neighbour Malaysia, over the deaths of the
298 civilian passengers and crew aboard Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which crashed yesterday as
it was flying over eastern Ukraine. As the Council
may be aware, 12 Indonesian citizens were confirmed
among the deceased. Our thoughts and prayers are with
the families of the victims. Allow me also to take this
opportunity to sincerely thank the delegations that have
expressed their sympathy and condolences to Indonesia.
According to various sources and reports, the
airplane was presumably shot down by a surface-to-air
missile. If that is indeed the case, such a heinous act
is tantamount to a grave violation of international law,
in particular international humanitarian law. In that
regard, Indonesia calls upon the Security Council to
take immediate steps to enable a thorough, transparent
and independent international investigation to be
conducted upon this horrendous incident.
Indonesia stands ready to join and support such
an investigation. If the investigation concludes that
the crash was indeed intentionally caused by human
factors, be it a missile strike or otherwise, Indonesia
demands that the perpetrators of such a heinous and
inhuman crime be brought to justice to the fullest
extent of the law.
As a precautionary measure, yesterday my President
instructed all Indonesian airlines to exercise the utmost
caution and to avoid the airspace in and around conflict
areas, including that of Ukraine.
In conclusion, as a member of the Association of
Southeast Ansian Nations family, Indonesia reiterates
its solidarity with the Government and the people of
Malaysia, as well as with the countries whose citizens
have fallen victim to this tragedy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this emergency meeting.
It is with great sadness that the Philippines
received confirmation that Malaysia Airlines Flight 17
had crashed in eastern Ukraine yesterday, 17 July. The
downing of MH-17 is a most shocking and confounding
event. Aboard that flight were 298 irreplaceable lives.
Today we are united in grief. The Philippines conveys
its most heartfelt condolences to the families and to
the Governments and the peoples who lost their lives
in the incident. Today we are united in denouncing

20/22

18/07/2014

this regrettable incident. The Philippines condemns in
the strongest possible terms the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight 17.
This incident is revolting, in particular in view of
troubling and disconcerting reports that the crash was
occasioned by a targeted move. The Philippines joins
the call to immediately secure the area of the crash site,
to launch an independent, transparent and international
investigation into the incident and to provide full and
safe access to investigators to the scene of the crash
to enable them to swiftly conclude and report on the
results of the investigation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
the opportunity to participate in this meeting. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for
his briefing.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Belgium, I would like first to express my most heartfelt
condolences to the Government of Malaysia, as well
as to the families and friends of the 298 people who
were aboard the Malaysia Airlines plane shot down
in eastern Ukraine. There were five Belgian nationals
among the victims. Our thoughts are with those who
mourn today, in particular the friends and families and
the Government of the Netherlands, a country close to
us.
Like others who preceded me have done, Belgium
launches an appeal to all the parties to guarantee full
access to the disaster site, not only for the search
and rescue teams but also for the investigators. A
full, detailed, thorough and impartial international
investigation should be conducted to determine the
exact circumstances surrounding the MH-17 disaster.
In that regard, Belgium supports the proposal
of Australia that the Security Council adopt a draft
resolution that stresses the need for guaranteed access
to the site and for the conduct of a full, independent
international investigation. We owe it to the victims
and their families, as well as to ourselves, to shed full
light on what happened yesterday in eastern Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rischynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to take
14-47337

18/07/2014

Ukraine

the floor, although this is a day of such great sadness
for the entire international community.
(spoke in English)
Canadians are shocked and saddened by the terrible
loss of life in the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines
Flight 17 over eastern Ukraine. With evidence mounting
that the airliner was brought down by a surface-toair missile, we are increasingly convinced that this
is not only a tragedy but also very likely the result of
an outrageous crime, perpetrated against hundreds of
innocent civilians of many nationalities.
Canada calls on all the parties to the conflict in
Ukraine to cooperate fully with an international
investigation into the incident. Both Ukrainian
authorities and international experts must be permitted
full and secure access to the crash site, and must be
provided access to all the relevant data and evidence
pertaining to the downing of the aircraft. We
commend the Government of Ukraine for launching
an investigation, and we thank the people of Ukraine
for their sincere expressions of condolence to all those
affected by this tragedy, including Canada. Canada
stands ready to provide whatever support it can to assist
authorities in determining the cause of the crash.
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was brought down in
a region of Ukraine embroiled in armed conflict. This
is a conflict generated and perpetuated by Russia’s
provocative military actions against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of Ukraine. We
once again call on Russia to cease its political, financial
and material support to armed insurgents in eastern
Ukraine. Following the loss of so many lives aboard
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, the grave international
consequences of Russian-sponsored violence in eastern
Ukraine are now plain for all to see.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and for
allowing New Zealand to make this statement. I will
be brief, but discussion of an international incident
that brings death to New Zealanders demands some
comment.
New Zealand joins with others in expressing
its deepest sympathy to the families, friends and
colleagues of all those who have died. We also express
our solidarity with our close friend Malaysia — indeed,

S/PV.7219

with all the countries whose people have died. Our
thoughts and prayers are with them all at this incredibly
sad time.
We express outrage at the mounting evidence that
this totally unnecessary and avoidable tragedy resulted
from a surface-to-air missile strike. If that evidence
is confirmed, this is a grave crime that demands an
international, thorough, credible and independent
investigation. We call in particular for protecting the
integrity of the crash site.
New Zealand welcomes the calls for such an
investigation — from the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and many others. The circumstances
of this tragedy, the catastrophic nature of its occurrence
and its occurrence in a conflic zone mean that the
international community, in particular those like New
Zealand and others that have lost nationals, has a right to
demand such an investigation. Any party with relevant
informaton that can help in that process must offer its
proactive assistance and cooperation. Perpetrators must
be brought to justice: no qualifications, no ifs, no buts,
no maybes.
The situation in Ukraine has now gone beyond
dangerous. It now kills people from other parts of the
world with no direct involvement in the local conflict.
This morning families in New Zealand and many
other countries are waking up to the tragic reality that
they have lost loved ones to a conflict that threatens
international peace and security and demands the
ongoing attention of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
represntative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): It was with
profound grief that we learned of the crash of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 in eastern Ukraine on 17 July,
which caused the tragic loss of the lives of all the
passengers and crew members. My delegation has
just been informed that, of the four victims whose
nationalities had not yet been identified when the
Ambassador of Malaysia spoke, three of them are
Vietnamese. We would like to convey our deepest
sympathy and condolences to the Governments, the
peoples and the bereaved families at this moment. As a
member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
Viet Nam stands in solidarity with the Government
and the people of Malaysia. The President, the Prime
Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Viet Nam have conveyed their deepest

14-4733721/22

S/PV.7219

Ukraine

condolences to the Government and the people of
Malaysia.
We call for expeditious, effective and responsible
actions by the relevant authorities and parties on behalf
of the families of the victims and in order to address
other related issues. Viet Nam also requests a prompt
and transparent investigation into the incident. We
hope that this incident will soon be resolved through
efforts and determination by the relevant authorities
and parties.
Viet Nam is closely following the situation in
Ukraine. We are extremely concerned about the recent
complicated developments in the eastern provinces

22/22

18/07/2014

of Ukraine. We sincerely hope that all the parties
concerned will exercise restraint and avoid any actions
that could aggravate the situation and cause casualties
among civilians, while at the same time making efforts
through peaceful dialogue to find solutions that ensure
the legitimate interests of all parties and to meet the
people’s aspirations for peace, stability and development
in Ukraine and the region.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

14-47337
