V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Ac­
tion for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries; 154
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United Na­
tions Development Programme to consider measures to en­
hance the capacity of the United Nations Capital Development
Fund to respond effectively to the priority needs of the least
developed countries, including measures to improve com­
plementarity between the capital assistance available to them
from the Fund and other types of assistance available to the
least developed countries administered by the United Na­
tions Development Programme, with a view to maximizing
the impact and effective utilization of those resources in the
implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Ac­
tion for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries;
5. Endorses the programme orientation and operational
policies of the United Nations Capital Development Fund
as described in the report of the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme on the activities of the
Fund in 1980 and, in particular, stresses the importance of
achieving a balance between resources allocated for meeting
basic needs of low-income groups and those required for
strengthening the productive sectors and dealing with other
structural bottle-necks, with a view to promoting national
self-reliance and accelerated self-sustained economic growth
of the least developed among the developing countries;
6. Decides that the administrative and programme sup­
port costs of the United Nations Capital Development Fund
shall be met from the general resources of the Fund, while
the United Nations Development Programme will continue
to provide field support services as well as all headquarters
administrative support services to the Fund;
7. Calls upon Governments not already contributing to
the United Nations Capital Development Fund, particularly
developed countries and others in a position to do so, to
provide financial support to the activities of the Fund.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
36/197. United Nations Children's Fund 159
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the Economic and Social Council reso­
lution 1981/56 of 22 July 1981,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children's Fund on its session held at
United Nations Headquarters from 11 to 22 May 198 I, 160
Reaffirming the principles and guidelines for the pro­
gramme activities of the United Nations Children's Fund
laid down by the Executive Board, in particular the field­
oriented and action-oriented approach of the Fund and the
maintenance of a low ratio of administration to programme
costs,
Acutely aware that the present global economic situation
adversely affects the ability of developing countries to im­
plement plans for the extension of basic services to children
and mothers, which requires the most effective use of avail­
able resources to advance the well-being of children,
Concerned that the situation regarding the income of or­
ganizations of the United Nations system depending on vol­
untary contributions, including the United Nations Children's
Fund, has recently been adversely affected by a number of
unfavourable factors,

Bearing in mind that the programmes of co-operation of
the United Nations Children's Fund are contributing to the
realization of the relevant goals and objectives of the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade, 161
I. Commends the policies and activities of the United
Nations Children's Fund;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/56;
3. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations Children's
Fund as the lead agency in the United Nations system re­
sponsible for co-ordinating the follow-up activities of the
International Year of the Child related to the goals and
objectives concerning children set forth in the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Devel­
opment Decade;
4. Commends the Executive Director and the secretariat
of the United Nations Children's Fund for their efforts to
enlarge the income of the Fund so that it may respond more
effectively to the needs of developing countries in support
of their programmes to enlarge basic services for the benefit
of children and mothers;
5. Urges all organizations concerned in supporting the
activities of the United Nations Children's Fund, including
the national committees for the Fund and the co-operating
non-governmental organizations, as well as other organi­
zations of the United Nations system, to enlarge and enhance
their co-operation with the Fund in order to maximize the
effectiveness of such co-operation in the interests of children
and mothers in developing countries;
6. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have
responded to the needs of the United Nations Children's
Fund and expresses the hope that more Member States will
follow their example;
7. Invites all Governments that make pledges of vol­
untary contributions to make payment thereof as early as
possible so that the United Nations Children's Fund may
proceed with the implementation of its programmes without
undue delay while maintaining an adequate level of oper­
ating capital;
8. Appeals to all Governments to increase their contri­
butions, if possible on a multiyear basis, so that the United
Nations Children's Fund may, in the present global eco­
nomic situation, be able to augment its co-operation with
developing countries and respond to the urgent needs of the
children in those countries.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
36/198.

See also sect. II, resolution 36/244.

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 198/. Sup­
plement No. 8 (E/1981/48).
160

United Nations Volunteers programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December 1970,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme on its
twenty-eighth session 162 and its decision 81/l of 18 June
1981 163 on the United Nations Volunteers programme,
I. Notes with satisfaction the successful achievement
of the United Nations Volunteers programme during the
first decade of service, that it is active in ninety-three coun­
tries, including the least developed countries, and that it
has, in response to General Assembly resolution 34/107 of
101

9
"

131

Resolution 35/56, annex.

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1981. Sup­
plemenr No. II (E/1981161/Rev I)
1
"' /hid .. annex I.
1 2
"
