S/PV.8399

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8399th meeting

Wednesday, 14 November 2018, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Vaverka
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2018/981)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-37781 (E)
*1837781*

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2018/981)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/981, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: The members of the Security Council
have before them the latest quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/981), and today I will share
with them my assessment of the situation, as well as
an overview of the recalibrated work priorities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
When I last briefed the Council in May (see
S/PV.8254), the situation reflected a degree of uncertainty
with regard to the prospects for decisive progress in the
European Union (EU)-facilitated political dialogue.
However, after leaders from Belgrade and Pristina met
in June and July, prospects for renewed negotiations
2/24

14/11/2018

began to be explored. At the European Forum Alpbach
in Austria in August, both sides advocated for a new
framework for a comprehensive agreement, including
the possibility of territorial exchange. The addition
of that new dimension has generated new impetus, as
well as apprehension, among political actors and the
populations on both sides, as well as within the region
and among the international community. Regardless of
the underlying challenges and concerns, the discussion
has opened space for debate and consideration. Last
week in Brussels, President Vučić and President Thaçi
met and confirmed their mutual intention to continue
the dialogue and work towards a settlement, within the
EU-facilitated process.
The political talks in Brussels took place against
a situation still dominated by frequent adversarial
actions on the ground, many of which carry real
consequences for the populations. Actions that attempt
to pre-empt agreement are not conducive to achieving
political compromise. Whether on larger or smaller
issues, one-sided actions carry the constant potential of
influencing the situation on the ground.
I refer to a number of broad areas, including
infrastructure, energy and the economy. Individuals
continue to face challenges in exercising their basic rights,
including the rights of freedom of movement, religious
practice and equal access to economic opportunities. In
a recent development, the announcement by the Kosovo
Government that a 10 per cent tax would be imposed
on Serbian and Bosnian goods further increased
tensions between Pristina and Belgrade and created
instability for business and people. The Government
of Serbia denounced the measure as damaging to the
normalization of relations and a violation of the Central
European Free Trade Agreement.
I would like to underline that the much-needed
reform of Kosovo’s rule-of-law institutions has been
undermined by ethnic tension and political agendas.
The resignation of a Kosovo Special Prosecutor over
alleged threats connected to the investigation of
major cases led to public protests and harmed public
confidence in the strength and impartiality of the justice
system. Naturally, protecting the independence of the
judiciary and fighting organized crime and corruption
require continuous and strenuous effort, in Kosovo
as well as everywhere else. The European Union and
the United Nations continue to place resources at the
disposal of the authorities to help in that difficult but
essential endeavour.
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

The wider context of the political dialogue process
between the parties may sometimes be overshadowed
by this array of unresolved problems, posturing and
jousting. The European perspective itself continues to
provide a significant source of motivation for political
leaders on both sides and, in doing so, helps promote
continued peace and stability. Support and assistance
from the European Union is essential to strengthen
capacity across Kosovo’s public institutions and, on
19 July, the European Commission took a momentous
step in affirming that benchmarks had been met for
Kosovo’s road map on visa liberalization, proposing
that the European Parliament and the European Council
lift visa requirements and allow visa-free travel for
residents of Kosovo.
With all the focus on possibilities for a new political
compromise, let me underline that we should not fail to
account for the advances made since April 2013 and
the central tenets of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations signed at that
time, including the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities. Those
tenets and their full implementation are crucial to
progress on the ground.
The Assembly of Kosovo’s recent approval of three
draft laws on the Kosovo Security Force, aimed at
significantly enhance the strength and responsibilities
of the Force, has caused renewed tensions. The matter
needs to be handled with the utmost care to ensure
that the steps taken are the result of a fully inclusive,
fully representative political process that respects the
relevant legal frameworks.
Any political negotiation process, if it is to succeed,
requires the full engagement and buy-in of societies,
as well as leaders and political representatives. Toplevel commitments that may be reached via political
negotiations, no matter the strength of international
and regional support, are unlikely to stand unless
they are backed by full understanding and confidence
among communities and individuals across society. I
am confident that leaders on both sides, as well as the
facilitators of the dialogue, have that firmly in mind.
With that in mind, UNMIK continues to prioritize
trust-building in Kosovo, particularly at the grassroots level, whenever and wherever possible, in close
cooperation with all international partners on the
ground. I have set engagement, empowerment and

S/PV. 8399

creativity as core objectives of our interaction and work
with Kosovo society.
As I previously highlighted to the Council,
UNMIK has re-aligned its focus and priorities towards
promoting longer-term reconciliation at multiple levels
in Kosovo. Without societal reconciliation — involving
people, communities and civil society — progress
can falter, regardless of the best efforts and work of
political stakeholders. Trust-building requires patience
and persistence to raise and empower the voices of
understanding and compassion that may help shape a
future different from divisions and conflict.
Following the United Nations Kosovo TrustBuilding Forum held in Ljubljana in May, we have
worked systematically to identify, support and empower
change-makers across Kosovo and facilitate the
implementation of initiatives outlined by participants
in the Forum. In collaboration with the United Nations
Kosovo team and other international partners, UNMIK
is focused on realizing the recommendations from
the Trust-Building Forum, which include a number of
concrete measures for this year and beyond. The action
plan encompasses a series of important measures,
ranging from involving all segments of Kosovo society
in an informed debate about the future to influencing
the agendas of local and international partners in the
areas of intercommunity trust and cooperation.
Other key objectives of the Mission’s ongoing work
include promoting the use of innovative communication
technologies to support constant interaction among all
groups and communities across Kosovo and addressing
outstanding issues within the framework of justice,
human rights, the women and peace and security
agenda and the youth, peace and security agenda.
I would like to emphasise that the UNMIK strategic
frameworks on women and youth represent a bold step
towards supporting the empowerment of women and
young people in Kosovo.
Those efforts are designed to encourage an
environment conducive to peace and reconciliation,
healing historical mistrust and building bridges
of common interest among communities. That is
fully in line with the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and may offer an important
example of how to tap into the potential of people and
partnerships to create the necessary conditions for
sustaining peace.

18-377813/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

14/11/2018

Our international partnerships remain vital in
this effort. During the year, the Mission reinforced
its functional collaboration with the EU Office, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force, the Council of Europe and other
international presences, together with our core partners
in the United Nations Kosovo team. Besides any
regular consultations in Belgrade, Pristina and regional
capitals, I have made particular efforts to share our
perspective and experience with stakeholders in Europe
and beyond.

important at this moment that this topic remain high on
the Council’s agenda.

In each of the areas of the Mission’s recalibrated
work, as I have described today, UNMIK is working in
line with the core principles of the Secretary-General’s
reform agenda and the guidance of the Council. Our
efforts are aimed at helping to boost the conditions for
peaceful negotiation and societal reconciliation.

Membership of the Security Council, let me recall,
is a great privilege and a great responsibility, and its
members must do their best to safeguard international
peace and security. For years, the United Nations and its
Member States have spared no effort or time working to
prevent conflicts, and we are all called upon to do what
it takes to prevent, at the first sign, instability from
metamorphosing into a conflict.

At the same time, we are working to remain at the
forefront of understanding, help the Council and share
our understanding and work with all partners in the
service of a lasting peace. I thank the members of the
Council for their continuing support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dačić.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation
provided by the delegation): At the outset, I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his report (S/2018/981)
and his Special Representative, Mr. Tanin, for his
briefing. I also thank them for their dedication and
hard work on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), under resolution 1244 (1999). I
commend China for including this meeting, in line with
the established dynamic, on the agenda of the Security
Council, as well as the Council members who support a
continued consideration of this question.
In August, we did not have the regular meeting on
UNMIK, and I cannot but express my displeasure at
the decision of the United Kingdom not to include that
item in the programme of work of the Security Council,
with the explanation that the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija was calm and nothing was happening on
the ground. I take this opportunity to point out why
that approach is wrong and why we consider that it is
4/24

We spent more than three hours — the time it usually
takes to hold a Security Council meeting — discussing
if it was necessary to convene the meeting or not.
An unnecessary adversarial atmosphere between
Belgrade and Pristina was created, as was division
among Security Council members. The adoption of
the programme of work of the Security Council was
called into question, which constitutes a situation that
is certainly harmful for both the solution of that issue
and the prevailing tone in this organ.

In this case, we are faced with a situation of a
semi-resolved problem being neglected. The conflict is
far behind us, but we are equally far from establishing
a stable and safe situation that no longer merits the
attention of this organ. To allege that this topic is less
important at a time when extensive efforts are being
made to find a durable and sustainable solution, with
great support from important actors in the international
community, is counterproductive, to say the least.
We continue to believe that agreement should be
reached among Council members on how often this
topic should be considered in the Security Council and
that the question of frequency is not a technical matter.
I recall that Serbia tried hard to make a contribution to
achieving a solution by agreement, and we are ready
to continue the discussion of that question with all
interested parties in the same constructive spirit.
It is with regret that I note that no substantive,
positive changes have taken place since the last
meeting of the Security Council on this item (see
S/PV.8254). More than 2,000 days have passed without
the formation of the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities, which is the cornerstone of the
Brussels Agreement; no conditions have been created
for the return of 200,000 internally displaced persons
(IDPs); the Specialist Chambers have not begun their
work and almost a year has passed since the murder of
Oliver Ivanović, while the perpetrator of that heinous
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

crime has not been found. None of that has happened,
and one would be hard-pressed to say that what has been
done has been positive. Resolutions of this organ have
been grossly violated and new provocations and new
incidents have occurred. Let me mention just a few.
The so-called Kosovo Assembly has adopted laws
that will make it possible, for all practical purposes,
for the Kosovo Security Force to transform into armed
forces. The constant calls of the international community
for caution and disregard for the interests of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija notwithstanding,
the authorities in Pristina are resolved to form the
armed forces. Serbia is categorically opposed to such
unilateral acts, for it is evident that those forces would
have all the attributes and competencies of a military,
irrespective of what they might be named.
Let me recall that, under resolution 1244 (1999) and
the Military Technical Agreement, the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) is the only legal military formation in Kosovo
and Metohija. At the same time, it is an important
guarantor of the implementation of the Brussels
Agreement and, in practical terms, the only guarantor
of the security and survival of the Serbs, their property
and their religious and cultural heritage. Let me point
out that it is unacceptable that radical, far-reaching and
unilateral decisions be taken at a time when of ongoing
dialogue aimed at finding a solution, and I expect
the Security Council members to condemn Pristina’s
decision in that regard.
During his visit to Kosovo and Metohija on 8 and
9 September, Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić
was prevented from visiting the locality of Banja, in
a Serbian enclave, because the Pristina authorities
changed their initial decision at the last moment,
regardless of his clear message of peace and calls for a
sustainable solution for Kosovo and Metohija.
The raid by the special police forces of Gazivode
reservoir was the most drastic example of provocation.
Sixty members of the special Regional Operational
Support Unit units, wearing balaclavas and wielding
long-barrel guns, descended on Gazivode reservoir and
hydroelectric plant in northern Kosovo and Metohija to
enable Hashim Thaçi to make a visit. I am afraid that
the only goal of that irrational action was to provoke and
intimidate the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija,
and not for the first time. That too, let me point out,
was a clear violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Brussels Agreement.

S/PV. 8399

As the First Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, I
personally attended, along with Catherine Ashton,
Hashim Thaçi and Aleksandar Vučić, a NATO
meeting at the time of the signing of the Brussels
Agreement in 2013, at which agreement was reached
that no Kosovo security force could go to the north,
unless two conditions were met: first, advice given to
KFOR; and secondly, consent given by representatives
of the Serbian municipalities in northern Kosovo and
Metohija. Neither of those two occurred. We consider
the KFOR and European Union (EU) reactions to have
been inadequate and, to say the least, incongruent with
their role and mandate. Escalation was avoided thanks
to the calm prevailing on our side, the messages of
the President of Serbia and the restraint of the Serbs
in northern Kosovo and Metohija, who, although
alarmed, demonstrated maturity and did not take the
bait of provocation.
The message sent by the Gazivoda incident,
however, is of particular concern. The reservoir and the
hydroelectric plant are strategically important for both us
and the Pristina side, yet Pristina is not ready to discuss
substantive issues. The recent attempt to interfere
with the work of Elektromreža Srbije, Serbia’s power
transmission network, and the intention of Pristina to
take over the energy infrastructure in northern Kosovo
and Metohija are also indicative in that regard. I recall
that energy is a subject matter of the Brussels dialogue
and that we have expressed our concern on a number of
occasions over the steps Pristina has taken that threaten
the energy stability of the entire region, despite its
failure to fulfil its obligation to register two energy
companies in northern Kosovo and Metohija.
Allow me to say that, according to the Brussels
Agreement, the formation of the association/
community of Serb-majority is important. What
kind of dialogue are we talking about if, 2,000 days
after the signing of the Brussels Agreement and the
commitments to the European Union contained therein
were undertaken by Pristina, none has been fulfilled,
including the formation of the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities? That association, of
course, should be the basis for the formation of the
aforementioned energy companies and for further
discussion of the topic of energy.
Other developments also took place within the two
previous reporting periods. The Pristina authorities
decided to build a road through the special protected
zone of the Visoki Dečani monastery, built in the

18-377815/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

fourteenth century and included on the UNESCO World
Heritage List, and sent bulldozers to its courtyard.
Someone wrote “ISIL” on the gates of the monastery.
That is the kind of conditions that the cultural heritage
of Serbs must endure in Kosovo and Metohija. I take
this opportunity to thank international representatives
who prevented such unfortunate action by their
timely intervention.
Attacks on Serbs and their property have occurred
once again, including against those en route to the
graveyards of their relatives, as well as against children
in a playground. Unlike the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/981), that of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in
Kosovo registers 173 incidents involving members of
non-Albanian communities from January to June alone,
and says that the overall number of incidents rose by
almost 20 per cent compared to the previous six months.
These are only some of the incidents that threaten
security in Kosovo and Metohija and burden its
already complex situation. I have to admit that I do not
understand how this situation can be characterized as
stable by anybody. Perhaps a “stable situation” implies
that Serbs are fair game, that attacks on them are
normal, that they do and will occur, and that they do
not merit attention or response.
I would remind Council members that many of
these attacks are directed at IDPs and returnees. How
are we to expect even a modicum of progress to take
place in the process of IDP returns if, in the Europe
of the twenty-first century, we continue to recognize
that the security situation is still the biggest challenge
as the returnees continue to be targets of ethnically
motivated attacks? Arbitrary arrests — that is, arrests
of returnees on trumped-up charges — physical assaults
and injuries, the stoning of the faithful and assaults
on priests, the destruction of property, disturbing
graffiti, the desecration of memorial plaques, national
and religious hatred, the destruction of graveyards,
provocations, institutional discrimination, the absence
of the rule of law and an independent judiciary, drawnout procedures, inadequate protection of evidence
and witnesses, failure to enforce court decisions and
other injustices are among the obstacles encountered
these days by those attempting to return home. The
latest report of the Secretary-General fails to refer to
the approximately 200,000 IDPs who — according
to a report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees — have waited 19 years
6/24

14/11/2018

but still do not enjoy their rights because of these
unacceptable practices.
The assertions regarding stability are most
certainly undercut as well by the number of foreign
terrorist fighters from Kosovo, concerning which the
Secretary-General also expresses concern in his report.
Reports that one group planned to carry out terrorist
attacks in Serbian majority communities and on KFOR
are particularly alarming.
Another important and sensitive topic is the
question of sexual violence in conflict. Serbia
condemns most strongly such horrific acts of violence
and believes that all perpetrators must be punished
and that victims should be provided with appropriate
protection and help. The number of victims of sexual
violence in conflict does not diminish the dreadful
effect of such violence on each individual victim, just
as speculation about numbers does not help justice,
leads to politicization and slows down the process of
reconciliation in post-conflict societies.
The information contained in the report and based
on the data of the Commission for the Verification
and Recognition of Sexual Violence Victim Status in
Kosovo — according to which, out of 782 complaints,
only 137 have been accepted — is indicative of the
years-long practice by Pristina of presenting falsehoods
to the Security Council and continually invoking the
World Health Organization (WHO), even though that
agency does not possess any such data. I have submitted
requests to the WHO, which has confirmed that it does
not have any such information. At these meetings of
the Council, we have heard repeated allegations of the
existence of 20,000 victims of sexual violence, on the
basis of which attempts have been made to establish a
hierarchy of victims based on ethnic, religious or other
attachments. It is almost as if Serbian victims were
less important and that sexual violence against Serbian
nationals were justified and unpunishable.
In this atmosphere of the justification of crimes
against Serbs, it was possible for the so-called
Government of Kosovo to nominate Fatmir Limaj
as chief of the negotiating team in the dialogue with
Belgrade. As a commander in the Kosovo Liberation
Army, he raped and killed, according to the testimony of
Albanians themselves, the Mazreku brothers, witnesses
and accomplices to the crime, and a number of Serbian
women in the village of Klecka. That is the man
dispatched as head of the team to negotiate with Serbia.
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

I reiterate that Serbia believes that these issues must
be addressed without politicization and with respect for
each and every victim, and of course with recourse to
the truth and the facts concerning all parties to the war.
On this occasion, I cannot fail to mention the letter
addressed to the Secretary-General by the departing
United States Ambassador to the United Nations,
urging him to initiate a strategic review of UNMIK
and to develop an exit strategy from Kosovo. We have
heard again and again at these meetings that UNMIK
has fulfilled its mandate and that it is no longer needed,
in light of the fact that the so-called Kosovo has built
democratic institutions and that the rule of law and
human rights are being respected. I must once again
put the following questions to all those who have made
these arguments.

S/PV. 8399

different than it was in 1999 or 2009, but the Mission is
also different from what it was at that time. To allege,
however, that the Mission is not needed and that it has
fulfilled its purpose is far from reality. Considering
that this organ is responsible for the UNMIK mandate,
I would like to ask on this occasion whether and what
the Secretary-General replied to Ambassador Haley.

Do they accept that democratic institutions do not
carry out the agreements and obligations they have
undertaken? The Brussels agreement was signed but has
not been implemented by Pristina. Do they believe that
democracy is served when tear-gas grenades are lobbed
in Parliament, as we have seen occur in Pristina for years
now? Is it evidence of the rule of law when, every now
and then, Pristina pardons criminals sentenced for the
most heinous criminal offences, including members of
the Drenica Group? Can the intimidation of returnees,
attacks on members of minority communities and daily
discrimination against them be accepted as a normal
state of affairs? Has the desired standard of respect
for human rights been achieved by the return of a
mere 1.9 per cent of IDPs? Is that a sufficient number
to warrant giving up on further returns? Does that
mean that the expulsion of 200,000 Serbs is done and
dusted? Are we supposed not to mention it any more?
Whatever happened to over 1,500 missing Serbs? We
keep hearing such insinuations from other parties, as if
Serbian victims were less important.

Some Council members are of the view that
the status of Kosovo is a finished story; at the same
time, many think that it is not. Many States are
now reconsidering their decision to recognize the
unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo and,
to date, 10 States have changed that decision. They
have revoked their recognition or suspended it. They
realized that they had not been sufficiently informed
of the situation and thought that it was necessary to
give dialogue a chance and that everyone would respect
the outcome of the dialogue. That number could soon
rise significantly and the number of those that have
recognized the unilaterally declared independence of
Kosovo could fall below one half of the United Nations
membership. Decisions to withdraw such recognition
are condemned by Pristina and some States, while
Serbia’s petitions are disqualified as provocations.
Conversely, for such States Pristina’s lobbying for new
recognitions is a legitimate exercise, not a provocation.
For them, calls to disrespect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a full-fledged State Member of
the United Nations heard from some countries — and
which I am sure we will hear at today’s meeting, since
they always do so in my presence — will openly appeal
to other countries to recognize Kosovo. What does that
mean? They can lobby countries to recognize Kosovo,
whereas Serbia may not call on countries to withdraw
such recognition. It seems that something is very wrong
in that reasoning.

For some, this is an uncomfortable yet undeniable
truth. Almost everyone sitting at this table supports
the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where the general situation cannot be compared to that
of Kosovo and Metohija and where we can all agree
that the security of citizens is not threatened. Why
is the international presence needed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina but not in Kosovo and Metohija? Why
have some Council members not raised the issue of
removing the international presence from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as they have with respect to Kosovo? I
can agree that the situation in Kosovo is significantly

In desperation, last week Pristina increased its
tariffs on goods from Serbia by 10 per cent to punish
my country for how it was conducting its foreign policy.
It did so in breach of the rules and regulations of the
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA),
which it currently chairs, and had such an action strongly
condemned by all international actors, including the
European Union. Serbia agreed for Kosovo to take part
in the regional initiative. Serbia was asked to do so, and
it did so, and now Kosovo is not respecting CEFTA,
which it chairs. It is interesting that even Hashim Thaçi
himself disagrees with that decision of the Pristina

18-377817/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

authorities. The policy is therefore not clear to me. We
have good and bad policemen in Kosovo.
Instead on dialogue, Pristina is focusing on attempts
to become a member of international organizations in the
mistaken belief that it will thereby prove its statehood,
refusing to accept that such attempts are disruptive to
any solution whatsoever. However, the lack of grounds
for its applications and their inconsistency with the
basic principles of international law are conducive to
the politicization of those organizations, their division
and an unnecessary waste of energy.
In that connection, let me give one clear example:
the application of so-called Kosovo to become a
member of INTERPOL. The argument to which
Pristina often resorts is that it cannot cooperate with
INTERPOL because it is not a member. That falsehood
is exposed by the assertion in the Secretary-General’s
report that we are considering today, which states that
UNMIK continues to ensure communication between
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Pristina and INTERPOL. Under the memorandum of
understanding between INTERPOL and UNMIK, such
cooperation has continued for more than 15 years. In
fact, Pristina’s campaign, openly aided and abetted by
some States, whereby certain countries overtly take part
in lobbying and calling on other countries to recognize
Kosovo in international organizations and to vote for
it, seeks to present so-called Kosovo’s membership
of INTERPOL as a matter of security and combating
crime. That is unsubstantiated and unacceptable. It
is quite obvious that there are political aspirations
involved. Pristina does not want to join INTERPOL
in order to combat crime but to present itself as an
independent country. On the other hand, that is why
we always say that every country should bear in mind
that such issues have an inherent status. They are not
specialist issues. Pristina did not bother to extradite
Gülen’s supporters to Turkey within 24 hours. It did
not matter to it that it was not a member of INTERPOL.
We are talking about Kosovo’s attempt to misuse that
organization to try and enter by the back door in order
to prejudge the outcome.
The circumstances may have made the thrust of
my statement sound sombre and negative. However,
I would like to conclude on a positive note. At the
recent Security Council open debate on strengthening
multilateralism, the observer of the European Union
pointed out, inter alia, that we have learned that
sustainable peace always requires a negotiated political
8/24

14/11/2018

solution (see S/PV.8395). Among other matters, the
Security Council often discusses that and calls on other
countries to first reach a solution on external issues
and then for the rest of the countries to consider the
situation. As I recall, President Obama also called on
all countries not to recognize Palestine until it reached
an agreement with Israel. However, in the case of Serbia
many countries did the opposite. Serbia could not agree
more and earnestly seeks to achieve a compromise on
the question of Kosovo and Metohija. We are committed
to finding a mutually acceptable solution. Such a
solution cannot be found without agreement between
Belgrade and Pristina, just as it is not possible without
the Security Council’s support.
To that end, I once again call on the Security
Council to help that process and to use the momentum
to move forward. The divisions within the Security
Council on the issue and the discussions as to whether
we need UNMIK or not clearly do not help. The answer
as to whether we need Security Council meetings
and UNMIK will be found once we find a mutually
acceptable solution. Until then, we have resolution 1244
(1999), adopted by this organ, with which we all must
comply. For its part, Serbia will make the utmost effort
to continue the dialogue and to reach a lasting solution
that respects the interests of both the Serbian and the
Albanian peoples. Let us strive to seek a compromise
for the future, a lasting peace between Serbs and
Albanians, the prosperity of both Serbs and Albanians
and peace and stability in the entire region. Once that
happens, we will not need either UNMIK or Security
Council meetings on the issue.
In conclusion, we have recently been marking the
centenary of the end of the First World War, in which
Serbia fought on the side of the allies. Serbia paid for
the great victory with many casualties. According
to data from the Paris Peace Conference of 1919,
Serbia lost 1,247,435 people. That is 28 per cent of its
population and 62 per cent of its male population aged
between 18 and 55 years old. Of those killed, 845,000
were civilians. Almost every tenth victim of the First
World War was Serbian. To honour those Serbian
victims of the First World War, the former President of
the United States Woodrow Wilson took the decision to
fly the Serbian flag over the White House and all United
States national institutions on 28 June 1918. A similar
decision was only ever repeated once in the history of
the United States, when it decided to do the same with
the French flag some years later. That is why peace and
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

stability in the region are among Serbia’s priorities: so
that the victims are never forgotten and to avoid another
war in the future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: It is a great honour to be here in the
Chamber today to represent the youngest democracy in
South-Eastern Europe. We are gathered here only days
after we all commemorated the centennial of the end of
the First World War. As the stories of the few remaining
witnesses to that dark chapter of human history
recently reminded us, a steep price has been paid for
freedom and peace in our old continent. The aftermath
of the Great War also reminds us that peace is not
sustainable unless it is complemented by justice. It is
no coincidence that, before the dust of that terrible war
had settled, our continent was hit yet again by a peril
of unprecedented proportions in the form of the Second
World War, causing a staggering loss of human life.
While the nations of the Western Balkans were
occasional protagonists of that conflict, more often
than not we were a battleground — a stage where
ideals clashed, nations brawled, lives were cut short
and dreams were gutted. Following the Second World
War, a most unfortunate course of events would lead
our region and my dear country, Kosovo, to become the
arena of the last war on the European continent. That
is a war that I remember all too well. I was among the
1 million Kosovar-Albanians who were displaced and
forced out of our homes as part of the ethnic cleansing
campaign carried out by the Serbian military forces.
One million refugees were scattered, twenty thousand
women raped and tens of thousands killed. Many are
still missing.
The wounds of war cannot be healed easily,
especially when the aggressor — the Serbian
State — continues to refuse to take responsibility for
its actions. Does anyone believe that peace in Europe
would have been possible if the perpetrators of the First
and Second World Wars had not been held accountable
for what transpired? Can anyone seriously contend that
it would have been possible for the world to move on
if the instigators of those wars had insisted on moral
parity? There was no moral parity in the First World
War, or in the Second. There is no moral parity in
the Kosovo war either. There is an oppressor and the
oppressed, and we are all acutely aware of who the
oppressor is.

S/PV. 8399

Unfortunately, the President of Serbian only
recently visited Kosovo. Instead of using the visit to
send messages of peace, the Serbian President praised
Milošević — the person in charge of instigating the
most terrible tragedies in Europe since the World Wars.
Yet we Kosovars refuse to be defined by our painful
past alone. Instead, we choose to identify ourselves
with our capacity to build a better future. We are not
yesterday’s victims; we are today’s champions. We are
the nation of Majlinda Kelmendi, Distria Krasniqi and
all of the young women who have elevated Kosovo to
the highest pedestals of the Olympics by relying solely
on their own abilities.
We are a nation of youngsters who refuse to accept
failure, who, when given the chance to perform, raise
the bar for everyone else. We are a young republic that
has been recognized by the majority of the free nations
of the world. We are relentless and resolute in repelling
every desperate attempt by our northern neighbour to
undo our accomplishments. And should they try, they
will undoubtedly fail.
Kosovo is its own entity and the President of Kosovo
has the legitimate right to visit any part of Kosovo
without asking for permission from anyone. There was
no incident on the day President Thaçi visited Lake
Ujman. As the Kosovo Force confirmed, the incident
unfortunately occurred the day after, when the Serbian
bar owner who offered coffees to the President and his
team was attacked with a bomb by Serbian parallel
structures from the north.
I also want to take this opportunity to thank all of
the Caribbean countries that have reconfirmed their
recognition of Kosovo’s independence and sovereignty.
On behalf of the people of Kosovo, I also want to humbly
express our gratitude to each and every delegation
sitting around this table for everything they have done
for the people of Kosovo. Dozens of statements and
resolutions adopted in this Chamber have made Kosovo
a better place, and the Council was our voice in our
darkest hour of need.
However, we need to acknowledge that the world
has since changed. Kosovo has changed. It is no
longer 1999; it is 2018. Kosovo has moved on and
it is long overdue for the Council to do the same on
the matter of Kosovo. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is not
a peacekeeping mission anymore, and it is certainly
not an administrative mission. The most instructive

18-377819/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

illustration of the point that I am trying to make and
convey is resolution 1244 (1999) itself. I urge members
of the Council to go back and read it again. Read it and
the Council will be baffled to find that it refers to an
alternate reality, a world that ceased to exist a long time
ago. Kosovars as a people have been on the receiving
end of the United Nations helping hand. We believe that
the Organization’s resources can be put to much better
use in offering solutions to more troubling problems
and crises around the world.
As far as Kosovo is concerned, I implore the
Council to consult the ruling of the International Court
of Justice, which, I might add, was written upon the
request of none other than Serbia itself. The ruling is
precise and unambiguous. It states that Kosovo did
not break any international laws when it declared its
independence one decade ago. Those facts and realities
are indisputable and irreversible. They will not change
now or ever. Kosovo is independent, and it is here to
stay, now and forever.
These meetings do not help peace. These meetings
do not help dialogue. Unfortunately, this Chamber
is being misused. It is being turned into a theatre, a
platform to fuel our own domestic audiences. It is being
used and misused for our own domestic audiences, and
we should not allow that.
Kosovo has undergone a process of painful growth
through which it has come to realize that independence
is not sufficient in and of itself. While we rejoice and
take immense pride in the individual accomplishments
of our champions in sports, the arts and science, our
institutions have a long way to go in order to meet
the rightful expectations of the Kosovar people. Our
Government must do much more to provide higher
quality education, better welfare and more opportunities
for its people. It must also go the extra mile in combating
corruption, nepotism and other negative phenomena
that plague our young republic.
However, while some battles are ours to fight
internally, we will be able to meet other challenges
only if we are completely integrated into the global
community. Kosovo cannot be expected to effectively
battle transnational crime if it is not part of INTERPOL.
Kosovo cannot, and should not, be a black hole in the
middle of the European continent. We are prepared and
willing to help make not only Kosovo, but our entire
region and Europe at large, safer for its inhabitants. The
Kosovo Police Force — and here the United Nations
10/24

14/11/2018

should take pride because it helped us to establish it,
19 years ago — meets all the conceivable criteria for
a credible partner in the fight against transnational
crime. It has already helped foil international terrorist
plots and curtail violent extremist groups. It has also
signed over 80 bilateral agreements of cooperation
with counterpart law enforcement agencies around
the world.
However, in order to become a proper contributor
to regional and global security, Kosovo must become
a member of INTERPOL. That is what membership is
about. Frankly speaking, I do not know how on Earth
such an outcome would be a loss for our neighbour. I
really do not know. The matter is not a zero-sum game;
it is quite the opposite, actually. In this day and age,
it is irresponsible to pretend that our nations are not
deeply affected by what happens beyond our borders.
We should view our growing interconnectedness as a
reason to increase cooperation. The fact of the matter
is that those who obstruct Kosovo’s membership in
INTERPOL are implicitly aiding organized crime. It is
evident that the only parties who stand to benefit from
keeping Kosovo out of INTERPOL are criminals, drug
cartels and terrorists. The question that must be asked
is: do we really want to be on that list?
The same principle applies to the establishment
of Kosovo’s armed forces. First and foremost, I must
emphasize that Kosovo has not engaged in building
an army with the intention of threatening to fight or
invade any land. That is not something we do. We
are actually transforming the mandate of our existing
security forces in order to make them compatible to
contribute to regional and global security to the full
extent of their potential. Our soldiers and officers
have excelled in every single international competition
that they have participated in, proving that they are
ready to give back. Moreover, we are proud to have
the second most diverse security force relative to all
NATO members. In Kosovo we perceive our diversity
as a source of strength. It is an attribute that we cherish
and want to preserve. Hence it is a matter of concern
to see Serbian members of the Kosovo Security Force
be subjected to intense campaigns of intimidation,
which are not limited to the members themselves but
affect their families as well. The Serbian State and its
proxies have left no stone unturned in their endeavour
to stop the process of the transformation of the Kosovo
Security Force.
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

But let me be clear: no State other than Kosovo, no
other citizens than those of Kosovo, have veto power
over the establishment of our armed forces. The issue is
a matter of sovereign decision, one which Kosovo shall
conclude soon. And again, allow me to be completely
candid: the matter is not something on which we will
ever have a dialogue with Serbia. Also, as the Council
is well aware, the decision is in no way a violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).
While we are on the topic of the dialogue, I feel
it is necessary for me to reiterate, on behalf of the
Government of Kosovo, that our country remains
committed to fulfilling all the arrangements previously
agreed to in Brussels with Serbia. However, as the
expression goes, it takes two to tango, and Serbia is not
holding up its end of the bargain. It has consistently
failed to deliver on almost everything that we have
agreed upon, from its disregard for the energy
agreement, which is costing Kosovo millions on an
annual basis, to its unwillingness to recognize Kosovar
diplomats, and many other matters that are hindering
normal interactions for citizens in both our countries.
Furthermore, Serbia has been in violent breach of the
Central European Free Trade Agreement with Kosovo,
dumping its products in order to destabilize our
markets. As such, Kosovo’s imposition of a 10 per cent
tariff on Serbian products was unavoidable. It is both
an economically and a politically sensible measure.
Our Minister for Trade and Industry has sent dozens of
letters to his counterparts in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and in Serbia, letters that were never answered.
That of course brings us back to the necessity of
dialogue with Serbia. We all agree that dialogue is the
only path forward for our two countries. Nonetheless,
it is crucial for us to also agree on what that dialogue
is, and what it will never be about. That dialogue is not
about debating Kosovo’s right to exist as a free nation
under the sun; rather, it is principally and exclusively
about peace, reconciliation and mutual recognition.
As such, the dialogue will have meaning and produce
results only if we decide to speak in earnest with our
own domestic audiences about the process in Brussels.
Beyond the agreements and papers signed, it is essential
that our neighbours begin to treat us as human beings,
equal in every dimension and endowed with the same
inalienable rights and freedoms.
Dialogue is very important, but we in Pristina
are the ones who decide. We — not people in
Belgrade — decide who represents us. We are proud

S/PV. 8399

that we represent the generation that fought Slobodan
Milošević. Fatmir Limaj was acquitted twice by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, at
The Hague. And we in Kosovo can look back very
calmly at our own past and not be ashamed of it.
Just two months ago, an 18-year-old boy from
Kosovo was beaten and hospitalized in Serbia because
someone on the streets of Serbia heard him speak the
Albanian language on the phone. Thankfully, that time
he survived. Not long ago, an infant — a baby — was
about to die because Serbian air traffic control refused
to grant a permit for the use of its airspace to a plane that
was due to land in Pristina. Indulge me for a moment and
think about this — Serbian air traffic control officials
refused to grant a permit for the use of airspace to a
plane because it was headed for Pristina, even when it
could have saved a baby’s life. That behaviour is beyond
comprehension. In another instance, dozens of buses
carrying Kosovo Albanians were attacked with stones
as they passed through Serbia because Kosovo was their
destination. Another case in point is the Kosovar artists
and scholars who are banned from entering Serbia in
the first place, even though the purpose of their travel to
Belgrade is to promote peace and dialogue. Such issues
transcend politics. However, they are exceptionally
more hurtful when the State is complicit. An innocent
infant was about to die in the sky in September because
Serbian authorities refused to grant a simple request by
an international aircraft operator.
We can agree or disagree on various and numerous
counts, but we cannot and will not discuss placing a
price tag on human life. There are no circumstances
that can justify that horrendous notion becoming the
subject of negotiation. In fact, it is shameful that a
European Union candidate country is utilizing such
despicable tools to make a political point. An agreement
between States can be meaningful and sustainable only
if it is an agreement between people that brings about
more secure peace and better living standards for those
involved — not if it triggers the opposite outcome. Our
northern neighbours may have their doubts. However,
we in Kosovo know exactly where we stand, where
we are headed and where we belong — in Europe.
We are reminded of that every day by our brave and
courageous journalists who work fiercely to hold our
politicians to account. We are constantly reminded of
that by our athletes, men and in particular, women, who
defy the odds and bring gold medals back home. We
are reminded of that by our vibrant youth who excel

18-3778111/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

in science and technology, explore new frontiers and
experiment with cutting-edge innovations to find
answers to the questions of the future.
We are reminded of that by brave women like Vasfije
Krasniqi. Vasfije was only 16 years old when she was
taken from the arms of her mother by Serbian military
forces in the spring of 1999. She was raped. They did
not kill her because, as she herself has testified, they
explicitly told her “you will all suffer more if we keep
you alive”. Little did they know that Vasfije would grow
up to become an incredible woman, a mother of two
beautiful daughters, and nearly two decades later she
would return home stronger and braver than ever to
teach all of us a lesson about justice. That lesson is about
the justice that was once denied to her. It is a lesson
of perseverance — about never giving up. Despite the
best efforts to make Vasfije a victim, she is not one.
She is a hero. And heroes like her define my country.
The lessons of war still speak to us, reminding us that
progress must never be taken for granted. Kosovo has
borne witness to the worst of humankind. We live in
the absence of justice for the dead, the wounded, the
raped and the missing. Remorse cannot do justice to
such suffering. We believe that every act of aggression,
terror, cruelty and oppression must have repercussions,
for hatred shall never prevail.
As Kosovars, we have a responsibility to do better.
We are determined to honour the lives that might have
been by ensuring that their sacrifice was not made in
vain. Their memory has fuelled our transformation and
empowered our sense of purpose. They have inspired
our collective commitment to realizing the dreams of
the fallen and our persistent efforts to pursue a future
of enduring peace and prosperity. We know that those
ideals are not easy to achieve, but they are nonetheless
worth striving for. However daunting the odds may be
and however big the challenges may seem, everyone
can rest assured that Kosovo will never give up. We
are a young republic, one that is far from perfect, but
also one that will not stop striving to become better for
all its citizens, regardless of their ethnic or religious
background. Because that is how we keep our promise
to our children. That is the Kosovo we are fighting for.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
12/24

14/11/2018

and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, for his comprehensive update on
the reporting period based on the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/981).
The current state of affairs in Kosovo requires the
continued attention of the Security Council as a matter
on its current agenda. Our priorities in that regard
should be to continue promoting dialogue between
the parties, as well as confidence-building measures
in the political-military, socioeconomic and human
dimensions, in compliance with resolution 1244 (1999)
and under the auspices of the European Union (EU) and
with the involvement of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other relevant
regional organizations to maintain comprehensive and
sustainable security and development in Kosovo. In that
regard, Astana supports the initiatives and concerted
efforts of the global community, including the United
Nations, the OSCE and the EU, aimed at achieving
mutually acceptable conditions for resolving the
situation in Kosovo. We consider it important for the
parties to adhere to the agreements previously reached
through the mediation of international organizations.
Kazakhstan commends the steps by Belgrade and
Pristina under the auspices of the European Union High
Representative Federica Mogherini for continuing
dialogue by holding a series of technical-level meetings
in Brussels. We positively note that both leaders met in
person in Brussels on 8 November.
At the same time, taking note of the 29 September
incident related to the Gazivode reservoir, we strongly
believe that both parties should avoid any steps leading
to further tensions and instability. Kazakhstan also
considers it highly important to thoroughly study the
issue of border delineation, which was reintroduced
by both leaders of the two parties as part of their
continued efforts to reach a comprehensive agreement
on the normalization of relations, as it has the potential
to bring about a negative effect on existing peace and
stability in the region.
There are still a number of sensitive issues left to
be resolved, such as the lack of inter-community trust
and a large number of persons still missing. Of equal
critical importance is the protection of vulnerable
groups, including the Roma and the Ashkalija, and
the cultural heritage and diversity in Kosovo. To that
end, Kazakhstan calls both parties to strengthen their
political will to further normalize relations between
Belgrade and Pristina.
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

Without neglecting the importance of a political
settlement of the situation in Kosovo, we consider it
instrumental to tackle the issue through the nexus of
security and development leading to sustainable socioeconomic recovery of Kosovo. In that vein, there is a
need to implement resolution 2250 (2015), on youth,
peace and security, and provide full support and access
to the youth of all ethnicities to education and skillsdevelopment to fulfil their potential, as young people
are a key determinant in preventing conflicts and a vital
driver of future peace and development in the region.
In addition, we need to pay special attention to the
implementation of the resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and subsequent resolutions for
enhancing gender equality and empowerment. Our
delegation welcomes the efforts of UN-Women and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting social stability in
the region, which can be achieved only with the full
engagement of the United Nations country team,
regional organizations and civil society groups
working towards peacebuilding and conflict prevention
and mediation in Kosovo. We note the positive work
of UNMIK on the question of returning refugees and
displaced persons, together with their resettlement. We
call to strengthen the international work on the matter.
We believe that peace and stability in this part of
the world will be achieved only if the parties continue
to fulfil their commitment in the good spirit of mutual
respect, understanding and compromise. To that end,
Kazakhstan firmly believes that long-lasting peace
and stability in Kosovo could be achieved if the parties
follow agreements, while focusing on promoting
inter-community dialogue and trust, mutual respect
and understanding.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for all the good work he and his
team continue to do in Kosovo and the region. I also
welcome His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Serbia and Her Excellency the Kosovo Ambassador to
Washington, D.C.
We fully support the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) and recognize
the important role that UNMIK has played in postconflict stabilization and reconciliation. The situation
in Kosovo has indeed changed dramatically since the
Mission’s inception, two decades ago. We believe the

S/PV. 8399

Security Council needs to use its resources effectively.
It needs to refocus UNMIK’s efforts so that the means
deployed by the United Nations are tailored fully to the
situation on the ground. To that end, the United Kingdom
supports and looks forward to a strategic review of the
Mission. I would recall for members that the European
Union (EU) and other regional organizations are also
very closely involved in Kosovo and in the region. The
EU’s role is vital to enabling true peace, security and
stability on the ground.
With the efficiency and priorities of the Council
in mind, we welcome the reduction in frequency of
UNMIK discussions. The Foreign Minister singled
out my country, so I will take a few, brief minutes to
respond. It is important that the cycle of discussion
in the Council reflects reality on the ground. We all
agreed on that at the point when we took the decision.
It is also important that the reporting cycles of the
Secretary-General reflect the frequency of the Council’s
discussion. But on the Foreign Minister’s specific
points, we offered four options to reach an agreement
with his country — and all four were rejected. We also
made it very clear that we would hold a meeting on
Kosovo in the Security Council if there were progress
on normalization. Sadly, there was no progress on
normalization. Instead, I am sorry to say, the Serbian
Government orchestrated a protest outside our Embassy
in Belgrade, which is simply not an acceptable way of
conducting diplomatic relations.
As we reflect on the progress Kosovo has made
since UNMIK’s installation in 1999, there is an example
of how far Kosovo has moved forward that I would
like to raise, and that concerns the Kosovo police.
The Kosovo police is a professional organization that
since its inception, in 1999, has taken responsibility for
ensuring the maintenance of the rule of law in the long
term. Its officers are well trained, and they are keen to
cooperate internationally in our joint efforts to combat
serious and organized crime and terrorism.
The United Kingdom hopes that the Kosovo police
is voted into INTERPOL during its General Assembly
session next week. We urge other members to support
the Kosovo police bid. That is not about political pointscoring, it is about our collective security and fight
against organized crime. Kosovo’s inclusion would
facilitate information-sharing among law enforcement
in the Western Balkans and beyond, and that would
enhance the stability of us all, including Serbia’s. It

18-3778113/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

is time that we stop transnational organized criminals
cooperating better than our own police services.
I would just like to add the point that I knew Oliver
Ivanović and considered him a friend. We too hope that
the perpetrators of his murder will be brought to justice.
Oliver worked tirelessly to try to normalize the status
of relations between Kosovo and Serbia. I think the
greatest tribute that both countries could pay to Oliver
would be to continue his work without conditions.
We continue to encourage both Serbia and Kosovo
to make progress towards a sustainable solution
through the EU-facilitated dialogue. We agree with
both speakers that progress on the dialogue is vital for
stability, security and prosperity in the two countries
and the region. But I am sorry to say that this is not
always the way in which dialogue is approached. We
would like to see much more progress and faster, and
we would like the two sides to always keep in mind
that any proposals they put forward really do enhance
stability on the ground and the safety and security of
all their citizens.
We have had a number of rounds of dialogue in the
past. In this century alone there was an attempt in 2006
under the auspices of the United Nations, to resolve the
status issue that recommended Kosovo be independent.
that was blocked. There was an attempt in 2007 among
the EU, the United States and Russia to the same end.
That too was blocked. Now we have the EU- facilitated
dialogue. I cannot stress too strongly how important it
is that that dialogue makes real progress if the region,
and in particular Kosovo and Serbia, are to realize
prosperity, security and stability.
The people of Kosovo and Serbia have elected their
leaders to best represent their interests. We urge those
leaders to do so. Provocative acts and rhetoric from
both sides are deeply unhelpful and antagonistic and
should be stopped. They are contrary to the spirit of
normalization and they simply make finding common
ground more difficult. We believe that both countries
now need to focus on a deliverable and sustainable
normalization agreement through the EU-facilitated
dialogue, which enhances security and benefits the
ordinary people of both countries. The United Kingdom
stands ready to support such an agreement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
14/24

14/11/2018

Republic of Serbia, and we share the serious concerns
he has expressed about the situation in Kosovo. We
once again listened attentively to Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
We thank Special Representative Zahir Tanin and his
team for their work and for his objective briefing on the
activities of the Mission, which shows that the serious,
deep-seated problems in Kosovo continue and require
urgent solutions and the oversight of the international
community.
We are not impressed by the rosy picture that
some in this Chamber continue to paint in meeting
after meeting. We have been compelled to conclude
that the European Union (EU)-mediated dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina remains mired in a deep
conceptual crisis, as the lack of any tangible results
from the contacts between the parties confirms. There
is still no progress towards the ambitious declared
goal of drafting a comprehensive agreement on the
normalization of relations. The main flaw is that the
key agreement reached previously on establishing an
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo is not being implemented. This is the sixth
year since the signing of the document, but Pristina
has been sabotaging the process while the Serbian side
has consistently upheld all of its commitments. Some
examples of that are the integration of Serbian judges
and prosecutors into the Kosovo justice system, the
inclusion of Serbian police officers in the north of the
province in a Kosovo-wide structure and the allocation
of a territorial dialling code for Kosovo.
We note the constructive position that Belgrade has
taken and the efforts of the Serbian side to find mutually
acceptable solutions. It seems, however, that Pristina
is hoping that under pressure from outside, Serbia will
recognize Kosovo’s so-called independence. On top
of that, its response to the Serbian leadership’s recent
compromise proposals came in the form of KosovoAlbanian leaders’ laying unilateral claim to large areas
of southern Serbia. We want to point out that over and
over again, Pristina makes provocative moves as soon
as the possibility of resuming the negotiation process
arises. The latest example is the Kosovo-Albanian
authorities’ recent imposition of a 10 per cent duty on
goods from Serbia in defiance of existing agreements,
including in the context of the Central European
Free Trade Agreement. Moreover, it was achieved
through Pristina’s abuse of its function as Chair of the
Agreement, which it participates in only indirectly,
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

through the Mission, as resolution 1244 (1999) strictly
stipulates.
The situation in Kosovo is seriously worrying. In
September alone, the province teetered on the brink
of a relapse into conflict twice. That could have had
disastrous consequences for the entire Balkan region.
On 8 September, Kosovo Albanians took aggressive
action in trying to prevent the passage of Serbia’s
President Aleksandar Vučić to a Serbian-populated
village in northern Kosovo, while on 29 September,
Kosovo’s so-called President, Hashim Thaçi, visited
the Gazivode reservoir without prior agreement with
the leaders of the Serbian municipality of Zubin Potok.
These were nothing but provocative acts that worsened
the already extremely low level of trust in the region.
We are disappointed by the passivity of the various
relevant international structures, particularly the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), which is directly responsible for
maintaining peace and security in the province. We also
want to point out that the incursion by armed Kosovars
into the north of the region was a direct violation of
the agreements reached with the participation of NATO
and the EU. We are particularly alarmed by Pristina’s
efforts to transform the Kosovo security forces into
fully fledged armed forces with the support of the
NATO countries in KFOR. We have repeatedly drawn
the international community’s attention to the fact that
these little infringements are direct gross violations
of resolution 1244 (1999), which stipulates that the
only presence permitted in Kosovo is of multinational
contingents under international control. The KosovoAlbanian authorities are already announcing the
deployment of one garrison of the future army to
northern Kosovo, which is a direct route to conflict.
We urge both Pristina and its international patrons to
stop before it is too late.
The slow pace of the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to the region remains
unsatisfactory. The daily attacks on Kosovo Serb homes
and property and the cases of arson, physical damage
and acts of vandalism continue. Ensuring the reliable
protection of Orthodox structures in Kosovo needs
especially careful attention. Kosovars’ usurpation of
Serbian Orthodox Church property continues, and in
particular, the church of Saint John the Baptist and
the Saint Paraskeva Pyatnitsa chapel in the town of
Peć are no longer listed in the local land register as
Serbian Orthodox Church property. There have been
attempts to build illegally in UNESCO-protected

S/PV. 8399

areas near churches and monasteries. The international
presence in Kosovo, particularly the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
must keep the situation in this area under control. In
addition, the province is still a breeding ground for
recruiting radicals. Any attempts to put that problem
on the back burner could be very costly for the Balkans
and for Europe as a whole, especially considering that
terrorists fleeing Syria and Iraq are returning there.
We have to once again conclude that the Specialist
Chambers for prosecuting crimes committed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army insurgents has not begun its
real work, although it has already appointed its third
Prosecutor. This story looks more and more like a
mockery aimed at winding up the investigation into the
atrocities uncovered by the Council of Europe Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty. All those guilty of serious
crimes must be brought to justice and duly punished,
regardless of the positions they hold. There has also
been no progress in clarifying the circumstances
surrounding the murder in January of the Kosovo Serb
politician Oliver Ivanović. We believe that has to do with
the fact that despite Belgrade’s legitimate demands, for
some incomprehensible reason the investigation of the
crime was handed over wholly to Pristina.
A solution to the Kosovo problem must be found by
the parties themselves on the basis of our unanimously
adopted resolution 1244 (1999). The final agreement
must be reliable, with the proper international legal form,
and must have the broad support of the international
community. Despite our colleagues’ assurances that
they support the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, we continue to see attempts to push for
Kosovo’s membership in international organizations.
In particular, major efforts are being made, including
through financial leverage aimed at specific countries,
to round up a few more votes in support of Kosovo’s
INTERPOL application. That is undermining the
mutual trust between the parties even more and may
have a destructive effect on INTERPOL’s work, as
happened before with the World Customs Organization.
It is clear to us that considering the serious problems
in the province and the realities on the ground, the
international community’s attention to the situation in
Kosovo must not be distracted. We deplore the fact that
the quarterly meeting on Kosovo scheduled for August
did not take place. I am obliged to respond to my British
colleague, who told us about four options for holding a
meeting on Kosovo in August. We have another reading

18-3778115/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

of that proposal, which is that our British colleagues,
who presided over the Council in August, simply blew
off the meeting altogether. We believe it is essential to
maintain the quarterly Security Council meetings on
Kosovo and specifically to hold them in an open format.
It is also essential to maintain the budget and staffing
parameters of UNMIK, which plays an important role
in Kosovo as, essentially, the objective eyes and ears of
the international community, as well as doing important
work in the area of intercommunal reconciliation. We
want to point out that the Security Council alone is
authorized to make decisions about the fate of UNMIK,
as provided for in resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank our former colleague
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his comprehensive briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on UNMIK (S/2018/981). I also
reiterate our full support to him in carrying out his
mandate. We highly value the vital role that the United
Nations has played over the past years in helping
Kosovo build its institutions and implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
1244 (1999). I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Her Excellency Ms. Vlora
Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States in
Washington, D.C., and thank them for their statements.
I will focus in my statement on political and security
developments in Kosovo.
With regard to political developments, we welcome
and support all the efforts and endeavours of the
Republic of Kosovo to promote its stability, security,
the rule of law, justice, development and the building
of State institutions in the country. We also support its
efforts to conduct dialogue with the European Union
and achieve integration with it, as well as to implement
all signed agreements between Kosovo and Serbia to
reach permanent solutions to pending problems and
establish good-neighbourly relations while attaining
regional security and stability.
We commend the recent steps taken by Kosovo
to achieve rapid and more consistent progress in the
implementation of the European reform agenda. We also
commend its full commitment to meeting its obligations
under this agenda, especially that Kosovo has met all
requirements to become part of the Schengen Zone,
16/24

14/11/2018

which was announced on 18 July by the Commissioner
for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship of the
European Commission.
We urge Pristina and Belgrade to work together to
finalize the establishment of the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities, as that is extremely
important for building trust and confidence between
both parties. The high-level European Union-facilitated
dialogue in Brussels between Belgrade and Pristina
remains the most appropriate framework for settling all
outstanding issues. It is the principal means for reaching
lasting, just and consensual solutions. We look forward
to the work of both parties over the coming months
with regard to adopting a legally binding agreement
under international law to normalize relations between
Belgrade and Pristina, in particular concerning the
delineation agreement. We call for the inclusion of all
social groups in that process.
With regard to security developments, we are
concerned about renewed tensions between the Serbian
Orthodox Church and the Government of Kosovo caused
by construction in the protected zone neighbouring the
Visoki Dečani Monastery. We call on both parties to
commit to the protection of religious heritage, and we
stress the need to address such issues in line with the
legislation and decisions of Kosovo’s Implementation
and Monitoring Council.
We note with concern the failure to reach any
findings concerning the death of Kosovo-Serb politician
Oliver Ivanović, on 16 January, which will prevent
fostering trust among all communities across Kosovo.
We look forward to seeing cooperation between both
parties that will ensure the return of refugees, the
recovery of their property, allocation of land to build
houses, establishing security and providing social and
economic opportunities — the absence of which will
negatively affect sustainable return.
In conclusion, the international community must
continue to make efforts to urge Pristina and Belgrade
to overcome their differences in order to reach
consensual, mutually acceptable, sustainable and just
solutions leading to peace and stability in the region.
UNMIK must continue its constructive work with
Pristina, Belgrade and all parties in Kosovo to promote
security, stability and respect for the human rights.
Kosovo will need to make further efforts to strengthen
the rule of law and end corruption and organized crime,
as well as settle bilateral disputes and establish dialogue
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

between Belgrade and Pristina, while complying with
the strategy of the European Commission on the
Western Balkans.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing. We
appreciate his service and contributions to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We also thank Foreign Minister Dačić and
Ambassador Çitaku for being here today.
The United States applauds the leaders of Serbia
and Kosovo for their expressions of commitment to
normalization between their countries. We hope to
see that normalization dialogue continue to intensify.
Neither side should engage in any effort to undermine
its legitimacy, including diplomatic recognition of the
other side. That has no place in a genuine commitment
to normalization.
Now is the time for both parties to be flexible in
reaching compromises that both can agree to. The
United States is committed to supporting the talks in
whatever way possible. We will seriously consider any
deal that is durable, implementable and sellable in both
countries and that enhances stability. We urge Kosovo
and Serbia to recognize the value of fully committing
to normalization, which will bring great benefits to the
people, the economy, the culture and peace and security
of both countries. Mutual recognition and normalized
relations between Kosovo and Serbia are the future.
All sides will benefit from recognizing that reality and
embracing it.
Considering the future of UNMIK, as we have
noted many times before, we feel that the Mission has
fulfilled its purpose and should draw down. We request
that the Secretary-General and UNMIK initiate a
strategic review to provide the members of the Security
Council with critical information so that we can assess
and evaluate the United Nations presence in Kosovo
and ensure good stewardship of valuable United
Nations Member States’ time and resources. We also
need to assess and develop a viable exit strategy for
UNMIK. That is a principle that guides our approach to
all other peacekeeping missions and should be possible
with UNMIK, as well. The United States also supports
the gradual transparent transition of the Kosovo
Security Force into a multi-ethnic NATO interoperable
military with a limited territorial defence mandate.
The legislation pending before Kosovo’s Assembly
is fully in line with resolution 1244 (1999). It is the

S/PV. 8399

sovereign right of Kosovo to establish and maintain an
armed force. That force, as planned, would contribute
to regional and global security. We encourage all sides
to avoid disinformation and provocative rhetoric about
that legitimate, gradual multi-year transition.
The United States continues to encourage countries
that have not yet done to join more than 110 other States
Members of the United Nations in recognizing the
reality of Kosovo’s independence. We strongly support
Kosovo’s membership in all relevant international
organizations, including the United Nations. We
particularly encourage all INTERPOL members to
support Kosovo’s membership at that organization’s
general assembly on 20 November. Kosovo meets all
membership criteria for INTERPOL. United Nations
membership is not a requirement for joining INTERPOL.
Kosovo’s
membership
in
INTERPOL
fundamentally is about enhancing the international law
enforcement community’s collective ability to combat
terrorism, violent extremism, trafficking, cybercrime
and other international criminal activity in the Balkan
region and beyond. It is neither an impediment to
the dialogue on normalization of relations nor in the
international community’s interest to postpone it
until Serbia and Kosovo reach an agreement. UNMIK
long ago ceased police functions in Kosovo. Having
the Kosovo police — recognized by both Belgrade
and Pristina as the sole law enforcement authority in
Kosovo — join INTERPOL will no doubt strengthen
international security. We urge all to support Kosovo
on 20 November.
Finally, we reiterate our call on both sides to fully
embrace normalization and support one another in all
aspects of the enhanced relations that will come with it.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his informative
briefing and work. We also welcome First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and thank him for
his statement. We are also grateful to Ms. Çitaku for
her statement.
Bolivia calls for compliance with resolution
1244 (1999), including respect for the sovereignty,
the territorial integrity and the independence of the
Republic of Serbia. It is in that regard, and pursuant

18-3778117/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

to the resolution, that we call on all political actors
to work towards an agreement in this framework,
support initiatives of this kind and refrain from using
provocative rhetoric. Such language is nothing but
detrimental to a future agreement between Belgrade
and Pristina and erodes the efforts already undertaken
to build trust between the parties.
In the same vein, the creation of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, agreed
upon in the Brussels Agreement more than four years
ago, must be re-established in accordance with that
Agreement. Although progress was made in terms of
the draft statute, we are concerned that both parties
maintain opposing positions regarding the powers
and competencies of the association/community. We
regret that this situation continues, and we urge the
Kosovo authorities to respect the Agreement and to
move forward on this matter in order to ensure the
security and rights of Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija.
Similarly, we call on them to refrain from any attempt
to transform the Kosovo Security Force into an armed
force, as doing so would constitute an act contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999) and international law.
We also hope that the Kosovo authorities will
fulfil their responsibilities and obligations as concerns
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Office of the
Specialist Prosecutor. We reiterate that the rule of law
and its impartial application is essential to combat
impunity. The persons responsible for the commission
of war crimes must be held accountable for their actions,
regardless of their status or background.
We also reiterate our concern about the slow
progress in the investigation into the assassination
of Mr. Oliver Ivanović, leader of the Civic Initiative
“Freedom, Democracy, Justice”. We call on the
competent authorities to work on the investigation of
the events that culminated in the killing of that Kosovo
Serb politician on 16 January.
Bolivia takes note of the efforts by the European
Union and the mediation of the High Representative of
the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to
make headway in the implementation of the existing
agreements. We commend her recent outreach to the
parties and we appreciate that they are willing to come
to a binding agreement in line with international law. It
is crucial that the parties comply with the commitments
entered into and, in this context, we call on the parties
to work for a peaceful solution through dialogue and in
18/24

14/11/2018

line with the obligation to negotiate, as stipulated by
international law.
We appreciate the work carried out by UNMIK
in accordance with its mandate in the context of
resolution 1244 (1999), especially its efforts in fostering
intercommunity confidence-building, the rule of law
and human rights. Along the same lines, we welcome the
convening of the United Nations Kosovo Trust-Building
Forum in Ljubljana in May and hope that the resulting
recommendations will be implemented in line with the
commitments assumed by the Kosovo authorities.
We also commend the work that UNMIK continues
to conduct with respect to gender equality in accordance
with resolution 1325 (2000). We value its joint work
with the municipal authorities and representatives
of the province of Kosovo to protect communities’
rights, strengthen the rule of law and facilitate the
return of internally displaced persons, as well as its
work providing document certification services. We
encourage UNMIK to continue that work.
Finally, we are concerned about the lack of funding
from the trust fund established to carry out community
assistance projects for the benefit of the Roma, Egyptian
and Ashkali minority communities affected by lead
poisoning in Kosovo. We call on the international
community to join forces in order to support the fund.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the informative briefing by Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
We would like to welcome the presence of Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku,
Ambassador of Kosovo. We also wish to highlight
that the most senior officials have expressed their
commitment to the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union in order to normalize their relations. We
emphasize the importance of involving the citizens of
both countries, particularly women and young people,
in building a shared vision of the future. We welcome
the initiatives promoted by UNMIK and UN-Women in
that regard.
We believe that, in order to consolidate and sustain
peace in Kosovo and stability in the Balkan subregion,
the progress made in recent months should allow a
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the Brussels Agreement. In the light of
those instruments, we believe that the recent legislative
initiatives on the transformation of the Kosovo Security
Force into an army must be carefully evaluated,
considering the presence and role of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) in the country, as well as its impact
on the process of political dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade.
We underline the importance of respecting and
strengthening the rule of law and the trust of citizens
in the institutions. In that connection, we highlight
the work of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, especially in the area of promoting and
protecting human rights. We underscore the need to
respect the work and autonomy of the justice system to
guarantee access to justice and effective accountability,
thereby enabling it to fight effectively against corruption
and impunity.
We also emphasize the importance of recognizing
ethnic, religious and cultural diversity in order to
consolidate the rule of law and make headway on pending
issues, such as the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, the safe
and dignified return of internally displaced persons and
respect for protected areas of cultural heritage.
On the other hand, we must express our concern
about the risk posed to Kosovo and other countries of
the subregion by the return of foreign terrorist fighters.
The support of the international community is vital in
that area, in accordance with the agenda promoted by
the Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee.
I would like to conclude by expressing our
appreciation for the work carried out by UNMIK,
as well as by KFOR, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
in support of building sustainable peace in Kosovo.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Ambassador Tanin for his briefing just now; we
also thank High Representative Mogherini and the
European Union for facilitating the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Those efforts should, in turn,
be rewarded with the strong commitment from Serbia
and Kosovo, in good faith, towards the normalization
of their relations.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that it is
high time to recognize Kosovo’s considerable progress

S/PV. 8399

since 2008. In that context, I will focus on three issues:
first, the reporting cycle; secondly, the strategic review;
and, thirdly, the rule of law.
First, the current situation in Kosovo clearly
allows for a reduction of the Secretary-General’s
reporting cycle. We also encourage a shift of format
from briefings to closed consultations. The Council set
a welcome example by reducing the frequency of our
discussions to twice a year. We call upon the SecretaryGeneral to adjust his reporting cycle accordingly.
Secondly, we believe that it is possible for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to downscale its operations. We therefore
call once more for a strategic review of UNMIK, in
coordination with all the relevant actors. Such a review
should align the Mission to the situation on the ground.
My third and final point is on the rule of law.
We appreciate Kosovo’s progress in strengthening its
judiciary. We welcome the launch of Justice 2020 and
the functional review. Those are positive examples of
efforts to increase performance and accountability.
However, political will and the efforts of all strata of
Kosovar society remain necessary to push forward in
strengthening the rule of law and improving the daily
lives of citizens. High-profile cases must be treated
with the utmost scrutiny and precision. We encourage
Kosovo to keep reforming its judiciary. Kosovo needs to
embrace its responsibilities and ensure accountability
at the national level, as we encourage the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to hand over
responsibilities to Kosovar authorities.
In conclusion, Kosovo has come a long way since
its independence 10 years ago. We encourage Kosovo
to keep building up its institutions. We have full faith
in its ability to handle its affairs as a sovereign nation.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative Tanin for his presence
and briefing today. I would also like to thank First
Deputy Prime Minister Dačić and Ambassador Çitaku
for their statements before the Council.
Poland watches the developments in Kosovo closely
and we are reassured that the situation on the ground is
calm, and while it may be far from perfect, it certainly
does not warrant a quarterly cycle of reporting. We
express a sentiment shared by other Council members
when we say that there is clearly no factual justification
for this frequency.

18-3778119/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

As concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Poland
would like to reiterate our call for a strategic review of
the Mission. We are happy to see that this initiative has
been taken up by other members of the Council. It has
been years since a strategic review was last conducted,
and it is apparent that circumstances have changed. A
fresh assessment of the Mission’s comparative advantage
vis-à-vis other international presences in Kosovo is
obviously needed. The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has recently undergone
a substantial refocusing of its mandate, reflecting the
growing capacity of the host country to handle its own
affairs — and so, in our view, should UNMIK.
Having recognized Kosovo, I will stick to more
general remarks made from the point of view of an
interested observer. Looking at the overall picture in
Kosovo, we see work in progress. To be sure, much
work still remains to be done, but progress is equally
apparent. Whether problems may exist internally
or bilaterally, none of this is outside the competence
of a self-reliant independent State with functioning
institutions, supported by the true engagement of its
political elites.
We commend the effort of both leaders, from
Belgrade and Pristina, to continue the European
Union-facilitated dialogue and call on them to show
consistent commitment to reaching a legally binding
agreement on the comprehensive normalization of
relations. The enlargement perspective set out in the
strategy for the Western Balkans is feasible if enough
energy is invested in going forward, rather than
concentrating on the past.
Much work remains to be done in strengthening the
rule of law in Kosovo. Although a lot has already been
achieved, more needs to be done to combat corruption
and organized crime so that the basic trust of the
citizens in the State is restored and maintained.

14/11/2018

Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for the quality of his briefing. We
also welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora
Çitaku of Kosovo.
My country welcomes the great progress that
has been made in Kosovo in recent years in the
political, security and economic spheres, thanks to
the support of the international community and the
outstanding work of the UNMIK staff in supporting
the Government’s efforts for reconciliation among
the various communities and a return to peace and
stability in the country. My country also welcomes the
full commitment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo to the consolidation of multi-ethnic,
transparent and democratic institutions in the country
since 2008. That commitment has strongly contributed
to the return to institutional normalcy and stability, as
evidenced by the successful organization of municipal
elections on 22 October and 19 November 2017.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the
ratification in March by the Parliament of Kosovo of the
bilateral agreement on the demarcation of the border
between Kosovo and Montenegro, which was signed
in September 2015. However, it remains concerned
about the paucity of progress in the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore urges those two countries to overcome
their differences and give priority to cooperation,
particularly within the framework of the Central
European Free Trade Agreement, in order to stimulate
their economic development.

Let me conclude with the same words that we used
to conclude our statement in this Chamber six months
ago (see S/PV.8254), as they remain valid. Poland
regards Kosovo as being capable of managing its own
future and realizing its potential within the shared
framework of European values. We are ready to extend
our assistance in that effort and share our experiences,
as we have done so far.

On the security front, my delegation welcomes
the efforts that have been made by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) since 1999 to contribute to the maintenance
of a safe and secure environment in Kosovo and ensure
the free movement of goods and persons. My country
notes with regret the slow progress of the investigations
into the murder on 16 January of Mr. Oliver Ivanović,
the leader of the civic initiative “Serbia, democracy,
justice”. It therefore encourages the Kosovar authorities
to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the
perpetrators of that crime are apprehended and brought
before the competent courts.

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Мy delegation thanks Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special

We take this occasion to welcome the indictment
by the Kosovo Specialist Prosecutor’s Office on

20/24

18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

5 October of seven individuals planning terrorist
attacks in Serb-majority areas and against KFOR
troops. Furthermore, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call
for the rapid operationalization of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which will
undoubtedly contribute to the easing and relaxation of
the sociopolitical climate.
My country would like to see the continuation of
high-level meetings between the political authorities
of Pristina and Belgrade, under the leadership of
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
in order to significantly advance reconciliation and a
final settlement of the Kosovo issue. Those meetings,
in addition to the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, have contributed to the significant progress
made in the area of human rights and reconciliation
among communities.
In conclusion, my country calls on the international
community to make a significant contribution to the
trust fund to support the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian
communities in Kosovo.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his briefing, and welcome Foreign Minister Dačić
and Ambassador Çitaku to the Council Chamber today.
Today’s briefing will be Sweden’s last meeting on
Kosovo during our current tenure as a member of the
Council. During these two years, despite challenges,
important steps have been taken by Pristina and
Belgrade to normalize relations and advance on their
respective European Union (EU) tracks.
The future of both Serbia and Kosovo clearly lies in
the European Union. The EU integration process is the
most important driver of positive change and necessary
reforms in the Western Balkans. We welcome the
continued engagement of Pristina and Belgrade in
the EU-facilitated dialogue for the normalization of
relations. Full normalization is vital to a stable, peaceful
and prosperous Western Balkans, and a comprehensive
and legally-binding agreement must be reached as soon
as possible.
Pristina and Belgrade should implement their
commitments and pursue the dialogue process with
constructive engagement and dedication. Important
achievements, such as the integration of Kosovo
Serb judges and prosecutors into Kosovo’s judicial

S/PV. 8399

system last year, should serve as an inspiration for
further progress.
The developments in the Western Balkans have a
direct influence on the rest of Europe. The European
Union has therefore invested heavily in the stability
and prosperity of that region, both politically and
financially. It is essential that the status issue not
hamper the European perspective for the two countries.
The normalization of Kosovo in an international
context, including its membership in international
organizations, must be allowed to move forward.
We encourage the Government and the opposition of
Kosovo to accelerate work with the necessary reforms,
including the fight against corruption and organized
crime, in order to advance further on the EU path.
The United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have
undoubtedly made invaluable contributions to bringing
us to where we are today. Present challenges in Kosovo
are, however, better dealt with in the framework of the
EU integration process, including in close cooperation
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo. The handover of responsibilities from
UNMIK to the local authorities should continue.
UNMIK’s efforts should instead be refocused so
that the means deployed by the United Nations are better
tailored to the situation on the ground. To that end, we
would welcome a strategic review of the Mission in due
course. Given the progress made in Kosovo, the current
reporting cycle to the Security Council should also be
adjusted to six months to better reflect the realities on
the ground. That would entail two reports from the
Secretary-General a year.
Since 1999, Sweden has contributed militarily,
economically and politically to the stability and
prosperity of Kosovo. Our political support, which is
also demonstrated through our bilateral development
cooperation, will continue, with a clear focus on
supporting Kosovo’s EU integration.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in Kosovo. I also welcome the presence
of Mr. Dačić, Serbian First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, at today’s meeting and

18-3778121/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

thank him for his remarks. I also thank Ambassador
Vlora Çitaku for her statement.
Our position on the issue at hand has always been
consistent and clear. We would like to reaffirm our
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia and the peaceful and amicable resolution of
all outstanding issues between Belgrade and Pristina
in accordance with the Brussels Agreement. We also
welcome the ongoing efforts made by the European
Union in facilitating dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo, as well as in advancing peace and stability in
the region.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the continued
engagement of Belgrade and Pristina in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue on the normalization of
relations. We are also encouraged by their determination
and commitment to resolve outstanding issues through
dialogue and call on both sides to remain engaged in
the process.
The ongoing efforts being made to operationalize
an integrated Kosovo judiciary is a welcome step.
However, we are concerned about the slow progress
on the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo. We therefore
encourage the implementation of all existing agreements
in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
We also take note of the ongoing discussion by
both sides on the territorial delineation as part of a
comprehensive agreement on the normalization of
relations. It is our hope that leaders in both Belgrade
and Pristina will continue to engage in dialogue and
maintain a positive and constructive spirit with a view
to addressing outstanding issues and disagreements
through peaceful means. That demands that both sides
refrain from actions and statements that could cause
ethnic discord and exert efforts to create an atmosphere
of trust and confidence conducive to dialogue that also
addresses the interests of all segments of the population.
Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
has been undertaking in discharging its mandate in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). Its engagement and
support in promoting intercommunity reconciliation
and confidence-building measures in the reporting
period are commendable.
It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to
promote political dialogue and strengthen community
22/24

14/11/2018

reconciliation, as well as ensuring security and
stability in Kosovo and the region. We also recognize
the significant role of the European Union on matters
concerning Kosovo and commend the European Union
Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force for their
valuable contribution in Kosovo in the area of the rule
of law and security.
In conclusion, I would like to state that the security
and stability of Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be ensured once there is political will and resolve on
the part of both sides. In that respect, we once again
encourage both parties to remain committed to dialogue
and negotiation with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States of America, for their
briefings. I would like to very respectfully recall
that, in accordance with the working methods of the
Security Council, such statements should not exceed 15
minutes, as recalled in paragraph 56 of note S/2017/507.
In the light of the situation described by the Special
Representative and the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/981), I will briefly underline three points.
The first concerns the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Notable efforts have been made to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and the region. That work deserves to be
commended. France particularly welcomes UNMIK’s
activities in bringing together communities and in
promoting the women, peace and security agenda in
cooperation with UN-Women. However, as has been
underlined by several members at previous meetings
and again today, we must continue to be attentive to the
issue of refocusing UNMIK’s actions nearly 20 years
after the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), taking into
account the situation on the ground, the performance of
that peacekeeping operation and the initiatives led by
other regional and international actors. I am thinking in
particular of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX).
Secondly, the normalization of relations between
Pristina and Belgrade also depends on the dialogue
between the two leaders conducted under the auspices
18-37781

14/11/2018

Kosovo

of the European Union. In that regard, we welcome
the commitment of Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, and the most recent
meeting held in Brussels on Thursday, 8 November.
France calls on both sides to show a spirit of
compromise and political will. We encourage the
policymakers of both States to be up to the circumstances
and to create the conditions for an agreement, which
would be an essential step in the long-term stabilization
of the Western Balkans and in moving towards the
European perspective.
Finally, my third point concerns the European
future of Kosovo and Serbia, which was clarified
last March in the European Union’s strategy for the
Western Balkans. In view of the merits at the heart of
the European project, we emphasize the importance of
the reforms needed to consolidate and to strengthen
the rule of law. In Kosovo, EULEX contributes to that
objective by focusing on the effectiveness, ethics and
the multi-ethnic character of Kosovo’s justice system.
However, the primary responsibility lies, of course,
with the policymakers.
As we commemorate the centenary of the end of the
Great War, a spirit of reconciliation must prevail. We
hope that Belgrade and Pristina will be able to move in
that direction and reach an agreement on normalizing
their relations.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
progress made in recent months in Kosovo. I would
also like to thank Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States of America, for their
interventions, which I welcome.
My delegation takes note of the resumption of
the European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on 18 July and separate talks
with Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in Brussels on 7 September. We urge the parties
to continue the talks to promote the normalization of
relations, since ensuring security and stability in Kosovo
requires the commitment of both parties to continuing

S/PV. 8399

the dialogue. We therefore encourage them to continue
to step up their efforts towards achieving stability on
the ground, while respecting the implementation of the
agreements reached.
Likewise, we note the possible agreement on
territorial adjustments on which the parties are working
in view of their commitment to reaching a final
agreement on Kosovo. We recall that the aforementioned
agreement should not only be in line with international
laws but also address all the concerns of the various
communities, as well as the disagreements that may
arise among them. In that regard, we encourage the
parties to continue to cooperate peacefully, to promote
political dialogue and respect for human rights, as
established in the Charter of the United Nations, and
to address their differences through direct, fair and
inclusive negotiations in order to find a lasting solution
acceptable to all parties.
We note with concern the decision of Pristina to
increase taxes on products imported from Serbia.
That decision does nothing but undermine regional
cooperation, increase tensions and damage overall
trust among the various communities. We therefore
urge the parties to step up their efforts to improve
regional cooperation and the rule of law, and to
promote development, peace and security in Kosovo,
while safeguarding the good relations of trust among
the communities there. In that regard, we call on the
competent authorities to clarify as soon as possible the
circumstances surrounding the murder of Kosovo Serb
politician Oliver Ivanović in January.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Serbia and deems the legitimate Serbian
concerns on the question of Kosovo to be justified. We
thank Serbia for its continued efforts to seek a peaceful
and inclusive solution to the question of Kosovo.
Finally, we commend the excellent work that
UNMIK is doing on the ground and the support that
it provides to all of the communities in Kosovo and
the regional and international actors, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, in order to fulfil the mandates of
resolution 1244 (1999), which is the legal basis for a just
solution in Kosovo.

18-3778123/24

S/PV.8399

Kosovo

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China thanks Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. We support
the Special Representative in leading UNMIK’s
implementation of its mandate. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, at this meeting and thank him for
his briefing. I also take note of the statement delivered
by Ms. Çitaku.

14/11/2018

through dialogue and consultation. We also welcome
the constructive efforts of both parties to implement the
agreements already reached, gradually build mutual
trust and continue to create conditions conducive to
reaching a comprehensive and lasting solution.
It is in the fundamental interests of all of the
ethnic groups in Kosovo to achieve reconciliation and
common development, which in turn will contribute
to peace, stability and prosperity in the Balkans. It is
hoped that all parties concerned will put the well-being
of the people first, protect the legitimate rights and
interests of all ethnic groups, promote socioeconomic
development and avoid words or actions that might lead
to escalating tensions.

At present, the security situation in Kosovo is
stable on the whole, but it still faces some complexities.
Resolution 1244 (1999) is an important legal basis
for resolving the Kosovo issue. All parties should, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and within the framework
of the relevant resolutions, reach a solution that is
acceptable to all through dialogue and negotiation.

While the Council should remain seized with the
Kosovo issue, the international community should play
a constructive role in promoting a proper solution. We
hope that UNMIK will maintain its coordination with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the Kosovo Force and others in a joint effort to improve
the situation in Kosovo and promote the due settlement
of the Kosovo issue.

China respects Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, understands Serbia’s legitimate concerns on
the Kosovo issue and appreciates Serbia’s efforts to seek
a political solution to the Kosovo issue. China welcomes
the commitments made by Belgrade and Pristina to
promoting the normalization of bilateral relations

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

24/24

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

18-37781
