A /69/PV.91

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

91st plenary meeting

Thursday, 28 May 2015, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mendonça e
Moura (Portugal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/722/Add.7)
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
items on our agenda, I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/69/722/Add.7, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/69/722/Add.6, Tonga has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Request for the inclusion of an additional item
submitted by the Secretary-General (A/69/231)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take up a request submitted by the Secretary-

General in document A/69/231 relating to the election
of members of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law.
In his note, the Secretary-General requests, pursuant
to rule 15 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, the inclusion in the agenda of the sixty-ninth
session, under agenda item 112, entitled “Elections to
fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections”,
of an additional sub-item entitled “Election of members
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law”.
Owing to the nature of the sub-item, unless there is
an objection, may I take it that the General Assembly
agrees to waive the relevant provision of rule 40 of the
rules of procedure, which would require a meeting of
the General Committee on the question of the inclusion
of this additional sub-item in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral, wishes to include in the agenda of its current
session, under agenda item 112, entitled “Elections to
fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections”,
an additional sub-item entitled “Election of members of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”, under heading I, “Organizational, administrative
and other matters”?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Owing to the nature of the
sub-item, the Secretary-General also requests that it be

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-15447 (E)

*1515447*

A/69/PV.91

considered directly in plenary meeting. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to consider
the sub-item directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that this additional sub-item becomes
sub-item (e) of agenda item 112 in the agenda of the
current session.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of twenty members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/291/Add.3)
The Acting President: Pursuant to General
Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December 1987, and
upon nomination by the Economic and Social Council,
the Assembly elects the members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination.
Members will recall that, at its 32nd plenary
meeting, held on 29 October 2014, the General Assembly
elected 13 members to the Committee for a three-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2015. Members
will also recall that, at its 68th plenary meeting, held
on 10 December 2014, the Assembly elected three
members to the Committee for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2015. Members will
further recall that, at its 85th plenary meeting, held on
16 April 2015, the Assembly elected Portugal to the
Committee for a term of office beginning on the date of
election and expiring on 31 December 2017.
Members will recall that by its decision 2015/201 B of
8 April 2015, the Economic and Social Council postponed
the nomination of three members from the Western
European and other States for election by the General
Assembly, one member for a term beginning on the
date of election and expiring on 31 December 2015,
and two members for terms beginning on the date of
election and expiring on 31 December 2017. By the same
decision, the Council also postponed the nomination of
one member from the Asia-Pacific States for election
by the General Assembly for a term beginning on the
date of election and expiring on 31 December 2017.
In this connection, the Assembly has before it a
note by the Secretary-General contained in document

2/7

28/05/2015

A/69/291/Add.3. As indicated in that document, by its
decision 2015/201 D of 15 May 2015, the Economic
and Social Council nominated the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland for election by the
General Assembly for a term beginning on the date of
election and expiring on 31 December 2017.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
all elections should be held by secret ballot and there
shall be no nominations. However, I should like to
recall paragraph 16 of General Assembly decision
34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing with the
secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs when
the number of candidates corresponds to the number
of seats to be filled should become standard, unless
a delegation specifically requests a vote on a given
election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I therefore take it that
the Assembly wishes to declare the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland elected as a member
of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
for a term beginning on 28 May 2015 and expiring on
31 December 2017?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members are reminded that
the Economic and Social Council decided to further
postpone the nomination of three members from the
Western European and other States for election by the
General Assembly; one member for a term beginning
on the date of election and expiring on 31 December
2015, one member for a term beginning on the date
of election and expiring on 31 December 2017, and
one member for a term beginning on 1 January 2016
and expiring on 31 December 2018. The Council also
decided to postpone the nomination of one member
from the Asia-Pacific States for a term beginning on
the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2017.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 112.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/69/L.71)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now resume its consideration of agenda item 14 to take
15-15447

28/05/2015

action on a draft resolution entitled “Saving the cultural
heritage of Iraq”, issued as document A/69/L.71.
Members will recall that the Assembly held a debate
on agenda item 14 and adopted resolutions 69/139 and
69/140 at its 72nd plenary meeting on 15 December
2014.
I will now read out a statement on behalf of the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Sam Kutesa.
“In April, we gathered here at the United
Nations as I convened a high-level thematic debate
on promoting tolerance and reconciliation. The
debate brought together political and religious
leaders representing diverse nations, geographies
and faith communities in an expression of their
support for dialogue and mutual understanding in
the face of the disquieting rise of extremism and
violence worldwide. Over the course of two days,
speakers emphasized the importance of enhancing
respect for religious and cultural diversity. Many
also stressed the urgent need to protect artifacts
of cultural heritage from destructive attacks at the
hands of violent extremists. As was highlighted
during that debate, we must collectively uphold the
principles of tolerance and respect, while promoting
diversity and fostering inclusiveness. We must also
work together to uphold respect for human rights
and freedom of thought, belief and expression.
“It is deeply concerning to witness the
destruction
of
irreplaceable
artifacts
of
humankind’s shared cultural heritage. Such
barbaric and senseless attacks are taking place
with alarming frequency not only in Iraq, but
also in Afghanistan, Syria, Mali and elsewhere.
By destroying invaluable cultural icons found in
museums, libraries, archives, archaeological sites
and places of worship, extremists are exacerbating
conflicts, instigating violence and perpetuating
fear among societies. Such attempts to obliterate
humankind’s collective history must be stopped
immediately, by all necessary means, in accordance
with applicable international law. I would also add
that those responsible for such acts must be held
accountable.
“Cultural heritage is of exceptional value and
interest to all peoples of the world and must be
preserved. In that context, it is essential that the
international community work together to protect
elements of cultural heritage in Iraq and elsewhere.
I thank UNESCO for its contribution and in

A/69/PV.91

particular for its work in conserving heritage and
taking measures to protect cultural property at risk.
I welcome the draft resolution (A/69/L.71) before
us today as an important step forward in saving
our shared histories, and I would like to thank the
delegations of Germany and Iraq for taking this
initiative.”
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I am honoured to
speak at today’s discussion on the culture of peace and
the very serious topic of the draft resolution before us
today, “Saving the cultural heritage of Iraq” (A/69/L.71).
I would like to thank the Governments and delegations
of Iraq and Germany for this initiative. The number of
sponsors of the draft resolution is truly heartening and
impressive.
We stand here today, I know, with a deep sense of
serious and historic responsibility. There is something
at stake in this venerable Hall that relates to the core
values of the United Nations and to our duties with
respect both to history and to the challenges ahead of
us. The destruction of cultural heritage bears witness
to a senseless form of violent extremism that seeks to
destroy the past, the present and the future of human
civilization. That it is taking place today in Iraq, the
cradle of Mesopotamian civilization, represents a loss
not only for the Iraqi people, but for all of humankind.
The international community must do everything in its
power, as the President just said, to halt the destruction
of Iraq’s cultural heritage and to hold the perpetrators
to account.
Tragically, this type of cultural destruction does not
stop with the case of Iraq. Other countries in the region
and beyond have seen similar serious crimes. In recent
years we have seen them committed in Afghanistan, in
Syria, in Mali, but rarely — let us think about this — in
times before that. It is sad testimony about the state of
affairs in the world today. The destruction of cultural
heritage worldwide has reached an unprecedented
scale. It is being used as a tactic of war or conflict in
order to terrify populations, finance criminal activities
and spread hatred, creating polarization and divisions
among people. To respond, we need coordinated action,
improved information-sharing and strengthened
legal foundations, in both affected countries and
neighbouring States, and throughout the international
community.

15-154473/7

A/69/PV.91

We should also today commend the work of
UNESCO and its partners for their work, both
by themselves and in assisting Member States in
dealing with this new global problem. I particularly
want to commend Ms. Irina Bokova for her personal
commitment to the issue. The fact that she has come
today from Paris for this meeting is a testimony to her
commitment and that of UNESCO.
I particularly urge all Member States, in cooperation
with other relevant authorities, not least INTERPOL,
to prevent the trade in items of cultural, scientific
and religious importance illegally removed from Iraq
and other countries. Through today’s draft resolution,
the General Assembly is sending a strong message of
worldwide support for the people and the Government
of Iraq on a question of their national identity. I wish
to reaffirm the determination of the United Nations
system, the General Assembly and all Member States
in their support for these endeavours.
Let today be a moment of deep reflection on our
common humanity and on our shared responsibility
to defend values and principles that are under attack
but which must be upheld by all of us with firm and
principled determination.
The Acting President: I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Maria
Böhmer, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office
of Germany, to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.71.
Ms. Böhmer (Germany): It is a privilege for
Germany to introduce the draft resolution A/69/L.71,
entitled “Saving the cultural heritage of Iraq”, which
we drafted together with our Iraqi partners.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
for his vivid description of the situation, and I offer my
heartfelt thanks for the welcome I have received.
All of us have been profoundly shocked by the
barbaric attacks on Iraq’s cultural heritage perpetrated
by the terrorist organization the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. We all remember our feelings of
anger and impotence at the videos showing militants
destroying the UNESCO World Heritage Site of Hatra
and ravaging Mosul’s museums or the ancient Assyrian
city of Nimrud, using sledgehammers and Caterpillars
to put an abrupt and violent end to thousands of years
of history. Their objective is clear. By obliterating the
visible traces of history and civilization, these terrorists

4/7

28/05/2015

want to destroy the foundations of a peaceful civil
society and a unified country. They want to erase the
soul and the identity of the people of Iraq. What they do
not destroy, they loot and sell abroad in order to finance
their terrorism from the spoils.
The attacks on the cultural heritage of Iraq are a
test case for all of us. Iraq is a cradle of our common
civilization. We cannot leave it to face this challenge
alone; its heritage has been entrusted to the care of all
of humankind. The international community must do
all it can to put an end to these war crimes. And this is
what these attacks are and what they should be called,
with all the consequences this entails — war crimes
that need to be prosecuted.
We are alarmed that these terrible crimes may be
only part of a worrying trend to use intentional attacks
on unique cultural heritage as a tactic of war. From
Hatra to Bamiyan or Timbuktu, the cultural heritage
of thousands of years has been attacked and destroyed,
and we are watching with concern the current escalation
near the world heritage site of Palmyra.
Together with our Iraqi partners, Germany is
therefore introducing draft resolution A/69/L.71 to save
the cultural heritage of Iraq, as we did when the Taliban
were destroying the Buddha statues of Bamiyan (see
resolution 55/243). With the support of the General
Assembly, the draft resolution we introduce today will
deliver a resounding and united message. The draft
resolution condemns these barbaric acts of destruction
and looting of the cultural heritage of Iraq. The draft
resolution expresses outrage that attacks on cultural
heritage are being used as a tactic of war. It calls for
an immediate halt to the wanton destruction of Iraq’s
cultural heritage, affirms that such attacks may amount
to war crimes and calls upon all States to hold the
perpetrators of such attacks accountable.
The draft resolution affirms the General Assembly’s
support for the Iraqi Government in protecting the
heritage of Iraq. It calls upon all States to assist Iraq
in fighting against trafficking in cultural property and
in repairing, restoring and conserving damaged or
destroyed cultural heritage. The draft resolution urges
all States to counter the trafficking of cultural property
through better national and international regulations.
Specifically, it urges the adoption of measures to
ensure that all traders in cultural property are required
to provide verifiable documentation of provenance and
export certificates.

15-15447

28/05/2015

The draft resolution also calls on States to enhance
the protection, preservation and documentation of
cultural heritage endangered by armed conflicts. It calls
upon community leaders to stand up and unambiguously
reaffirm that there is no justification for the destruction
of humankind’s cultural heritage.
In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to the President of the General Assembly,
to the Secretariat, to UNESCO — in particular to
UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova — to the over
90 sponsors, to all the delegations that participated in the
informal consultations and especially to Ambassador
Alhakim and his team for their dedication and close
cooperation.
Let us stand together against such barbarism and
speak with one single voice for the preservation of the
culture and diversity that we have inherited from the
past, because without them we have no future.
The Acting President: I thank the Minister of
State at the Federal Foreign Office of Germany for
having travelled all the way to New York to underline
the importance of the matter addressed by the draft
resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution A/69/L.71, entitled “Saving the cultural
heritage of Iraq”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that Guatemala is not a sponsor of the draft
resolution. I should also like to announce that, since
the submission of the draft resolution and in addition to
those delegations listed on the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors of draft resolution
A/69/L.71: Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Bahrain, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
China, Costa Rica, Eritrea, Mali, Mongolia, Nigeria,
Palau, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste and Turkmenistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.71?
Draft resolution A/69/L.71 was adopted (resolution
69/281).

A/69/PV.91

The Acting President: I now call on representatives
who wish to make statements following the adoption.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of my delegation, I welcome the adoption today of
resolution 69/281, entitled “Saving the cultural heritage
of Iraq”. I thank the German Minister of State, Ms. Maria
Böhmer, for her support. Our thanks and appreciation
also go to the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations as our partner in this initiative. We thank
the Director-General of UNESCO for her presence at
this historic meeting. We also thank and express our
appreciation to all the sponsors for their valuable input
during the negotiations on the resolution, which was
adopted by consensus. Their support provides further
impetus for this important resolution, which is of great
significance to all humankind and particularly for Iraq.
The destruction of the cultural heritage of Iraq,
the cradle of civilization, is no less barbaric and
serious than the killing of Iraqis, because it threatens
to erase the multicultural history of Iraq, which has
been the hallmark of our country for millennia. In
order to confront this challenge, Iraq has undertaken,
with the assistance of our friends among the United
Nations membership, serious and timely measures to
protect Iraqi artefacts from the smuggling and illegal
trafficking that fund terrorist activities.
The resolution adopted today falls within
that framework. Its adoption is a testament to
the international community’s determination and
commitment to stand by the State of Iraq and its people
in defiance of criminals and to bring to justice those
whose goal is to destroy our past, present and future. It
serves as an important step in strengthening the legal
commitments of Member States to preventing the sale
and smuggling of our heritage by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups
associated with Al-Qaida. It also underscores the
importance of putting an end to the smuggling, selling
and acquisition of artefacts, and requires the restitution
of those artefacts to Iraq or, for that matter, to any other
country that faces such a problem.
The resolution highlights the importance of the
United Nations in developing international instruments
that enhance the capacity of Member States to protect
the human cultural heritage, and it is aligned with the
stated position that we have repeatedly reaffirmed
before United Nations bodies as being among our
priorities. Those include, in addition to the protection

15-154475/7

A/69/PV.91

of our heritage, the fight against ISIL, the return of
internally displaced persons and the restitution of
security and stability to our country.
The resolution is timely, given the increasing
frequency of terrorist attacks on cultural heritage in
various parts of the world. The situation in Palmyra,
Syria, is another case in point. The challenge that we
face requires global support in order to retrieve the
stolen Iraqi artefacts. Iraq continues to strive to protect
its cultural heritage, including by planning future
projects to that end.
I thank Member States that sponsored and supported
the resolution. I reiterate our thanks and appreciation to
Germany for its valuable partnership and to UNESCO
and its representative for their valuable support for
Iraq. I also thank the United Nations, the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Secretary-General, as well
as the President and Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly and the President’s team, for their valuable
efforts.
Mr. Winid (Poland): On behalf of Chile, Ethiopia,
Indonesia, Italy and Poland, I would like to express our
profound appreciation to the Permanent Missions of
Germany and Iraq for their efforts in the preparation of
resolution 69/281, entitled “Saving the cultural heritage
of Iraq”, which we co-sponsored.
Long known as the cradle of civilization, Iraq is
home to a great number of cultural heritage sites that
are a precious testament to its history. However, Iraq’s
cultural legacy remains at great risk as disastrous
losses have already occurred. Any further damage or
destruction of its cultural heritage must be immediately
put to an end. We believe the resolution to be a necessary
step in that direction and would like to assure everyone
gathered in the Hall of our commitment to that very
end.
Just two months ago, during the twenty-eighth
regular session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva,
we delivered a statement on behalf of Chile, Ethiopia,
Indonesia, Italy and Poland in which we expressed
our deepest concern about the growing number of
acts of intentional destruction of cultural heritage, as
well as the organized looting and illicit trafficking of
cultural property, which are occurring today on an
unprecedented scale. The statement was supported by
137 countries, which underscored the urgent nature of
the problem.

6/7

28/05/2015

It is not only Iraqi heritage that has been put in
danger; it is our collective heritage that might be
diminished. The international community must learn
about the importance of protecting the records of
human history; therefore, we must take all necessary
actions to ensure that its uniqueness is preserved. It is
our responsibility to respect and protect the cultural
heritage of our societies. For that reason, we join the
many sponsors of the resolution in strongly condemning
the intentional destruction of cultural heritage wherever
it occurs and whoever the perpetrator.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 69/281, entitled “Saving the cultural heritage
of Iraq”. I thank the sponsors for having submitted
the text. The delegation of my country, the Syrian
Arab Republic, joined the sponsors of the resolution,
thereby underlining our support for the efforts of the
Government and the people of Iraq to safeguard and
protect their civilizational and cultural heritage from
acts of barbaric terrorism.
We hope that our efforts to safeguard the cultural and
human heritage will be commensurate with the threats
posed to cultural and historical sites in Iraq and my
own country, Syria, by the Daesh terrorist organization,
which is now occupying the city of Palmyra, and other
extremist terrorist groups linked to Al-Qaida. We also
hope that the resolution will allow us to speak with one
voice; send a unified message to the Governments of
countries supporting terrorism, demanding that they
desist from supporting takfiri terrorist groups and
inciting violence, terrorism and hatred; and prevent the
destruction of priceless antiquities by the ignorant and
the enemies of civilization and the trafficking of those
antiquities to finance terrorism.
The artefacts stolen from Syria and Iraq and
smuggled to countries worldwide, which are often huge
and cannot be trafficked easily, could not have reached
those countries without the support of Governments,
organized criminal gangs and corrupt networks helping
to finance terrorism. This is a very immediate challenge
and requires a response that proves that we are truly a
United Nations and not merely an Organization in name
only.
The Syrian Arab people will continue to offer
assistance to INTERPOL and the United Nations and
its specialized agencies, including those combating
terrorism, to prevent the trafficking of Syrian and

15-15447

28/05/2015

Iraqi artefacts and their transformation from pieces
of incalculable human value into mere objects to be
used to finance inhumane criminal terrorism that has
nothing in common with any religion or civilization.
I reiterate my country’s support for the resolution
that we have just adopted by consensus. The cultural
heritage of Iraq is a source of pride for us all, and I
therefore reiterate my thanks to the sponsors and to all
countries that supported the draft resolution.
The Acting President: I should now like to
consult with Member States with a view to giving the
floor to Ms. Irina Bokova, Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization. If there is no objection, may I take it
that the General Assembly wishes, without setting a
precedent, to invite Ms. Bokova to make a statement at
this meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In accordance with the
decision just taken, I now give the floor to Ms. Irina
Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO.
Ms. Bokova (United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization): The adoption of resolution
69/281, entitled “Saving the cultural heritage of Iraq”, is
a turning point in the mobilization of the international
community against the destruction of cultural
heritage, the looting of antiquities and the persecution
of minorities that have lead to the destruction of the
cultural diversity of Iraq. It marks a turning point in the
fight against cultural cleansing in Iraq.
Never before in recent history have we seen such
brutal and systematic destruction of cultural heritage
used as a tactic of war to intimidate populations and
to disseminate hatred. This is a war crime. Such
destruction of heritage has also taken place in Mali,
Syria and Afghanistan. All of us believe and feel that

A/69/PV.91

such attacks are not just against specific communities,
specific religions or a specific world heritage. These
are attacks against the very notion of a civilized order,
against the humanity we share, and against the values
that bind us together as a single human family.
The resolution resonates deeply with the mandate
of UNESCO, as is indicated in many of its paragraphs.
This is a test for the United Nations that calls on all
of us to review the means by which we seek to defeat
violent extremism.
(spoke in French)
The resolution sends the resounding message that
cultural heritage is not merely collateral damage, but
that its deliberate destruction is a war crime and an
integral part of the humanitarian and security crisis.
The resolution is evidence of our strong resolve to
take action, with strong recommendations to stop the
financing of terrorism, counter the ideology of hatred
and stop illicit trafficking. The resolution complements
Security Council resolution 2199 (2015), on the
financing of terrorism. I believe that it sets forth a
new strategy for the fight against violent extremism. I
am already convinced that the resolution will have an
impact, and I congratulate Germany and Iraq, as well
as its more than 80 sponsors, for this initiative.
UNESCO will remain fully engaged with all the
sponsors, particularly Germany, which will host the
UNESCO World Heritage Committee in Bonn next
month. Again, we will use that opportunity to mobilize
States to save the exceptional cultural heritage that
belongs to all of humankind.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

15-154477/7
