Re•olution■

adopled on the reporb of the Fir1l Committee

2456 (XX.ID). Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States
A

Tite General Assembly.
Noting that pursuant to its resolution 2346 B (XXII)
of 19 December 1967 the Conference of Non-NuclearW ea pon States was held at Geneva from 29 August to
28 September 1968 and attended bv ninety-two 11011nuclear-weapon States and four nucléar-weapon States:
France, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of .-\merica,
Having cxamined the Final Document of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-\Veapon States,22
. A¡,prcciating the importance of the consideration
gn-en by the participants in the Conference to the
~roblems of achi.~ving a universal peace and, in particular, the secunty of non-nnc\ear-weapon States the
cessati<?n of the nuclear arms race, general and ~omplete d1sarmament and the harnessing of nuclear energy
exc\usively for peaceful ¡mrposes,
. N oting that the Conference has adopted the Declaratlon of the Conference of X on-X uclear-\Vea pon Sta tes
ancl fourteen resolutions containincr various recommendations,23
"
W dcoming the constrnctin proposals adopted by
the Conference,
Considcring that in arder to fulfil thc aims of the
<:;onference it is 11ecessary to ensure the implementat1011 of these proposals. \\'hich will require appropriate
action by the international boclies and Gm·ernments
concernerl.
1\í oting in particular the decision of the Conference
i~viting the ~enera\ Assembly at its twenty-third sess1011 to cons1der the best ways ancl means of implementing its decisions ancl continuing the work that has
been umlertaken,
1. T:ndorscs the Declaration of the Conference of
:N'on-Xuclear-\Veapon States;
2. Tafrs note of the reso!utions adopted by the
Conference;
3. Rcqucsts the Secretan·-General to transmit the
resolutions and the Declarat1on to the Governments of
States Members of the United :Xations and members
of the specialized agencies and of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, and to the international bodies
concerned, for their careful consideration;
4. !nvitcs the specialized agencies, the International
Ato1111c Energy Agency ancl other international bodies
concerned to report to the Secretary-General on the
action taken by them in connexion with the recommendatio11s contained in the respective resolutions of the
Confercnce :
5. Invites the International Bank for Reconstruction ancl Development. the United Nations Development Progra111111e and the I11ternational Atomic Energy
Agency to continue. in consultation with their member
States, the stmlv of the recommendations of concern
to those organizátions. containecl in resolntion J of the
Conference ;
6. Requcsts the Secretary-General to snbmit a comprehensive report based on the infor111ation supplied
by those concerned on the progress achie\·ed in the
2 2 Official Rccords of tire Ge11eral Assembl\', Twml)'-tl1ird
Snsio11, agenda item 96, documcnt A/7277 and Corr.l and 2.
~3/bid., para. 17.

13

implementation of the present resolution for consideration by the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth
session;
7. Furth~r. requests the Secretary-General to place
on the prov1S1onal agenda of the twenty-fourth session
of the General Assembly the question of the implementation, taking into account the reports of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament and the International Ato111ic Energy Agency,
of the results of the Confere11ce of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States, including:
( a) The question of co11veni11g early in 1970 a
meetmg of the United Natio11s Disarmament Commission to consider disarmament and the related question
of the security of nations ;
. ( b) The questio11 of further internatio11al co-operat1011 111 the peacefnl uses of nuclear energy with particular regard to the special needs and interests of
developing countries ;
8. Furtlzer requests the Secretary-General, in accorda11ce with resolution G of the Confere11ce, to appoi11t a
group of experts, chosen 011 a personal basis, to prepare
a foil report 011 ali possible contributions of nuclear
technology to the economic a11d scientific advancement
of the developing countries;
9. Endorses the recommendation that the SecretaryGeneral should draw the attention of the group of
experts to the desirability of taking advantage of the
experience of the International Atomic Energy Agency
in preparing the report ;
10. Rcquests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report to the Governments of States Members of
the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies and of the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency
in time to permit its consideration by the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session.
1750th pTenary meeting.
20 Decr111bcr 1968.

B

Tire General Asscmbl-y,
Having e.rnmincd the Final Document of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-\Veapon States, 2 ~
Considering that the establish111ent of zones free from
nuclear weapons, on the initiative of the States situated
within each zone concerned, is one of the measures
whi~h ca.n contribute . most effectively to halting the
prohferat1011 of those mstruments of mass destruction
and to promoting progress towards nuclear disarmament,
Observing that the Treaty for the Prohibitio11 of
~ uclear \V eapons in Latin America, 25 opened for
s1gnature on 14 February 1967, has already established
a nuclear-weapon-free zone comprising territories
de.nsely populatecl hy man,
Reiterates the recommendation contai11ed in resolution B of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon
States, concerning the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree 2:ones, and especially the urgent appeal for full
comphance by the nuclear-weapon Powers with paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 2286 (XXII)
of 5 December 1967. in which the Assembly invited
~ 4 !bid., document A/7277 and Corr.1 and 2.

25 lbid., Twtnty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 91,
document A/C. l /946.

14

General A11emhl:,-Tweaty-third Seulon

Powers possessing nuclear weapons to sign and ratify
as soon as possible Additional Protocol II of the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America.
1750th ple·nary meeting,
20 Deccmbcr 1968.

e
The General Asse111bly,
Ha,z,.¡ng considcrcd the Final Docmnent of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-,Veapon States,20
Observing that the use of explosive nuclear devices
for peacefttl purposes will have an extraordinary importance in the light of the technical documents prepared for the Confcrence at the request of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations,
Recalling the statements made at the 1577th meeting
of the First Committee by the representatives of the
Co-Chairmen of the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to the effect that it will
be convenient to initiate promptly the preparatory work
for the determination of what appropriate principies
and international procedures could be adopted in_ or~er
that the potential benefits of any peaceful apphcat1on
of nuclear explosions might be made availa?le, with
due consideration for the needs of the developmg areas
of the world,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in
consultation with the States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and with
the co-operation of the latter and of those specialized
agencies that he may consider pertinent, a report on
the establishment, within the framework of the International Atomic Energy Agency, of an international
service for nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes,
under appropriate international control;
2. F11rthc1· 1·cq11ests the Secretary-General to transmit the report to the Governments of the States mentioned in paragraph 1 above in time to permit its consideration by the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth
session.
1750th p!cna.ry meeting,
20 December 1968.

D
The General Assembly,
N oting the recommendation contained in resolution
D of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States,
Considering that, pursuant to the agreement reached
in July 1968 by the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America to enter into bilateral discussions on the limitation of both offensive strategic nuclear-weapon delivery
systems and systems of defence against ballistic missiles,
such discussions could lead to the cessation of the
nuclear arms race and to the achievement of nuclear
disarmament and relaxation of tensions,
Urges the Governments of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
to enter at an early date into bilateral discussions on
the limitation of offensive strategic nuclear-weapon
·2e /bid.,

Twenty-tlrird Session, agenda item 96, document

A/7277 and Corr.1 and 2.

delivery systems and systems of defence against ballistic
missiles.
1750th plenary meeting,
20 December 1968.

2466 (XXIII). The Korean queetion
Tl1e General Assembly,
Ha1.:ing n.otcd the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea,
signed at Seoul, Korea, on 24 August 1968,27
Rcaffinning its resolution 2269 (XXII) of 16 November 1967 and previous resolutions on the Korean question noted therein,
Recognizing that the continuecl division of Korea
does not correspond to the wishes of the Korean people
ancl constitutes a source of tension which pre.vents the
ful! restoration of internanonal peace and security in
the arca,
Recalling that the United Nations, under the Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to maintain peace and security and to extend
its good offices in seeking a peaceful settlement in
Korea in accordance ,vith the purposes and principies
of the Charter,
An.rious that progress be made towards creating
conditions which would facilitate the reunification of
Korea on the basis of the freely expressed will of the
Korean people,
Conccrned at reports of recent events in Korea
which, if continued, coulcl hamper efforts to create the
peaceful conditions which are one of the prerequisites
for the establishment of a unified and independent
Korea.
l. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United
Nations in Korea are to bring about, by peaceful means,
the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic Korea under a representative form of government, and the full restoration of international peace
and security in the area ;
2. Expresses the belief that arrangements should be
made to achieve these objectives through genuinely free
elections held in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly ;
3. Calls for co-operation in the easing of tensions
in the area and, in particular, for the avoidance of
incidents and activities in violation of the Armistice
Agreement of 1953;
4. No tes with approval the efforts made by the
United Nations Commission for the Unification and
Rehabilitation of Korea, in pursuit of its mandate, to
encourage the exercise of restraint and the easing
of tensions in the arca and to secure maximum support, assistance and co-operation in the realization of
the peaceful reunification of Korea;
5. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to pursue these
and other efforts to achieve the objectives of the United
Nations in Korea, to continue to carry out the tasks
previously assigned to it by the General Assembly
and to keep members of the Assembly informed on the
situation in the area and on the results of these efforts
through regular reports submitted to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Assembly as appropriate, the first
report to be submitted to the Secretary-General no
later than four months after the adoption of the present
resolution ;

27 /bid., Twenty-third Session, Swpple,nent No. 12 (A/7212).
