316
General Assembly-Fortieth Session
----··-----·-·--·---------------~---------------------------14.

Article 45 "Loss ofa right to invoke a ground for invahdating, terminating, withdrawing from or suspending the operation of a
treaty"
15. Article 46 "Provisions of internal law of a State and rules of an
international organization regarding competence to conclude treaties"
- paragraph 2
-paragmph 3
-paragraph 4
16. Article 56 "Denunciation of or withdrawal from a treaty containing no provision regarding termination, denunciation or withdrawal"
17.

Article 61 "Supervening impossibility of performance"

18.

Article 62 "Fundamental change of circumstances"

19.

Article 65 "Procedure to be followed with respect to invalidity, termination, withdrawal from or suspensions of the operation of a
treaty"
-paragraph 3

20.

Article 66 "Procedures for arbitration and conciliation"

21.

Article 7 3 "Cases of succession of States, responsibility of a State
or ofan international organization, outbreak of hostilities, termination of the existence of an organization and termination of participation by a State in the membership of an organization"

22.

Article 75 "Case of an aggressor State"

23. Article 77 "Functions of depositaries"
24. Annex "Arbitration and conciliation procedures established in
application of article 66"
ANNEX III
Draft final clauses

{Based on those of the I 969 Vienna Convention on the
Law of T reaties 46 )
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 81

SIGNATURE
The present Convention shall be open for signature until ... (date,
month, year) at the Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Austria, and subsequently, until .. (date, month, year), at the United
Nattons Headquarters, New York by:
(a)

All States;

(b)

Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia;

International organizations invited to participate in the United
Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organizations or between International Organi,ations.
(c)

Artie/I' 82

RATiflCATION OR ACT OF FORMAL CONFIRMATION
The present Convention is subject to ratification by States and by
Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia, and to
acts of formal confirmation by international organizations. The instruments of ratification and those relating to acts of formal confirmation shall
be deposited with the Secretary-Geneml of the United Nations.
Article 83

ACCESSION
The present Convention shall remain open for accession by any
State, by Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for
Namibia, and by any international organization which has the capacity to
conclude treatie~.
I.

2. An instrument of accession of an international organization shall
contain a declaration that JI has the capacity to conclude treaties.
3. The instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary
General of the lJ nited Nations.
46 Offina/ Records of the United Nat,ons Conference un the Law ojTreaties,
Frrst and Second Sessions. Vienna, 26 March-24 May 1968 and 9 April-2:
May 1969, Documents of the Conference (United Nations publicat,on, Sales
No. E.70 V.5), p. 287

Article 84

ENTRY INTO FORCE
The present Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
following the date of deposit of the ... instrument of ratification or accession by States or by Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council
for Namibia.
2 For each State or for Namibia, represented by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, ratifying or acceding to the Convention after the conditton specified in paragraph I has been fulfilled, the Convention shall
enter into force on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State or by
Namibia of its instrument of ratification or accession.
3 For each international organization depositing an instrument
relating to an act of formal confirmation or an instrument of accession, the
Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day after such deposit,
provided that it shall not so enter into force before the Convention enters
,nto force pursuant to paragraph I.
Article 85

AUTHENTIC TEXTS
The original of the present Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese,
r.nglish, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned Plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized by their respective Governments, and duly authorized representatives of the United Nations Council for Namibia and of international
organi1ations have signed the present Convention.
DONE AT VIENNA this. day of. . one thousand nine hundred and
eighty-six.

40177. Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, 47
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 48
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of those missions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
Having considered the concerns regarding recent legislation of the host country pertaining to the travel of certain
members of the Secretariat,
Taking note of the positions of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the host country with regard to the
application by the host country of the above-mentioned
legislation,
l. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 56 of its report; 47
2. Strongly condemns any terrorist and criminal acts
violating the security of missions accredited to the United
Nations and the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to continue to take all necessary measures to ensure effectively the protection, security
47 OjJit:ial Records o( the General Assemb/.v, Fortieth Session, Supp/e,,,,,n,
No. 26 (A/40/26).
48 Resolution 22 A II).

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the ~e__!!O~~!_ _th_e_S_i_x_th_C_om_m_itt_ee
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _3_1_7

and safety of the m1ss10ns accredited to the United
Nations and their personnel, including practicable measures to prohibit illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage
in the perpetration of acts and activities against the security and safety of such missions and representatives;
4. Reiterates that adherence of all Member States to
the Agreement between the United Nations and the
United States of America regarding the Headquarters of
the United Nations 49 and to other relevant agreements is
an indispensable condition for the normal functioning of
the Organization and permanent missions in New York
and underlines the necessity for avoiding any action not
consistent with obligations in accordance with the Agreement and international law;
5. Urges the host country and the Secretary-General to
seek a solution that is in accord with the Agreement with
regard to the recent legislation adopted by the host country;
6. Calls upon countries, especially the host country, to
build up public awareness by explaining, through all available means, the importance of the role played by the
United Nations and all missions accredited to it in the
strengthening of international peace and security;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively
engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United
Nations with the host country and to continue to stress the
importance of effective measures to avoid acts of terrorism, violence and harassment against the missions and
their personnel, as well as the need for any pertinent legislation adopted by the host country to be in accord with the
Agreement and its other relevant obligations;
8. Requests the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country to continue its work, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
I I 2th plenary meeting
I I December 1985

40/78.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 686 (VII) of 5 December 1952,
992 (X) of 21 November 1955, 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967, 2552 (XXJV) of 12 December 1969, 2697
(XXV) of 11 December 1970, 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and 3349 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of 27
November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973
and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, by which it established the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and its resolutions 31/28 of29 November 1976, 32/45 of8 December
1977, 33/94 of 16 December 1978, 34/147 of 17 Decem49 Resolution 169 (II).
50 Offeial Records of the General Assembly. Th,rrv-.,eventh Semon. Sup
plement No. 1 (N37/I)
5! Ibid., Thirty-ninth S,•sswn. Supp/emPnr /\lo I (A ·19; 1).

ber 1979, 35/164 of 15 December 1980, 36/122 of 11
December 1981, 37/114 of 16 December 1982, 38/141 of
19 December 1983 and 39/88 of 13 December 1984,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the work of the Organization submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh, 50 thirty-ninth 51 and fortieth 52 sessions, as well as of the views and comments
expressed on them by Member States,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization on the work of the
session it held in 1985, 53
Taking into account the work accomplished on the
working paper on the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace and of situations which may lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute, 54
Taking into account the elaboration by the Special Committee of the outline for the handbook on the peaceful settlement of disputes between States and the conclusions
thereon, 20
Noting the importance that pre-session consultations
among the members of the Special Committee and other
interested States may have in facilitating the fulfilment of
its task,
Considering that the Special Committee has not yet fulfilled the mandate entrusted to it,
I. rakes note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall convene
its next session from 7 April to 2 May 1986;
3. Requests the Special Committee at its session in
1986:
(a) lo accord priority, by devoting more time, to the
question of the maintenance of international peace and
security in all its aspects in order to strengthen the role of
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, and
to enable it to discharge fully its responsibilities under the
Charter in this field; this necessitates the examination,
inter alia, of the prevention and removal of threats to the
peace and of situations which may lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute; the Special Committee
will work on all questions with the aim of submitting its
conclusions to the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraph 5 below, for the adoption of such recommendations as the Assembly deems appropriate; in doing so, the
Special Committee should work expeditiously on the
working paper on the prevention and removal of threats to
the peace and of situations that may lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute, or any revision thereof, as
well as other proposals which might be made on that question, with a view to completing its consideration thereof;
(h) To continue its work on the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States and, in this context:
(i) To continue consideration of the proposal contained in the working papers on the establishment
of a commission on good offices, mediation and
conciliation; 19
(ii) To examine the progress report of the SecretaryGeneral on the elaboration of the draft handbook
on the peaceful settlement of disputes between
States;
' 2 Th,d. l·orr,erh Sessum, Supplement No. l (A/401 I).
' 1 th,d. Supplement No 3J (A•40i3J and Corr. I).
'4 Thul S<"ct 111
