s

UNITED
NATIONS
-- ---.... -----·-·

------------------

Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/18439
31 October 1986
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL1 ARABIC/ENGLISH/FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
After consultations among members of the Security Council, the President of
the Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council at the 2719th
meeting of the Security Council on 31 October 1986, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in the Middle F.ast"s
"The members of the Security Council have noted with appreciation the
report (S/18396 and Corr.I) submitted by the Secretary-General in conformity
with Security Council resolution 587 (1986) requesting him to take any further
measures needed to enhance the security of the men of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), and to make the necessary arrangements for
a deployment of the Force to the southern border of Lebanon,
"They express their gravest concern that the basic objectives of Security
Council resolution 425 (1978) have not yet been achieved.
"The members of the Council take note of the consultations initiated by
the Secretary-General with the parties concerned and others with a view to the
implementation of the mandate of UNIFIL. While they regret that the
consultations aimed at impleme,~ing resolution 425 (1978) have thus far failed
to yield practical results, th1 members of the Council request the
Secretary-General actively to pursue his contacts.
"They note the new security measures decided upon since the adoption of
the resolution, They request the Secretary-General to suggest any other steps
he may deem necessary for increased security in connection with the movements
of the Force indispensable for the fulfilment of its mandate. They approve
the proposals submitten by the Secretary-General in his report and his
intention to seek the approval of the General Assembly for necessary budgetary
appropriation. In that connection, they call on all countries to assume their
financial responsihilities towards UNIFIL and on the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts to expedite the reimbursement of the advances of funds
made by the contributor countries.
"They notF> with interest the instructions given hy the Secretary-General
to the Commander of UNIFIL to keep under continuous review all the
86-28331

192'in (E)

/

...

~'./18439
English
Page 2
possibilities of varying the size and deplo1·ment of contingents if that would
strengthen their security without jeopardizing the effectiveness of the
Force. They reaueat the Secretary-General to study these possibilities in
consultation with the contributing countries and to put appropriate measures
into effect.
"In that regard, they have noted with satisfaction the intention
expressed by the Lebanese authorities to deploy a regular unit of their army
in the UNIFIL zone to work in close liaison with the Force in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 425 (1978).
Monce again, the members of the Security Council urge all the parties
concerned to give full support to the Force in the fulfilment of its mandate
and also call for an end to any military presence in southern Lebanon which is
not accepted by the Lebanese authorities. They call on the Secretary-General
to intensify his efforts to secure the full and effective implementation of
resolution 425 (1978)."

lo~,

•••
