United Nations

A/RES/69/288

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 June 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 19 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 June 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.73)]

69/288. Comprehensive review of United Nations system support
for small island developing States
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Barbados1 and the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 2 the Mauritius
Declaration 3 and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, 4 the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa
Pathway) 5 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation),6 including chapter VII, on the
sustainable development of small island developing States,
Urging the speedy implementation, in an effective manner, of the outcome
document of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States,
Samoa Pathway,
Recalling its resolution 69/217 of 19 December 2014, and in particular
paragraph 12 thereof, in which it requested the Joint Inspection Unit to make
recommendations in order to facilitate the work of the General Assembly at its
sixty-ninth session in determining, as soon as possible, and by no later than March
2015, the parameters for a comprehensive review of United Nations system support
for small island developing States,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
containing the recommendations for the determination of parameters for a
_______________
1

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
4
Ibid., annex II.
5
Resolution 69/15, annex.
6
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.

15-09196 (E)

*1509196*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/288

Comprehensive review of United Nations system support for small island developing States

comprehensive review of United Nations system support for small island developing
States;7
2.
Requests the Joint Inspection Unit, on the basis of the recommendations
and findings outlined in its report, to conduct a comprehensive review of United
Nations system support for small island developing States, with a view to enhancing
the overall effectiveness of such support and respective roles in supporting the
sustainable development of small island developing States in order to ensure a
coherent and coordinated approach by the United Nations system to further improve
and strengthen its overall effectiveness and delivery with respect to small island
developing States and the implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,2 the Mauritius Strategy
for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States4 and the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,5 and emphasizes that the review should be
undertaken in the most efficient and cost-effective manner;
3.
Requests that the initial findings of the review and the recommendations
thereon be included in the regular report of the Secretary-General to be submitted to
the General Assembly at its seventieth session under the sub-item entitled “Followup to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States” of the item entitled “Sustainable development”, and notes that the complete
results should be included as an addendum to the report before the end of the
seventieth session;
4.
Requests the Joint Inspection Unit, taking into account the ongoing
intergovernmental negotiation processes and the limited time frame available to
present its initial findings, to begin, as soon as possible, its review in relation to
recommendations 2, 3 and 4 of its report.
93rd plenary meeting
8 June 2015

_______________
7

2/2

See A/69/921.
