UNITED
NATIONS

AS
General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
A/51/886
S/1997/347*
2 May 1997
ORIGINAL:

GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Fifty-first session
Agenda item 39
THE SITUATION IN AFGHANISTAN AND ITS
IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL
PEACE AND SECURITY

ENGLISH

SECURITY COUNCIL
Fifty-second year

Identical letters dated 1 May 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and to the
President of the Security Council

I have the honour to refer to General Assembly resolution 51/195 B of
17 December 1996 on the situation in Afghanistan and to my report of
16 March 1997 (A/51/838-S/1997/240 and Corr.1), issued pursuant to that
resolution. In paragraph 24 of that report I expressed my belief that the
United Nations and its Member States had to increase efforts to address the
Afghan question before the situation deteriorated even further. I underlined
that it was necessary for all of us to coordinate our efforts so as to increase
international pressure on the Afghan parties to solve the conflict in a peaceful
way. To that end, I suggested that I might convene another meeting of concerned
countries, using the formula that had been adopted for the meeting held in New
York on 18 November 1996.
At my request, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Kieran Prendergast, presided over such an informal consultative meeting in
New York on 16 April 1997. Representatives of China, Egypt, France, Germany,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Tajikistan,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uzbekistan and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference participated.
The purpose of the meeting was to reassess the situation following recent
political and military developments and to discuss how best to promote a

* Reissued for technical reasons.

97-11690 (E)

020597

/...

A/51/886
S/1997/347
English
Page 2

negotiated settlement of the conflict and reinforce the United Nations
peacemaking efforts.
The meeting demonstrated that consensus continues to exist on the grave
dangers of continued armed conflict for the region and on the central role of
the United Nations in coordinating efforts to achieve a peaceful solution. The
participants uniformly appreciated the efforts of Mr. Norbert Holl and of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to promote agreement on a
ceasefire and negotiations between the factions. While recognizing the need for
all concerned countries to be involved in the search for peace, they also
stressed that such initiatives should be coordinated with the United Nations.
All participants agreed that the territorial integrity and unity of
Afghanistan must be preserved. They supported the view that the only solution
to the conflict remains a national accord based on recognition of the legitimate
interests and rights of all the Afghan people. There was consensus that all
forms of foreign interference must cease, although, as usual, there were
differences on how to achieve this. The flow of arms into Afghanistan remained
a preoccupation and a number of countries supported an arms embargo, referring
to the action taken in that connection by the European Union; some called for
the Security Council to take similar action. Others, however, expressed doubts
about the practical effectiveness of such a measure and whether it could be
applied in an even-handed manner.
There continued to be widespread support for an international conference in
due course to support the results of negotiations. A number of concrete
proposals were put forward for an intra-Afghan dialogue under the auspices of
the United Nations to be held outside Afghanistan, possibly with Member States
as observers. Several participants repeated their offer to host negotiations
and/or a conference. Many favoured the expansion of United Nations
consultations beyond the leadership of the factions to include broadly
representative Afghan communities and personalities. Some particularly
supported the intensification of the contacts of Mr. Holl and the Special
Mission with concerned States.
A number of delegations favoured the increased involvement of the Security
Council in the issue. In the meantime, many expressed the view that the meeting
mechanism which I had initiated in November 1996, of which this was the second
instance, was a useful international framework which could meet more frequently,
even every two months.
I should note the expressions of several of the participants on the
desirability of a more spontaneous exchange of views at these meetings, as well
as the interest of some in giving the deliberations a sharper focus. I am
reflecting on how we might address those concerns together.
All participants voiced their distress at the continued plight of the
Afghan people, with special attention drawn to women and girls. Several
emphasized the connection between a political settlement, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and peace-building. I look forward to exploring further how we
can best harmonize and coordinate policies in the future for the maximum benefit
of the Afghan people.
/...

A/51/886
S/1997/347
English
Page 3

I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter
circulated as a document of the fifty-first session of the General Assembly,
under agenda item 39, and of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
