---

UNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
*!\a.];.(j;<*
:,):[L.I‘1’

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

JUN 191985
+.!(6,:.',,:

MEETING:

15 NOVEMBER

... I) i
1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . #. . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/12225) . . . . . . , . , . . . . . , . , . . . , . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l971)

S/PV. 1971

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capita1 letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Qfficial Records of .the Security Col~ncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions m7d
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

1971st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

(Panama).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l971)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application
of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for admission
to membership in the United Nations (S/12225)

Adoption of the agenda

15 November

1976, at 11 a.m.

Socialist
Republic)
the places resewed
chamber.

nrld MI-. Petri6 (Yugoslalsin)
took
for them crt the side of the Corlncil

2. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretntion
fioru
Spcrrlish):
I should like to inform the members of the Security
Council that I have received letters from the representatives of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Democratic Yemen, India and Mexico asking to be
invited to participate in the Council’s deliberations
on the item before it. If I hear no objection, therefore,
I propose to invite the representatives I have mentioned
to participate in the debate without the right to vote in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
3. I invite the representatives I have mentioned to
take the places rese’rved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when they wish to address the Council.

The crgcwdcr WCISrrdopted.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the Application of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership
in the United Nations (S/12225)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpr’ettrtion
~fiwt Spcrnish):
In accordance with the decision taken at the
1970th meeting, I now, with the consent of the
Council, invite the representatives
of Bulgaria,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic
Kampuchea,
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Malta, Mongolia,
Poland, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic and Yugoslavia to participate
in the debate without the right to vote.

4. The PRESIDENT
(irrterpretution
,fh~rr
Spc!rrislz):
The first speaker is the representative of Poland.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
5. Mr. JAROSZEK
(Poland): Mr. President, your
presidency of the Security Council will go down in
the annals of the United Nations as one during
which the Council considered an item of great
historical significance-the
application of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for admission to membership
in the United Nations. The Polish delegation congratulates you on this occasion and is happy to see the
eminent representative of friendly Panama presiding
over this important debate. We are grateful both to
you and to the entire Council for allowing us to offer
our own contribution to further the just cause of the
people of Viet Nam, which the people and Government of Poland have consistently supported for
more than three decades now.

tions under the Charter. Supported by 123 States, the
resolution was not opposed by a single Member of the
United Nations. Indeed, we take the present debate
to be in conformity with, and an implementation
of,
that resolution, based as it was on the only valid
criteria for admission to the United Nations provided
for in Article 4 of the Charter. Therefore, as Poland’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Stefan Olszowski, put
it in the general debate of the current session:

6. As we join in the Council’s discussion of the
subject, we wish to point to at least two important
aspects of the case.
7. The first is a historical reminder. Since President
Ho Chi Minh, more than 31 years ago, solemnly
declared Viet Nam’s independence-although
the
question of the plight of the Vietnamese people had
as such never been inscribed as a separate item on
the Organization’s
agenda-the
name of that brave
country has thousands of times been entered in the
records.of the Unit&d Nations. In the course of that
period, the people of Viet Nam has valiantly overcome all its hardships, managed courageously to
repel armed aggressions-paying
as it did the greatest
of prices, with the lives of its own sons and daughters.
Today there is hardly a family in Viet Nam that has
not mourned one or more of its missing members.

“We favour the prompt admission to the United
Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
which has paid dearly for its right to independent
existence. This State satisfies all the requirements
for membership set out in the Charter and should
take its rightful place in the United Nations family..“’
13. This year we are dealing with the case in a new
form. In conformity with the will of their people,
the two Vietnamese States have decided to, form
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. That fact alone
has done away with last year’s flimsy pretext for
vetoing Viet Nam’s admission to the United Nations.

8. Having obtained its independence,
the people
of Viet Nam vigorously took up the enormous task
of post-war reconstruction and promotion of friendly
relations and co-operation with other nations on the
basis of respect for national independence,
sovereignty, equality, mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence, to mention only its impressive progress in the
normalization
of relations with Viet Nam’s neighbours
in South-East Asia. The free Republic has given
ample testimony of its best political will and desire
for accommodation
with all. Nobody can deny that
the developments in and around Viet Nam since its
complete liberation have been a major contribution
to the strengthening of international
peace and security
in both South-East Asia and the world at large.

14. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is a peaceloving State. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
accepts the obligations contained in the Charter. The
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is able and willing
to carry out those obligations. The Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam needs no other credentials to blcome a
full Member of the United Nations, as no others
are constitutionally
required nor have they ever been
expected of any other prospective Member of the
Organization.

9. In fact, the historic meaning of the recent unification of Viet Nam and the emergence of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam transcend by far the significance
of many a political event of recent years. In this firm
conviction,
we heartily
welcome
in our midst
Mr. Dinh Ba Thi in his new capacity as the Permanent
Observer for the new, united and socialist Viet Nam.

15. It is all the more regrettable that in recent
months a new “reason”
has been invented an
advanced to block Viet Nam’s membership in the
Organization,
cme which rests exclusively within
the realm of bilateral relations and has nothing to do
with the criteria for such membership.
Unless one
intends to undermine the very principle of sovereign
equality of States, as enshrined in the Charter, it is
inadmissible to set up new conditions for membership
in the United Nations, especially‘conditions
of a totally
unrelated nature.

10. Second is the need to respect the purposes and
principles upon which the United Nations is based.
Il.
Viet Nam’s application for admission to United
Nations membership is not new to us. Only one year
ago the Security Council and the General Assembly
both considered the applications
of the Democratic
.Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South
Viet Nam. On groundless and irrelevant pretexts,
the Council was prevented from taking the only
politically
sound and historically
just decision of
recommending the two States for membership in the
United Nations.

16. The Polish delegation is, therefore, in full agreement with the recent recommendations
of the Fifth
Conferencie of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries at Colombo, on Viet Nam’s
admission to the United Nations,* as well as with the
communiquC of 8 September by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries, which stressed
that:
“any opposition to the admission of Viet Nam to
the United Nations is legally and morally irrelevant,
indefensible
and unjustifiable,
contrary to the
Charter and an affront to the express wishes of the
overwhelming
majority of the Members of the
United Nations.” [S//2/98, NIIIICJ.Y]

12. Consequently,
last year Poland, together with
more than 60 other Member States, joined in sponsoring General Assembly
resolution
3366 (XXX),
which fully recognized the ability and willingness of
the two Vietnamese States to carry out their obliga2

,:;

17. The Polish delegation profoundly believes that
the C6uncil should take the only correct decision in
spite of artifically created difficulties, to recommend to
the General Assembly Viet Nam’s admission to
membership in the United Nations. In the present-day
interrelated and interdependent
world, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam needs the United Nations as
much as the Organization needs the Socialist Republic
of Vie1 Nam.

of heroism and sacrifice. For that they paid a heavy
price in barbaric mass destruction and plunder. What
else are they asked to deliver now? If anything,
they should be compensated, and with penitence,
and they should be welcomed into the hall of the
General Assembly with dignity.
24. The veto cast by the United States to block
the admission to membership of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam in the United Nations in no way casts a
blemish on the stature and respect which the Vietnamese had earned on the battlefield. Alas, in the
Security Council their own adversary poses as a judge
invoking irrelevant matters to block their admission.
In accordance with the principles and purposes of the
Charter, and especially Article 4, there is no legal jusiification for depriving the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam of membership in the Organization. Viet Nam is a
peace-loving State which has accepted the obligations
contained in the Carter. It would be preposterous to
suggest that it is either not able or not willing to
carry out those obligations. If it is not for reasons of
political
expediency or maybe even of political
extortion, why then should the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam be denied its right to membership in accordance with the Charter?

18. Its membership will only strengthen the United
Nations further and consolidate its universality;
its
admission will constitute an act of historical justice
towards the people of Viet Nam; it will accelerate
and facilitate
United Nations participation
in the
reconstruction and development of Viet Nam; it will
be an event in harmony with the processes of ditente
and the broadly conceived normalization
of international relations.
19. Mindful of the great advantages to the international community of Viet Nam’s admission to the
United Nations, I pledge Poland’s unreserved support
for that cause and its readiness to pursue all the efforts
to bring it to fruition.
20. The PRESIDENT
(intrrprPtrrtion.~[~‘01?1
Spmi.rh):
The speaker is the representative
of Democratic
Yemen. I invite the representative of Democratic
Yemen to take a place .at the Council table and to
make his statement.

25. Bilateral
issues between the United States
Government and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
should be resolved bilaterally. The United States,
as a permanent member of the Security Council, is
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Security Council should not be used
as a vechicle to promote the selfish interests of one
of its permanent members.

21. Mr. ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen): Mr. President, my delegation is happy to be allowed to address
the Security Council under your wise leadership
and to pay tribute to your outstanding qualities and
to your country’s energetic role in asserting its sovereignty and independence in the face of imperialist
pressure.

26. Today, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is not
only a full member of the non-aligned movement; it is
also an elected member of its Co-ordinating Bureau.
That is a tribute to its long and triumphant struggle
against imperialism. It is also a tribute to its policy of
peaceful coexistence and progress. We should only
be honoured to welcome it to membership in the
United Nations.

22. The Security Council is once again dealing with
the application for membership of the Socialist,Republit of Viet Nam, a country which comes to the United
Nations with a historically
impressive
record of
unrelenting victorious struggle against imperialism.
It is indeed an anomaly that its membership has been
blocked by one permanent inember of the Council,
when the overwhelming majority of both the Genera1
Assembly and the Council has voted for its admission
to the United Nations.
23.

27. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): In July last year, soon
after Viet Nam had emerged victorious from a fierce
struggle for freedom and independence, its people, then
under two administrations,
applied for membership
in the United Nations. During those long years of
struggle, the Vietnamese had confronted the most
awesome and destructive explosive power ever
unleashed against any people. They had withstood
the onslaught with fortitude, convinced that victory
was inevitable no matter how immense the sacrifices.

The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which proved

to the world that a united people under the vanguard

leadership of a progressive party can win a clear
victory over highly sophisticated
armies, already
earned its membership in the international
community
when the foreign .soldiers scrambled for their lives,
out of Viet Nam, on board rescue ships and planes.
Indeed, the Vietnamese people had been hailed and
supported by the peoples of the world long before
their stunning victory over imperialism;
for they have
in contemporary history written the most brilliant pages

28. The fate of those applications is a matter of public
record. On 11 August 1975 [183&h /?leelhg], the
legitimate aspiration of the Vietnamese people for the
membership of their States in the United Nations was
frustrated in the Council by the use of the veto. That
result, to say the .least, was unfortunate. It was
3

.I+. ”

--

therefore not surprising that, a few weeks later, the
General Assembly requested the. Council to reconsider
the applications.
The General Assembly resolution
embodying that request, resolution 3366 (XXX), was
adopted without a dissenting vote. However, on
30 September 197.5[1846th /?7eefing], the veto was once
again used to deny the Vietnamese people representation in the United Nations.

with the normalization
of relations between one
State Member of the United Nations-a
permanent
member of the Council-and
the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam should be a necessary condition of the
admission of the latter Republic to the United Nations
and that an absence of agreement between the two
parties provides a sufficient reason for a negative vote
by the former.

29. Since then, the Vietnamese people have reunited
their country and vigorously set about the reconstruction of their war-torn society. In international
affairs, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam currently
maintains diplomatic
relations with many Member
States, and, as a member of the Co-ordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Countries, the Socialist Republic
plays an active and constructive role in our deliberations and decisions.

34. In the first place, one is entitled to enquire
whether a matter essentially of bilateral concern, which
derives from a prolonged military conflict involving
much violence and imposed upon an applicant fol
membership, properly falls within the ambit of Article4
of the Charter and’ should therefore influence the
consideration of the application by the Security Council. My delegation thinks not. Since the issue is ;I
bilateral one between two sovereign States seeking to
adjust their relations, my delegation will refrain from
commenting on the substance of the question. Guyana
has never been engaged in a battle, save the battle
for survival. But, in the second place, are we not
entitled to ‘ask whether wars in modern times have
ever led to the full accountability for all participating
personnel by the parties involved?

30. It is the application of this peace-loving State
for membership in the United Nations that the Council
is now considering.
31. I suggest that it would be instructive to recall
the stated reasons given last year when applications
from what were then two Vietnamese States attracted
vetoes in quick succession. Speaking in the Council
on 11 August 1975, Mr. Daniel Patrick Moynihan,
the then representative of the United States, said,
inter cilicr : “But we must not apply partisan political
tests to membership. The United Nations cannot work
if we do”. [S/PV./836, patw. 116.1 Again, on 26 September 1975, it was Mr. Moynihan who stated: “It is
not my Government’s desire in any way to stand in
the way of admission of the Democratic Republic of
Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam, but
my Government
will continue to support in every
feasible way the desire of Republic of Korea to
participate as a Member in the United Nations”,
[S/PV./842,
pwa. 101.1 Further, on 30 $eptember
1975, after casting a tiegative vote Mr. Moynihan
positively asserted: “The United States favours the
admission of all qualified States desiring membership, including, I repeat, the Viet Nam”. [S/PV.18#6,
poru. 49.1

I

35. Operating strictly within the norms of international law and practice regarding relations between
States, my delegation wishes both countries-the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the United States
of America-all
success in their efforts to overcome
such obstacles as stand in the way of their constructing
their bilateral relations on the basis of sovereign w.
equality and mutual respect. While such endeavours
are under way, however, the Council should not be
deflected by them from fulfilling its responsibilities
under the Charter.
36. Three decades of prolonged and violent struggle
for freedom and independence have fortified the
appreciation of the people of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam of the true meaning of justice and of
peace. They come to us today with the confidence
of people who know what suffering is. They come to
us today with an expectation that the harsh lessons
of their recent experience will not be lost on the
members of the Security Council and that no member
of the Council will retreat from the clear principles
involved and succumb to the blandishments of naked
power. For the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam knows
that the overwhelming
majority of the international
community, impelled by the precepts of equity and
justice, sustained by moral conviction and convinced
of the logic of history, shares its desire that it become
a Member of the United Nations. Guyana is unequivocally committed to the goal of universality of membership in the United Nations, and we would support
all genuine efforts designed to advance the achievement of that objective.

32. An ordinary reading of the full statements made
on behalf of the United States in last year’s debates
leaves my delegation with the belief that it is not the
contention of the United States that the twd States
were not qualified for membership of the United
Nations. The United States, it appears, then based its
position on dther considerations-the
parallel application of the Republic of Korea-which
need not
detain us here.
33. Suffice it to say that, to the knowledge of my
delegation, such considerations are not now advanced
in relation to the present application. Yet, a metamorphosis of a kind seems to have taken place. It is
understood that the argument is being advanced that
an issue which is intertwined with processes connected

37. We are convinced that the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam is fully qualified for membership in the
4

[Jnited Nations. A positive recommendation
from
tlhe Council on the application before us would be
just for the Vietnamese people and would further the
universality
of membership
in the Organization.
Such a recommendation
would, I am sure, be welcomed by the totality of the membership
of the
Organization.

heroically for its freedom and self-determination,
in the face of an incomparably superior power, as
the People of Viet Nam. The struggle of the Vietnamese people has been and still is a source of
inspiration and encouragement to every other people
struggling
against foreign aggression and alien
ocupation. The objectives of that heroic struggle of
the Vietnamese
people are, the very objectives
advocated and recognized for every people in the
Charter of the United Nations.

38. A special responsibility
therefore devolves
upon the Council in this instance. The application
s’hould be assessed on its merits and an appropriate
recommendation
made. The Council should not be
imprisoned by circumstances outside the merits of
the application so that the exercise of its authority
is stayed. Each and every one of us has a solemn
responsibility
to act within that framework. Let no
one of us now by our actions open the door to the
accusation that we have allowed short-term need to
disfigure our perception.

43. The only conditions laid down in the Charter
for the admission of new Members are those stated
in Article 4, paragraph l-namely,
first, that the
candidate should be a peace-loving State and,
secondly, that it should accept the obligations contained in the Charter. There is a third condition, but
it is not up to the candidate itself, but to the Organization, to prove that that condition has been met. That
condition is the judgement that the candidate is able
and willing to carry out the obligations contained
in the Charter. A positive judgement to that effect
has been repeatedly and overwhelmingly made by the
United Nations. And the competence to make such a
judgement
is given by the Charter the Organization-and
I stress the word “Organization’‘-and
not to the Security Council. This positive judgement
is evident in the resolution adopted almost unanimously
by the General Assembly during the thirtieth session
[/~solr/tion 3366 (XXX)], as well as in the special
report of the Security Council to the Assembly,
approved with near unanimity at the 1846th meeting
of the Council, in September 1975.’

39. My delegation unreservedly supports the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
membership in the United Nations. We support it
on the basis of the requirements of the Charter. Let
me say, however, that my delegation remains confident that, should the application be frustrated on
this occasion, reason and justice will eventually
triumph, for those who resist today will be swept
along by the compelling tide of history.
40, In this respect, on 10 November, a number of
countries-Benin,
China, France, the Libyan Arab
IRepublic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden, the
.onion of Soviet Socialist Republics,
the United
Republic of Tanzania and my own, Guyana-spon:sored the draft resolution
in document
S/12226.
IConvinced that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is
fully qualified for membership in the United Nations
in accordance with Article 4 of the Charter, we have
proposed this draft resolution.
It is simple and
straightforward.
It needs no elaboration. The draft
resolution proposes that the Security Council:

44. It is clear, then, that the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam is fully qualified to enjoy membership in
the United Nations, because it fulfils the two conditions required of all applicants and because the
whole Organization, minus one Member. has judged
that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is able and
willing to carry out the obligations contained in the
Charter.
45. It is clear that, in the spirit of the Charter, the
right of veto enjoyed by the permanent members of
the Council cannot be legitimately used in order to
block the admission of a new Member so long as
that new Member is a peace-loving country and accepts
the obligations contained in the Charter. The power
to deny admission is given rather. in Article 4,
paragraph 1, to the Organization as a whole, and not
to the Security Council. That understanding is confirmed in the paragraph 2, of the same Article. which
states:

“l?~c~~n~r~~~n~ls to the General Assembly that the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.”
On behalf of the sponsors, I commend to the members
of the Council the draft resolution in document
S/12226.
41. The PRESIDENT
(intclp~ettrtion ji~j/!l Spr//1ish):
The speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

“The admission of any such State to membership
in the United Nations will be effected by a decision
of the General Assembly upon the recommendation
of the Security Council.”

42. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): If there
exists a country in the world upon which an honorary
membership
of the United
Nations
should be
bestowed-in
addition to the ordinary membershipthat country is the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.
For no people has fought as courageously and as

lt is worth noting here that the action to be taken by
the Security Council is described in .&Tide 4 as a
5

51. The PRESIDENT
(interp~etation~om
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

recommendation,
while the action to be taken by the
Assembly is referred to as a decision.
46. In any event, no country, not even a permanent
member of the Security Council, may impose conditions additional to those contained in Article 4 of
the Charter concerning the admission of new Members to the United Nations. To invoke any other
irrelevant
considerations-such
as the one stated
by the permanent member of the Council which has
so far blocked the admission of the Sociglist Republic
of Viet Nam, is not only unjustified and unacceptable
but is also a violation of the Charter and its provisions.

52. Mr. YANKOV
(Bulgaria):
Mr. President, I
should like to begin by thanking you and the members
of the Security Council for giving me the opportunity
to restate the position of the delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria on the admission of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the
United Nations, I would hasten to add that this is an
issue to which my Government attaches the utmost
importance.

47. In the light of what I have stated, my delegation
is deeply concerned about the isolated attitude taken
by the representative of the United States at the fiftyfifth meeting of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members, held on 10 November 1976. At that
meeting the representative is reported to have stated
that “at that stage and under current circumstances
his Government
was unable to acquiesce in that
application”
[S/1222.5, pruo. 41. He was referring to
the application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

53. I feel particularly gratified also Mr. President,
at being able to avail myself of this opportunity
to
congratulate you cordially on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for the month of November.
In your person we greet the representative of Panama,
with which the People’s Republic of Bulgaria maintains
ties of friendship and co-operation and whose Iegitimate aspirations to independence and full national
sovereignty have always enjoyed the sympathy and
solidarity of the Bulgarian Government and people.

48. My delegation sincerely hopes that the representative of the United States will take a more positive
attitude at the end of the current discussion, an
attitude more worthy of the prestige and responsibilities of the United States and of its role in world leadership and its obligations for the maintenance
of
international peace and security. If he fails to do so,
the United Nations, as represented by its supreme
organ, the General Assembly, will have no alternative
but to act, in fulfilment of its responsibilities under
the Charter and taking into account the precedents,
in order to remedy the abnormal situation resulting
from the abuse of the right of veto by one of the
permanent members of the Council.

54. After 30 years of heroic struggle, in which the
Vietnamese people were coerced to fight because of
foreign military
intervention,
peace was finally
triumphant in that land of suffering and valour. The
final and complete victory of the national liberation
revolution in Viet Nam is not only a victory of the
Vietnamese people but also an important achievement
in the efforts further to strengthen international peace
and security, justice and social progress. This great
victory is also an unequivocal confirmation
of the
significance of international solidarity as an enormous
force today. It shows that a nation fighting selflessly
against imperialism
and relying on the international
support of all progressive, democratic and peaceloving forces of the world will be unvanquished.
AS
the First Secretary of the Central Committee
of the
Bulgarian Communist
Party and President of the
State Council, Todor Zhivkov, said before the Eleventh
Congress of the Bulgarian Communist
Party last
March: “The shining victory of the heroic Vietnamese
people over the imperialist intruders and reaction will
go down in man’s history of struggle for freedom and
socialism”.

49. My delegation believes that the recommendation
proposed to the Security Council in the draft resolution [S//2226] just presented so admirably by the
representative of Guyana is the only just and reasonable recommendation
the Council can make to the
Assembly.- The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is a
fully qualified applicant. It is a peace-loving country.
It is willing and able to undertake and fulfil its obligations under the Charter. The Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam is a full member of the group of nonaligned countries and one of the members of’ its
Co-ordinating Bureau.

5.5. Not long ago, the people of Viet Nam achieved
a major goal of their valiant struggle: the unification
of their homeland. The result was the foundation Of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. This historic
achievement of the Vietnamese people offered new
prospects for the establishment of relations of goodneighbourliness and co-operation among all peoples
in South-East Asia.

50. In an organization where aggressive and racist
rtgimes such as the rigimes of Israel and South Africa
are still Members, it is very hard to understand that the
very same super-Power which advocates the continued
membership of such aggressive rigimes is preventing
the admission of a freedom-and
peace-loving country
such as the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. It is
about time that such upside-down logic was readjusted.

56. In the last hundred years the history of the
nations of that part of the world has shown that
without a united and independent Viet Nam there has
6

never been nor can there ever be lasting peace and
security in that region or in Asia.

session of the General Assembly when the admission
of Viet Nam to the Organization was widely discussed
,in both the Security Council and the General Assembly.
It was explicitly
reaffirmed by Assembly resolution
3366 (XXX).

57. Judged by its economic and human potential,
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is one of the
largest States of Asia. Its international
significance
is increasingly being felt around the world with every
passing day. At present, the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam is a powerful and stabilizing factor in Asia,
ia champion
of peace and understanding
among
nations. It spares no effort to aid the promotion
of
iinternational relations on the basis of strict respect
for the sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
Iintegrity of all States and non-interference
in their
domestic affaires. More than a hundred States of
.Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America have estab!lished diplomatic relations with the Socialist Republic
{of Viet Nam. The latter is also an active and respected
member of the non-aligned movement. Quite a number of international
organizations,
including
some
within the United Nations system, have already
admitted the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam into
their ranks as a full member. All this is so because
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is an important
country in South-East Asia, a country which has
captured the admiration of the world because of its
exemplary courage, dignity and firm adherence to
the lofty ideals of independence, liberty and national
sovereignty.

62. During the national liberation struggle and in the
days ,of peace, despite severe ordeals and countless
sacrifices, the Vietnamese people behaved with the
highest degree of humaneness and magnanimity, which
characterize a great nation. The Government of the
Socialist
Republic
of Viet Nam today continues
to show its good will and readiness to solve any
outstanding international
problems by peaceful means
and through meaningful
and honest negotiations.
We are all witnesses to the fact that such negotiations
are taking place at this moment, as we discuss this
item.
63. We all remember the very recent past when the
whole world witnessed the Vietnamese
people
struggling to defend themselves against an intervention
that nothing could justify. That makes it all the more
imperative for the world to recognize this manifestation of good will and to assess it according to its own
merit.
64. Having in mind all these facts and considerations,
we believe it could hardly be possible to advance any
valid argument of a political or legal nature which
could justify denial of the right of Viet Nam to occupy
its lawful place in the United Nations.

58. Progressive public opinion and all people of good
will have warmly welcomed the unification
of the
Vietnamese people and the formation of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam as an event of paramount
international significance and as a great contribution
to the cause of international and universal peace.

65. Last year the refusal of one permanent member of
the Council to join the position shared by the entire
membership
was veiled in ambiguous and utterly
groundless pretexts with regard to the existence at that
time of two Vietnamese States, though-and
I should
like to emphasize this-almost
the entire membership
of the United
Nations considered
that argument
irrelevant
and expressed the firm view that both
Vietnamese
States were eligible for membership in
the United Nations. Today, with the existence of a
united Viet Nam, any opposition to its admission to the
United Nations on that ground is not only inadmissible but is also absolutely unjustifiable.

59. By their valiant struggle for freedom,
independence and social progress, the Vietnamese
people have manifested to the world their adherence
to the principles of the Charter. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has already provided ample evidence
showing that it is determined to uphold those principles
and to see that they are applied in practice in international relations.
60. Today nobody can deny and, for that matter,
nobody doubts that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam not only has the sincere desire but also the
capacity to fulfil in good faith all obligations
under
the Charter.

66. But now we hear, in complete isolation and
against the common
understanding
of the entire
membership of the Organization, a permanent member
of the Council advancing other opposing arguments.
This time, national
claims and a discriminatory
approach constitute the alleged basis for denying the
right of the unified Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
membership
in the United Nations.

61. The Vietnamese people have already begun to
tend and heal the wounds inflicted upon them by the
long and destructive war. In all its actions the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has
demonstrated its sincere determination
to build the
new life in peace and security. In the eyes of world
public opinion Viet Nam is already a worthy and fullfledged member of the international community.
And
certainly this is not an overstatement. This fact was
recognized at the United Nations during the thirtieth

67. On this point, my delegation agrees with many
previous speakers that bilateral problems of any nature,
and national
allegations,
cannot and must not
determine
the attitude of a Member of the United
Nations in the discharge of its duties and responsibilities as a permanent rhember of the Security Council.
7

&tee on the Admission of New Members is also
very indicative about the degree of support within
the membership of the Council for the admission of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the United
Nations, We would like to believe that justice,
wisdom and a sense of collective responsibility will
prevail in the Council this time.

It would not only be detrimental to the United Nations
but also would inevitably
be harmful to its own
international prestige that a Government should adopt
a negative and filibustering
approach to a problem
of common interest to the Organization as a whole.
We are, therefore, fuIly entitled to expect that a
responsible member of the Council will in this instance
rise above narrow national considerations for political
bargaining in a bilateral dispute and will not create
artificial obstacles to the Organization in its genuine
endeavours to achieve universality and to increase
its efficiency.

72. The peoples of Bulgaria and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam are closely bound by ties of brotherly
friendship
and solidarity.
The Bulgarian people
warmly greeted the victorious end of the struggle of
the Vietnamese people for freedom, independence and
for the unification of their country. Today our two
countries are united again in their common endeavours
for international co-operation, peace and socialism.

68. Such opposition,
as the Co-ordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Countries stated in its declaration,
“is legally and morally irrelevant, indefensible and
unjustifiable,
contrary to the Charter and an affront
to the express wishes, of the overwhelming majority
of the Members of the United Nations representing
the widest possible
spectrum
of international
opinion”.
[S/12198, annex.] That statement of the
Co-ordinating
Bureau was, in fact, issued in pursuance of the Political
Declaration
of the Fifth
Conference of Non-Aligned
Countries.

73. On behalf of the Government
of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, I should like to express our full
and unreserved support for the application of the
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for membership in the United Nations. I should like
to voice our hope that the representatives of the
heroic Vietnamese people will take their place among
us at the current session of the General Assembly.
I am confident that nobody has any doubt about the
significant and constructive contribution
which the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam will make to our
common efforts in pursuit of the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

69. It is, therefore, absolutely inadmissible to make
admission to membership
in the United Nations
dependent on pre-conditions which have nothing to do
with the requirements
of Article 4 of the Charter.
Indeed, those are the pertinent requirements that
are and constitute the only valid criterion in the
consideration
of an application
for membership.
Pretexts and alleged claims cannot strengthen the
arguments against the admission of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, because these arguments are irrelevant from the point of view of the spirit and the
explicit provisions of the Charter, and are dictated by
short-term considerations
of an arbitrary domestic
nature which are not valid and should not be imposed
on the entire membership of the United Nations.

74. Before I conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome most cordially the representatives of the Vietnamese people who are present in this
chamber, I should like to assure them that the
Bulgarian Government and people will continue, as
they did in the difficult days of the struggle for freedom,
to do their utmost to strengthen Bulgarian-Vietnamese
friendship for the triumph of our common goals and
ideals.

70. The absence of the Socialist Republic of Vi&
Nam from the United Nations as a full Member is
equally unjust and harmful to the prestige of the
Organization and to its efficiency. Thus the admission
of Viet Nam to membership
in the United Nations
will be an act of justice. At the same time, it will
constitute yet another step towards the full application
of the principle of universality.
We would like to
believe that Lhe attempts to postpone a decision on
this important question will be discontinued.
The
admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to
full membership in the United Nations is absolutely
indispensable in the interests of peace and international
co-operation.

75. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (irzterllr,r.ctcltir)rz%o/lzFwnch):
Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, I should
like to offer you bur sincere and heartfelt congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month of November. Your
eminent personality,
diplomatic
skill and great
flexibility are well known to all in this chamber,
and my delegation appreciates the high quality of
your participation in the work of this Council. This
indicates how happy our delegation is to see YOU
guiding our work during this important debate on the
application of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for admission to membership in the United Nations.
76. The admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam as a full member in the Organization
would be legitimate. The overwhelming majority of
Member States have enthusiastically
welcomed this
application. How could it be otherwise? The brave and
heroic people of Viet Nam is a great people. The
people of Viet Nam for decades waged an armed

71. In our view, it is very significant that, at the
current session of the General Assembly, as was the
case at the previous session, almost the entire membership of the Organization
is definitely in favour
of the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam to the United’ Nations. The report of the Com8

struggle with the same determination,
the same
dedication and sense of sacrifice against the colonialist
and imperialist armed aggression and the puppetsthose misguided elements which were anti-national
and who betrayed the just cause of the Vietnamese
peo:ple.
77. Neither fighter-bombers
nor the most sophisticated weapons, could not weaken the determination
and courage of that people, which inflicted a bitter
defeat on the most powerful and modern imperialist
army of aggression of all times. That victory, won in
combat, is a victory for all oppressed peoples throughout the world. The VietnnmeSe people triumphed
because its cause was profoundly just.
78. The Vietnamese patriots reunified their country
and since then have launched a vast programme
of national reconstruction.
The whole of the, Vietnamese people , a people of peace, is now working
to eradicate the consequences of the imperialist
war. The authorities
of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam have followed since that time a policy of
non-alignment and openness which show their desire
for frank and sincere co-operation.
The Socialist
Republic of Viet Nnm has now been recognized by
more than 100 States, and it maintains excellent
relations with numerous countries throughout
the
world.
79. Why, then, should the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam be kept to this day outside the Organization,
which wants to he universal? The flJndamenta1 reason
is the United Stutes veto. The abuse of the right of
veto, of which certain permancn( members have
unfortunately becomc the champions in the Council
is based on political
short-sightedness
the consequences of which thrcutcn to become catastrophic
‘l’he rcpeuled USC of its right
for the Organization,
of veto by the United States Government, particularly
with regard to the applicution for ndmission of the
Socialist RepiJhlic of Viet Nam, is based on a
political annlysis which is in no way in keeping with
the present and future interests of the people of the
United Slates.
80. The prohlcm of the missing in action during the
imperialist itggression that was imposed on the Vietnamese pcoplc cannot be used ilS an ar~llITlelll
LO
block the admission
of the Socialist Repilblic
Of
Viet NiJnl to membership in the CJnited Nations. All
the representatives who have spoken here before me
have without difficulty refiJtcd the arguments of the
United States C;ovcrnment, which are comprehensible
only within the logic of the law of the jungle. My delegatiion feels that this problem can be resolved by a
fruiitful co-opcr:Jtion within ;I framework of sincere and
hotbest biI:Jter;~l dialogue between the United States
and lhe Socialist Republic of Viet N:Jm.
XI. The Sociillist Repllblic of Viel Nam 1121s d~‘eadY
prolved to the WO~ICI by m:lny gestures of good will

its profound wish to co-operate with the United
States so as to resolve all the problems that resulted
from the imperialist war in Viet Nam.
82. The use of the veto to block the admission of
a country to membership in the United Nations is
inadmissible. In the present case, the argument about
the missing in action-a
lost *argument about a lost
war-is a form of blackmail for which the American
strategists alone will be held responsible by history.
The United States authorities, which have for decades
failed so pitifully in their imperialist attempt to bring
the Vietnamese people to its knees must now know
better than anybody that the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam will certainly not yield to blackmail.
83. The United Nations is not the proper framework
for this blackmail by the United States. The United
Nations is a vast international house where the great
family of all the peoples gathers to strengthen their
solidarity and their co-operation so as to safeguard
peace and collective security. Therefore, no MembeJ
State has the right to consider this common property
of all the peoples as its own exclusive property.
This international
forum that is the United Nations
should serve as a catalyst to help bring peoples
closer and not for the development
of intrigues
detrimental to international understanding.
84. In the view of my delegation, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam meets all the political and
legal requirements Iaid down in the Charter for admission to membership in the Organiiation. My delegation,
therefore, hopes that there will be a unanimous decision in favour of draft resolution S/12226, recommending the admission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nnm to membership in the United Nations so
that at last the representatives of the courageous
people of yiet Nam can take their rightful place here.
85. The PRESIDENT
(irlrop/,r/rrtio~rJ~o/ll
Sprrnish):
The next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia, Accordingly,
I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
86. Mr. SMID (Czechoslovakia):
Mr. President, let
me first express to you and to the other members
of the Council my delegation’s appreciation of your
having acted positively on our request to address the
Council on a subject that is so important to all of us,
namely, the admission to the United Nations of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. At the same time, may
I congratulate you on discharging the high responsibilities of President of the Council for this month. I do
so with particular pleasure, conscious of the frJendly
relations that have long existed between our two
countries.
87. The admission to the United Nations of the
Socialist Republic of Vict Nam is a matter to which
my Government
attaches the utmost Jmportance.
The Government
and people of the Czechoslovak

Czechoslovakia was one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution that was adopted [resolution 3366 (XXX)]
recommending the admission of the then existing two
Vietnamese States.

Socialist Republic are linked with the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam by ties of long and deep
friendship. Czechoslovakia, together with other States
of the socialist community, has always stood squarely
on the side of the Vietnamese people and has given
them full and active support in their just struggle.
We hail the great victory of the Vietnamese people
over the forces of imperialism and reaction. We hail
with great satisfaction and joy the outstanding achievements already registered in the course of the present
period in overcoming the grave consquences
of
decades of war and in the building of a new, independent, prosperous and united socialist Viet Nam,
The significance of these victories far transcends
nstional boundaries; they are, indeed, ‘a historic contribution to the consolidation of peace and security in
South-East Asia and in the entire world.

92. It would seem that the admission of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the United
Nations should be a matter of course. What we have
witnessed, however, is that the representatives of the
very country which until recently had been waging a
long aggressive war against Viet Nam have also been
preventing its admission to the United Nations through
the improper exercise of the right of veto, linking
matters of a bilateral and a multilateral
character.
Thus, we are told, for instance, that a full report pn
the missing Americans in Viet Nam is to be a precondition of a change in the United States attjtude
to the question of the membership of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam in the United Nations. Concerning that unprecedented position, one can only
repeat what has already been said by the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic
[/97Oth umtiq],
and ask: who will compile the list
of thqse missing Vietnamese men and women-old
men, women and children-who
became victims of
American aggression?

88. Before achieving their historic success, the
Vietnamese people had to experience 30 long and
unbelievably hard years. By the revolution of August
1945, the people of Viet Nam broke the chains of
colonial dependence and established the Democratic
Republic of Viet Nam. The foundation of the Republic,
however, did not mark an end of the struggle. On
the contrary, it was a beginning of a further struggle
for the freedom and independence of the Vietnamese
nation.

93. The same arrogance and chauvinism
and the
same claim to the right to interfere in the fate of
other countries are manifested here as could be seen
and felt in the behaviour of the United States aggressors in Viet Nam, not merely by a friend of the
Vietnamese people but also by any reasonable
observer.

89. For the whole period of the existence of the
Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, the Vietnamese
people have had to fight in a self-sacrificine, way
for their independence. Both French colonialism
and American imperialism suffered defeat in Viet Nam.
Viet Nam has become a symbol for the national
liberation struggle in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
There is no need to stress here the fact that their
heroism and their proven love of independence have
won for the Vietnamese people friends all over
the world.

94. Concerning the United States position on the
question of the admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations, it is
only possible to declare that what has been lost in an
aggressive war cannot be gained at a diplomatic table.
At such a table there can only be achieved the
normalization
of relations between the Vietnamese
and the American peoples and the opening of a new
peaceful era in relations between the two countries-the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the
United States of America-on
the bases of the Paris
Agreement ending the war and restoring peace in
Vie1 Nam, signed in January 1973.s

90. My delegation has frequently explained the
position of Czechoslovakia on the question of the
admission of Viet Nam to membership in the United
Nations. Recently, this position was reiterated in the
statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Czechoslovakia, Mr. Chfioupek, in the general debate
in the current session of the General Assembly:
“We firmly believe that already in the course of
the present session of the General Assembly the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam will become a
Member of the United Nations. The historic contribution of that country to the strengthening of
peace and security in South-East Asia is generally
recognized. This new State which plays an important
role in the affairs of the Asian continent meets
all requirements of the Charter for United Nations
membership.“4

95. The admission of the Socialist Republic
of
Viet Nam to the. United Nations is expected by the
people of the whole world. It is not demanded by the
socialist countries alone. The non-aligned group Of
countries, comprising
States having a variety Of
political systems, unanimously
requested, at theii
recent conference in Colombo,
that one of thei!
important members-the
Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam-should
be admitted
without delay to the
United Nati0ns.l Such an act is quite logical, since
Socialist Viet Nam was one of the first countries to
deal a blow to colonialism.

91. Our position is also documented by the fact that,
at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly,
10

96. The admission of Viet Nam to the United Nations
is an tinambiguous and mater-of-course question fol
the overwhelming
majority
of Member
States,
irrespective of their poli’tical systems, and not merely
an issue for those countries that had their embassies
in Hanoi at the time when American bombs were
falling there.

only have led to an artificial universality,
legitimizing
and rewarding the American policy of
intervention and aggression in Korea, a universality
that would then be unacceptable tb us because it would
not have reflected universal support for the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
could

102. In a similar concern to remain consistent with
the letter and spirit of that Charter, my second remark
consists en reaffirming the message contained in
General Assembly resolution 3366 (XXX) of 19 September
1975, whereby the General Assembly
pronounced itself, without adissenting voice, in favour
of the admission to the United Nations of the two
components of what is now the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam and called on the Security Council to
re-examine the question in the light of the will thus
expressed by the overwhelming majority of Member
States.

97. The admission of this great country, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nnm, to United Nations membership is a political,
moral and juridical
imperative
of our time. The admission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam to the United Nations would undoubtedly
promote the strengthening
of the effectiveness of
what is being done by the United Nations by way of
preserving international peace and security and would
further enhance the prestige of the Organization.
98, The PRESIDENT
(i/rlrlp,.r/trlian,f~onl
Spr/ui.v/z):
I now invite the representative
of Madagascar to
take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
99. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar)fi/ltc~lp~etofiolz
.fio/ll Frr~/~c*/l): Mr. President, permit me on behalf
of the delegation of Madagascar to express to you
our profound satisfaction at the fact that you are
presiding over a debate to which the States members
of the non-aligned movement, of which your country
is one, attach particular importance.
Your objectivity and skill encourage us in the belief that our
cause will triumph, since it has received the support
of most of the Members of the United Nations.
100. Last year, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Madagascar spoke before the Council to support
the double candidacy of the Republic of South Viet
Nam and the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam
for membership
in the United Nations. Speaking
toclay to indicate our support for the single candidacy
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, for my part
and with the Council’s permission, I should like to
emphasize first of all the political importance of the
completion of the process that has led to the restoration of unity in Viet Nam.
101. There is no doubt that that reunification,
which was democratically
and quite independently
accepted by the entire Vietnamese nation, has become
an example and symbol for all peoples whose countries are still artificially
divided or forcibly dismembered. This new historic success won by the
Vietnamese people-and
we must congratulate a11
those instrumental
in that success-has
rendered
politically untenable the argument used against US last
year when the Government of Washington wanted Us
to get backing for its theory of two Koreas under
cover of the Council’s consideration of the applications of the two parts of Viet Nam. We are therefore
pleased that the maturity and political wisdom evinced
by the Vietnamese people have forced the Governnmt
of Washington to abandon an attempt which, at best,
11

103. Today as then our position is that the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
Organization would be of benefit to it and to the
Vietnamese people themselves, We wish to state that
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nun,
recogni.4
c/~,fil~‘to and t/e ,ju,‘e internationally and admitted as a
member of several specialized agencies, fulfils all the
conditions required for admission as a Member of
the Organization. Need I recall that our position is
based on the faith that we have always had in the
determination of the Vietnamese people unreservedly
to adhere to the principles and purposes of the Charter
and to uphold them vigorously when they are.
challenged. It would have been difficult to understand
the deep meaning of the struggle waged by that people
for three decades had ‘we for a second doubted that
that struggle was carried on in defence of the principles and objectives of the Charter, in particular the
principles relating to freedom, progress, social justice
for all men, national independence and self-determination for all peoples. The Vietnamese fighters made
sacrifices to prove that they rejected oppression,
imperialist
exploitation
and foreign intervention.
Were not those sacrifices in fact made so that the
ideals of the Organization might triumph? How can
we then fail to recognize that the United Nations,
which was not able to use its influence to hasten a
settlement of the Vietnamese conflict or lessen the
sufferings of its people, has a debt to pay that people
and that justice must be done? .Moreover, how can we
fail to admit that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
owing to its experience, has a positive role to play
in the Organization?
104. The ideological pluralism which, depending
on the case, makes the strength or the weakness of
the Organization, but which is certainly the source Of
its prestige, has accustomed us to see the most contradictory tendencies revealed within it: those of the
protagonists of the cold war, those of the fdrmer
colonial Powers and the formerly colonized countries, those of countries with different economic and

sympathize. On the other hand, we cannot accept or
excuse the fact that that problem is being removed
from its bilateral context, where it belongs, and
being made an instrument of blackmail at the United
Nations. That is all the more unacceptable since we
have all subscribed to the commitment
to serve the
Organization and not to make the Organization serve
us in our national policies.

social systems, those which advocate the old order
and those which are in favour of a more democratic
new international
order. The Organization has been
able to survive every adversity presented by the
continual interplay of these trends.
105. Within the perspective of such divisjons, the
problems which seem to subsist between the Governments of the United States and Viet Nam of necessity
appear limited in scope. They can in no way be considered to be insurmountable or insoluble, since the
principles and the framework for their settlement
have already been agreed to by the parties a long
time ago in the Paris Agreements.’ The fact that
representatives of the two parties have been in Paris
since Friday to negotiate the implementation
of
those Agreements is in itself a positive factor. Also
the fact that the Vietnamese side acqu,iesced in the
postponement of the consideration of its candidacy
from September to November, and in addition agreed
not to exclude from the new talks the humanitarian
problems of the missing in action is another positive
factor which is as important, if not more important,
than the first, because it bears witness to the good
will of that country to settle pending problems.

110. However emotionally
charged the problem
of the missing in action may be, we cannot accept
or excuse the manifest attempt to give it more
importance than it has, to make us forget the My Lai
inci’dent and the other massacres that have been
passed over in silence, to put in watertight compartments the two subjects of the purpose behind the
mission of those persons and the uncertainty of
their present fate; and, finally and above all, to
promote the idea that that is the only clause of the
Paris Agreement which has not been implemented.
The obligation of the United States of America to
contribute to the economic restoration of Viet Nam
is another such clause.
111. Since there is a specific legal and political
framework for the solution of the problem of those
missing in action, since the Vietnamese
side has
agreed to discuss the problem in that framework as
well as through normal diplomatic channels or United
States congressional
missions, the United
States
Government,
it seems to us, has no grounds for
introducing this question into the present proceedings
of the Council.

106. In view of those gestures of good will, coming
after so many others-among
them those mentioned
by the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic in his statement last Friday [ibid.]-how
can we not be astonished at the continued opposition
of the Government of the United States to the candidacy that is before the Council.
107. At best that opposition constitutes a manceuvre
by one of the parties intended to gain from the other
advantages which it cannot obtain by normal
negotiations or an exchange of mutually acceptable
concessions. Such a manoeuvre, which could only be
employed by a party which has a right. of veto,
would, if we allow it to succeed, consecrate a
renunciation
on our part of the principle
of the
sovereign equality of States and would thereby
mean our endorsement of arbitrariness and injustice.

112. To see in this attitude of willingness to engage
in dialogue an intention on the part of the Vietnamese
Government to neglect its humanitarian
obligations
and to conclude that it is not prepared to comply
with the obligations of the Charter is both arbitrary
and fantastic. We can only categorically reject such
a unilateral interpretation
of the Charter, an interpretation which furthermore leads us to put the following questions: Which of the two countries defies
the principle of the sovereign equality of States, the
small State of Viet Nam or the super-Power which
wishes to impose its will in the United Nations and
elsewhere? Which of the two countries has endangered
international
peace and security during these last
30 years, Viet Nam, the victim of aggression, or the
country which waged the war directly or through
the puppets it set up? Which of the two countries
has had recourse to the use of force or the threat of
force against the political independence of another
State, outside any collective operation and for its
own ends? Which of the two countries directly or
indirectly gives its assistance to a so-called State
against which the Organization has decreed sanctions?

108. Taken to its extreme, that opposition could be
interpreted as a refusal to normalize United StatesVietnamese relations, as the reaction of bad losers
who cannot resign themselves to defeat or accept
that their erstwhile adversaries have acquired the
right to adopt the ideology and form of Government
they choose. The logic of such an attitude at the level
of the United Nations could be translated into a
narrow, partisan and selective conception of universality, in an obstinate opposition to and retrograde
rejection of the strengthening of the progressive
camp and, ultimately,
lead to a negation of the
ideological pluralism to which I referred earlier.

113. All these questions enable us to decide which
of the two parties is in a better position to defend
its respect for and devotion to the obligations deriving
from the Charter.

109. We can understand and accept that the United
States Government may have obligations towards the
missing in action and their families, with whom we
12

114. It is not fitting for any Member the United
Nations, not even a permanent member of the Security Council, to proceed to a trial of intent against a
country which presents its candidacy for membership, particularly when such a trial of intent could be
held against that Member itself. If any judgement is
to be pronounced on the willingness or unwillingness
of a State to respect the obligations of the Charter,
it is the United Nations which must pronounce itself
and not a single Member.
115. That specification
is in accordance with the
de.termination of the founders to submit the admission
of new Members not to a procedure of total consensus such as is used by the “closed”
clubs of
certain countries, but to a democratic procedure giving
the power of decision to the General Assembly. So
that it may retain its full value, this democratic
procedure is subject only to the conditions of Article 4,
paragraph 1, of the Charter to the exclusion of all
other conditions. This has been confirmed by the
International Court of Justice in its advisory opinion
of 28 May 1948,” when it stated

responsibility
of the Council for the maintenance
of international
peace and security, which alone
justifies the existence of the right of veto, is limited
to Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII, and excludes
Chapter II, which covers the procedure for the admission of new Members?
117. It is time, it seems to use, to remove this
last-named procedure from the legal limbo it is now in,
so that the interplay of political and legal considerations cannot serve as an excuse for a small group of
States to frustrate the express wish of the majority,
thus creating situations of injustice for which there is
no recourse to remedy the mariifest abuse of power.
118. The obstinacy of a single State to use its veto
right as an instrument of national policy has meant
that the Council has had to examirie the Vietnamese
candidacy three times in less than 15 months. That is
unfair to the Vietnamese people and t.0 the Council.
But experience has shown that such a policy of
u,njustified obstruction ‘ultimately
leads nowhere
and is detrimental to those who support it. We are
convinced that the cause of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam will finally triumph, because that it the only
valid outcome, the only result that will benefit the
Vietnamese people and the United Nations.

“that a Member of the United Nations which is
called upon, in virtue of Article 4 of the Charter,
to pronounce itself by its vote, either in the Security
Council or in the General Assembly, on the admission of’ a State to membership in the United Nations,
is not juridically entitled to make its consent to the
admission dependent on conditions not expressly
provided by paragraph 1 of the said Article.”
ll6.
In consistency with the preceding statement,
we maintain thllt ,with regard to the procedures for
admission, the Security Council is only competent
to make recommendations.
The question, therefore, is
what is the legal value of a veto cast in the exercise
of that power which has been differentiated from the
power of decision. Is it not also true that the special

13

!
1

;:

i
,:

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
l’rom bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations.
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
mondc entier. Informez-vous
aup&
des vmtes. New York ou Get&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

DES NATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
esttin en venta en librerias
a su librero o dinjase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sont en vente dans les librairies
et IL’S agexes
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Narions

PUBLICAClONES

Lns publicaciones
de Ins Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

PUBLICATIONS

d&ositnires
&I
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Ventas.

83-60801-April

1985-2.200
