United Nations

S/PV.6163

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6163rd meeting
Thursday, 16 July 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Sumi
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Heller
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-40569 (E)

*0940569*

S/PV.6163

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Davies
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Justice Renate
Winter, President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
and to Mr. Steven Rapp, Prosecutor of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Justice Renate Winter and Prosecutor
Steven Rapp. I now give the floor to Justice Winter.
Ms. Winter: I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to the Council for its decision to convene
this important briefing on the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. My presence before the Council today as
President of the Special Court comes at a critical
juncture in the final stages of the Court’s mandate.
Therefore, allow me to be direct and straightforward as
I first provide a brief update on the status of our legal
proceedings
before
discussing
the
Court’s
achievements and its impact on the citizens of Sierra

2

Leone, as well as its residual issues and remaining
challenges.
Over the past six years, the Prosecution has
issued and the Chambers have confirmed indictments
against 13 persons. Eleven individuals were arrested
and transferred to the Special Court. Two died while in
custody, one was killed in Liberia prior to being
apprehended, and the whereabouts of another remain
unknown. To date, we have concluded proceedings
against eight of the remaining nine indictees in first
instance.
The Special Court combined its proceedings into
four main cases. Three of the trials took place in
Freetown, against the leaders of the Civil Defence
Forces (CDF), the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC) and the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF). The fourth trial — the prosecution of Charles
Taylor, ex-President of the Republic of Liberia — is
now being held in The Hague for security reasons.
The Special Court completed all three trials in
Freetown, including the appeals proceedings in the
CDF and AFRC cases. Those cases resulted in the
conviction and sentencing of all five individuals.
Currently, the Appeals Chamber is adjudicating the
appeals in the RUF case, and it will deliver its
judgement in October of this year. Upon delivery of the
RUF appeals judgement, the Special Court will have
completed all of the judicial proceedings conducted in
Freetown. In our final trial, the Taylor trial, the
prosecution closed its case in February this year, and
the defence started the presentation of its evidence this
week. As Council members may have seen on the
news, Charles Taylor is currently on the witness stand,
testifying in his own defence.
According to the updated completion strategy, the
Special Court predicts that the trial judgement will be
delivered in the Taylor case in July 2010 and the
sentencing judgement, if necessary, one month later.
We project that in February 2011, upon delivery of the
appeals judgement in the Taylor case, we will have
completed all of the Special Court’s judicial activities.
It is not easy to fully predict the duration of trials.
Judges sitting in a court of law have control over a
court’s proceedings but cannot violate the rights of the
parties to be heard. Nonetheless, it should be noted that
the Appeals Chamber has consistently adhered to the
allocated time frame set out in the completion strategy.
I am rather proud to mention that the Appeals Chamber

09-40569

S/PV.6163

at the Special Court has never taken longer than five
months to conclude any appeal. As such, let me
reassure the Council of the Special Court’s continued
commitment to achieving the aforementioned
milestones in a timely and thorough fashion.
For those reasons in particular, the Special Court
is considered to be an exemplary model of
international justice. Since its inception, it has
achieved many firsts and set many precedents in the
development of international criminal law. It handed
down the first decision on the non-applicability of
national amnesty for international prosecution. It first
adjudicated the limitations of immunity of a head of
State vis-à-vis an international criminal court, and it is
the first court in history to establish as crimes against
humanity the forcible recruitment and use of child
soldiers, attacks against United Nations peacekeepers
and the use of forced marriages, and to convict those
responsible accordingly.
However, the Special Court’s impact on Sierra
Leone extends well beyond the findings in its cases.
Through specific and sustained efforts, the Special
Court has transferred expertise to Siena Leoneans via a
number of programmes, including capacity-building
and training on police investigations, case
management, courtroom interpretation, archiving,
witness protection and detention standards. Further, the
passage into law of three gender bills by the Sierra
Leone Parliament is a direct consequence of the
Court’s work on gender issues. All three laws will
greatly improve the lives of women in Sierra Leone.
The Court’s Outreach Section, known as its
crown jewel, has made our legal proceedings a part of
Sierra Leone’s national discourse and heritage. Over
the years, the Court has conducted over 10,000 events,
including town hall meetings, radio programmes and
training sessions at schools, villages and cities across
Sierra Leone and throughout Liberia and Guinea, as
well.
Additionally, the Special Court is assisting the
Government of Siena Leone, wherever possible, in its
efforts to ensure the sustainability of the Court site
beyond the lifespan of the Court. Several potential uses
of the site identified by the Government include, but
are not limited to, a regional training centre for the rule
of law and a memorial component for commemorating
the victims of the war.

09-40569

Though much has been accomplished, much still
needs to be achieved. To maintain international
standards and successfully fulfil its original mandate,
the Special Court is still bound by a number of legal
obligations that will not terminate after the completion
of trials and appeals. Together with its Management
Committee, the Special Court has thus worked to
determine a suitable arrangement to provide for these
obligations, known as residual issues. A small
successor body, whose structure will be kept to a bare
minimum, will likely need to be established to manage
and perform such residual functions, including the
enforcement of sentences, maintenance of the Special
Court’s archives, witness protection and assistance, and
the possible trial or transfer of the case of the one
indictee at large.
Although a stand-alone residual mechanism will
have to be created in the short term, in the long term
sharing an administrative stage with another institution
should be considered, particularly as many of the
residual functions that will be performed by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia are
similar to those of the Special Court. That would help
to ensure the sustainability of the successor body in an
efficient and cost-effective manner.
Assistance given by the Security Council will
continue to be as important in the future as it has been
in the past. Much of the Special Court’s
aforementioned success emerged from the generous
support of the Security Council on numerous
occasions. I would like to express particular gratitude
for the Council’s adoption of resolution 1688 (2006),
which requested all States to cooperate in the transfer
of Charles Taylor to the Netherlands; the adoption of
resolution 1626 (2005), which extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to
include the protection of the Court’s premises by a
contingent of Mongolian troops; and the adoption of
resolution 1750 (2007), mandating UNMIL to provide
support to the Special Court for activities conducted in
Liberia with the consent of the Liberian Government.
Thus, in order to successfully complete its mandate in
the coming months, the Special Court continues to rely
on the indispensable support of the Security Council
and all Member States. Today more than ever before,
this request is urgent.
As members of the Council know, the Special
Court is currently funded by voluntary contributions

3

S/PV.6163

from interested States. Despite efforts by the Court to
contain costs and operate as efficiently as possible, the
financial situation of the Court is most serious. In
March 2009, the Secretary-General wrote to Member
States to inform them of his grave concern regarding
our funding situation and to seek their urgent support.
Based on current available funds, the Court will
experience a funding shortfall by the first week of
August 2009 — a very short time from now. This
shortfall poses the real possibility of disrupting our
work, which would have disastrous consequences for
the Council’s extensive peacebuilding efforts in Sierra
Leone and Liberia. A disruption in the proceedings
would send the wrong message to the international
community, jeopardizing the fight against impunity and
potentially calling into question our collective
commitment to international justice. In total, the Court
will need approximately $30 million to complete its
mandate successfully.
I would also like to recall that, in the words of
resolution 1829 (2008), the Security Council
recognizes that “further arrangements will be necessary
to address residual matters”. Because the necessary
residual mechanisms must last as long as victims and
witnesses need protection and until every sentence has
been served, it will be a great and ongoing challenge to
maintain the mechanism in the long term based purely
on voluntary contributions. It is also important to note
that fundraising has proven to be a time-consuming and
costly endeavour.
There is much work to be accomplished over the
next 18 months. Most importantly, we must conclude
the final case in Sierra Leone, after which the facilities
and operations in Freetown will be kept at a minimum
provided that we can transfer in a timely manner the
convicted persons to an enforcing State. To accomplish
that endeavour and assist the host country, the
establishment of a trust fund could be envisaged.
We must complete the trial of Charles Taylor in
The Hague, which is so critical to preserving the
fragile peace and stability in West Africa. Without the
adequate funds, it will be very difficult to retain
competent Court personnel who might depart for
better-paid and longer-lasting employment, to the
detriment of an efficiently run Trial Chamber. Lastly,
the Special Court must set up a residual mechanism —
the first of its kind — that will be of use to other
international courts when they reach their final stages,

4

thus saving significant costs to the international
community.
The Special Court is an institution that the
Council can be proud of. The Court’s groundbreaking
jurisprudence and its impact on the justice system in
Sierra Leone are exemplary achievements. I am as
confident as I am hopeful that the international
community will allow our effective and competent
Court to finalize its mandate successfully. To show that
it is not only me who believes that the Special Court
does effective and competent work, allow me to read
out a letter that I received a few days ago:
“In New York
“Dear Gentlemen and Ladies:
“Please accept this small donation to help
with the work of your court. It is vitally important
you keep up your important work. Thank you for
your efforts and please continue to do your work.
Thank you.
“Enclosed is $20 to help. I know it is a
small amount, but maybe if the world
Governments do not fund your work, individuals
will.”
Is that not a nice letter? I will keep it with me, bring it
to Sierra Leone, together with the $20-bill, and put it in
a frame to show our people that they are not alone.
Let me conclude by once again expressing my
gratitude to the Security Council and Member States
for the support that the Special Court has received from
the United Nations since its inception. On behalf of the
judges and staff of the Special Court, I also wish to
convey our utmost gratitude to the Management
Committee of the Special Court, as well as to the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs for the
invaluable help and advice it has imparted to the
Special Court at all times.
The President: I thank Justice Winter for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Stephen Rapp.
Mr. Rapp: In beginning my presentation, let me
echo the sentiments of President Winter and thank the
Council for its decision to convene this briefing on the
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
In resolution 1315 (2000), the Security Council
responded to a request that came from the Government

09-40569

S/PV.6163

of Sierra Leone, and it also recognized the serious
crimes committed against the people of that country, in
requesting the Secretary-General to negotiate an
agreement to create an independent special court. It
was to be a credible system of justice and
accountability that could hold individuals criminally
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and, in doing so, contribute to the
restoration and maintenance of peace.
For the victims — the thousands who had been
mutilated, the tens of thousands who had been
murdered, indeed the hundreds of thousands who had
been subjected to sexual violence — the Special Court
offers justice by holding to account those alleged to
bear the greatest responsibility for these crimes.
As President Winter has reported, the Special
Court has completed three multiple-accused trials in
Freetown. Two of those cases have now been finalized
on appeal, and the appeals proceeding in the third
should be concluded by October 2009. Members will
recall that the last time that the principals of the
Special Court addressed this body, in June 2007 (see
S/PV.5690), we reported that the fourth trial had just
commenced with the presentation of the prosecution’s
opening statement. That was the trial of Charles Taylor,
the former President of Liberia.
Since then, some 91 individuals, almost all of
them from Sierra Leone or Liberia, have travelled to
and from The Hague to present their testimony. They
were able personally to bear witness in this historic
proceeding because their presence in the Netherlands
was made possible by the Security Council in
resolution 1688 (2006), which facilitated the conduct
of this trial away from the seat of the Special Court in
the interests of regional security.
Since the witnesses began their testimonies in
January 2008, the Taylor trial has proceeded smoothly,
with a high level of transparency, efficiency and
fairness. This very week saw the commencement of the
defence case, with the presentation of its opening
statement, followed by the accused himself, former
President Taylor, taking the stand to begin his
testimony. Thereafter, other defence witnesses will
testify, and the accused will be assured of his right to
fully contest the indictment against him. We feel
confident that the trial will be conducted and managed
to allow for the entry of judgement by mid-2010 and
for finalization on appeal by very early in 2011.

09-40569

As President Winter has mentioned, the
proceedings in Freetown have resulted in historic
developments in international humanitarian law. Most
well known was the groundbreaking precedent
recognizing that the use of child soldiers — persons
under the age of 15 — in armed conflict was an
international crime, followed thereafter by the
convictions — the first in history — of five individual
defendants for that offence. The Special Court also
pronounced the first-ever conviction on the charge of
acts of terrorism in a non-international armed conflict.
The recent trial judgement in the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) case included the first convictions in
history for the specific crime of attacks on United
Nations peacekeepers. This was an offence that was
defined in the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. This precedent
sends a clear message in the conflict zones around the
world, wherever the United Nations, through its
Member States, has provided and today is providing
forces to maintain peace and security.
The Special Court continues to make a significant
contribution to bringing justice to victims of sexual
violence and gender-based crimes, of which there were
so many during the Sierra Leone civil war. The Court
pronounced the first-ever convictions on the charge of
sexual slavery, both as a war crime and as a crime
against humanity. It further recognized forced marriage
as an inhumane act constituting a crime against
humanity and rendered in February the first
convictions on that charge.
In pursuing this wider range of offences, and by
alleging that they were among the acts of terrorism, the
prosecution was able to present a case showing that
these acts of sexual violence were committed as part of
a strategy for dominating and instilling fear in the
civilian population. In the recent RUF trial judgement,
again for the first time, leaders of an armed movement
were held responsible for these offences, whatever
their physical distance from the actual acts, because the
commission of these crimes was part of a common
scheme or plan.
The Court’s work has helped implement Security
Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
which recognized that the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict can significantly contribute to
international peace and security, called on parties to
protect them from gender-based violence and

5

S/PV.6163

emphasized the shared responsibility to end impunity
and prosecute those responsible for such crimes.
All of these accomplishments have been achieved
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone, an institution
that represents a partnership between an African nation
and the international community. It is a court in which
60 per cent of the workforce is Sierra Leonean, and in
which Sierra Leone citizens hold senior positions in
every organ, including my own Deputy Prosecutor,
Joseph Kamara. It is also the court that has placed the
highest priority on outreach, in providing accurate
information about its proceedings to the population
throughout Sierra Leone, and, for the Taylor case, to
Liberia as well. For as important as it is to do justice,
for all those that the Court intends to serve it is also
important that justice be seen to be done.
As the Special Court concludes its proceedings,
we must address the need for a mechanism to deal with
residual issues. President Winter mentioned several of
these issues. Let me focus on one that falls directly
within the responsibility of the prosecution.
This concerns the case of the Court’s one
indictee-at-large, Johnny Paul Koroma. Witnesses in
the Taylor trial have testified to hearing reports that
Koroma was killed in Liberia not long after he was
indicted. However, despite significant efforts, the
prosecution has not been able to find and identify his
remains, and rumours persist of his whereabouts in the
subregion. Mr. Koroma was head of the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) and served as the
effective chief of State during the nine months in 1997
and 1998 that an AFRC-RUF junta ruled in Sierra
Leone. Three other leaders of the AFRC have been
tried and convicted. It would be unacceptable for the
country and for international justice were Koroma to
surface after the closure of the Court and never have to
answer for his alleged crimes in a court of law.
Therefore, the prosecution has been in discussions with
authorities in Sierra Leone and two other States and
will take steps before the Special Court concludes its
active proceedings to ensure that Koroma can be
prosecuted thereafter within a national system.
President Winter spoke of the need for State
cooperation in the enforcement of our sentences. It is
well accepted that the prison sentences of the Court’s
convicted persons must be served in facilities that are
secure and that meet international standards. The
Government of Sierra Leone expressed its wish that

6

these sentences be served outside of Sierra Leone. We
in the prosecution share that view because of our
concern for the safety and the security of the witnesses
and also for the personnel of the Special Court. It is
therefore necessary to reach agreements with States for
enforcement of sentences that provide that the
enforcing State will cover the cost of caring for the
prisoners, or to provide funding through the residual
mechanism to meet these expenses on an ongoing
basis.
Those are but two of the challenges that must be
met during the post-closure period. The Court and its
Management Committee are working on proposals for
a very small residual mechanism that may provide a
model for the other international courts that will close
after us. However, even if it is very small, we will still
need a secure source of funding that will remain in
place until all prisoners have served their sentences and
all the challenges have been managed.
While the future funding of the residual
mechanism must be addressed, the Court’s immediate
financial situation may now be fairly characterized as
an impending crisis. Even if all pledged donations from
donors for this year come in early — and that is as yet
uncertain, as the President told the Council — at the
moment, the funds on hand will be exhausted in
August. If those contributions come in early this year,
our funds will nonetheless run dry early next year,
before the next round of donations. The Special Court
will not have the resources necessary to complete its
work.
We are deeply appreciative of the support of
Member States that have provided the voluntary
contributions that have permitted the Special Court to
reach this point, when its mission is so close to
completion. We all wish to express our profound
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his letters to
Member States on our behalf, most recently on
16 March 2009. At this point, while we recognize that
the Security Council is not directly involved in
financial issues, we would respectfully request the
Council and its President to consider urging Member
States to pledge and to contribute so that the Special
Court can conclude the RUF appeal in Freetown and
the historic proceedings in the Charles Taylor case in
The Hague.
The commission of serious crimes against the
civilian population of Sierra Leone motivated the

09-40569

S/PV.6163

creation of the Special Court. We ask for the
cooperation and support necessary to complete its
mandate, so that justice can be achieved for the victims
of those crimes. As envisioned by the Security Council
in resolution 1315 (2000), that will contribute to
reconciliation and respect for the rule of law. It will
also send a powerful message that the international
community strongly supports institutions established to
hold to account those responsible for such atrocities,
and by doing so deter their perpetration in the future,
thus saving others from the violence, the injury, and
the death visited on the innocent people of Sierra
Leone.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Rapp for his
briefing. I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I should like to
start by thanking the President and the Prosecutor of
the Special Court for Sierra Leone for their very
informative briefings this morning and for all the work
they are doing to help to bring justice to the people of
Sierra Leone. We would also like to welcome to the
Council today the representative of Sierra Leone.
Since we last considered the work of the Special
Court, Sierra Leone has made significant progress. Its
elections in September 2007 were another milestone
for the country. They demonstrated that, in spite of a
decade of conflict, Sierra Leone is beginning to
consolidate its peace and rebuild its democratic
institutions and tradition. Part of that consolidation has
been the re-establishment of the rule of law and the
repudiation of impunity. The Special Court has played
a central role in that process.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Special Court, as we are a friend to Sierra Leone. We
have demonstrated that support through practical and
concrete actions. We are one of the largest financial
contributors to the Special Court, having contributed
some $32 million to the Court’s operations since 2002.
We are also an active member of the Special Court’s
Management Committee here in New York.
The Court is now entering the final stages of its
work. It is significant that the Security Council is
considering the work of the Court in the same week
that the defence case begins in the trial of Charles
Taylor. He is the first African head of State to be tried
for war crimes. He is also the last of the indictees to be
brought before the Court. We are confident that

09-40569

Mr. Taylor will receive a fair trial in accordance with
internationally recognized human rights norms. We
stand ready to imprison Mr. Taylor in the United
Kingdom if he is convicted.
It is because the Court is entering the final stages
of its work that, as President Winter has said, we must
urgently address the Court’s legacy and residual issues.
Like the Court itself, the proposed residual mechanism
is slimmed down and cost-efficient. Supporters of the
Court will need to consider how that mechanism is
funded, how it may fit with the follow-on mechanisms
of other international tribunals and how it offers the
international community both the best service, in terms
of international jurisprudence, and value for money. It
is critical to the integrity of the justice process to date
that residual functions be sustained effectively.
It remains important that, even in these final
stages, the Court continues to work to fulfil its mandate
as expeditiously as possible and, where possible,
deliver further efficiencies and budgetary savings.
Equally, it is essential that the international community
ensure that the Special Court has the resources it needs
to complete its valuable work. We have heard today of
the impending crisis in the Court’s finances. We would
strongly urge all Member States to make the further
financial contributions needed to fund the final chapter
of the Court’s operations. We are grateful to those
States that are working with the Court on the issue of
enforcement of sentences and witness relocation.
Finally, we should like to pledge our support for
the continued work of the Court, which has played an
indispensible role in helping to bring sustainable peace
to Sierra Leone. We pay tribute to its President,
Prosecutor, judges and all its staff.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I would like to welcome
Justice Renate Winter, President of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, and Prosecutor Stephen Rapp, as well
as to thank them for their comprehensive briefings. I
also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very timely meeting, which is taking place at a
time when defence hearings are under way in The
Hague in the case of former Liberian President Charles
Taylor. That case represents one of the most significant
undertakings of the Court. It is therefore of great use
for the Council to be kept abreast of the work of the
Special Court.
Sierra Leone went through perilous times in the
1990s. It is now a great pleasure to see that war-torn

7

S/PV.6163

country emerge from that difficult period with
promising signs of peace and stability. For that, we
commend the people and political leadership of the
country for showing resilience and taking bold steps
towards unity and reconciliation. That said, we also
highly appreciate the important role of the Special
Court in its efforts to end impunity and advance the
rule of law in Sierra Leone.
Indeed, since its establishment the Special Court
has done impressive work to that end, contributing not
only to national peace and harmony but also to regional
stability and understanding. In that regard, we agree
with President Winter that the Special Court for Sierra
Leone is an exemplary model of international justice.
As she pointed out, the firsts and precedents
established by the Court in the development of
international criminal law are all worth emphasizing.
In more specific terms, I would also like to
congratulate the Special Court on its significant
achievements in 2008, such as the completion of two
out of four trials, namely, the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council and the Civil Defence Forces
cases. We hope that the Revolutionary United Front
case will also be concluded soon through the appeals
judgement. Given the significance of the case related to
former Liberian President Charles Taylor, we think that
the continuation of the valuable work of the Special
Court may now be even more important than ever, for
the trial of Charles Taylor, which has attracted
worldwide attention, will be a turning point in
international efforts to end impunity.
In fact, a fair and effective trial process in each of
the four cases dealt with by the Special Court will send
a clear message to everyone involved and will, we
hope, discourage war crimes and crimes against
humanity all around the world. After all, those who
perpetrate such crimes must know that they will be
held responsible by the international community for
their acts.
We believe that the Special Court for Sierra
Leone will successfully complete its work within the
time frame described by the President and the
Prosecutor of the Court. For us, the successful
completion of the work is more important that merely
meeting deadlines. We therefore think that we should
be flexible in allowing the time needed by the Court,
taking into account the requirements of the tasks at
hand. Moreover, the effective completion of the

8

Court’s work also depends upon the availability of the
necessary resources. In this regard, the continued
contribution of the international community should
also be seen as an essential element of the completion
strategy. For its part, Turkey has consistently made
voluntary financial contributions to the Special Court
since its inception.
Finally, the Special Court for Sierra Leone will
constitute yet another first by being the first
international court to set up a residual mechanism. This
is also worth noting when we speak about the
completion strategy. We believe that this residual
mechanism can constitute an example that could be
emulated by other international courts as well.
In conclusion, we thank the President and the
Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for
their most valuable work and wish them every success
in their future deliberations.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
welcoming and extending our gratitude to the President
and the Prosecutor of the Special Court for sharing
with the Security Council the latest information on the
considerable progress made in implementing the
Court’s mandate. We appreciate their personal
commitment in carrying out this mandate.
The Court’s establishment, which broke new
ground in international criminal justice, and its
jurisprudence and accomplishments represent a strong
contribution to the global fight against impunity and
the fostering of the rule of law. It continues to
demonstrate that peace and justice are not
contradictory terms.
Earlier this year, a significant milestone was
achieved with the conviction of Revolutionary United
Front leaders for atrocities committed during the civil
war in Sierra Leone, sending a strong message against
impunity for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Croatia continues to closely follow the trial of
Charles Taylor in The Hague. We appreciate the
extensive outreach efforts undertaken by the Court.
Together with its capacity-building projects, these
efforts represent an excellent way of not only
spreading awareness and understanding of the Court’s
mission, but also preserving its legacy and thus
contributing to lasting peace and stability in Sierra
Leone and in the region of West Africa.

09-40569

S/PV.6163

As the operations in Freetown are nearing
conclusion, we understand that certain challenges
remain. Funding remains a critical issue for the Court
in this phase. One of the pressing outstanding questions
is securing the appropriate arrangements and financing
for the enforcement of sentences, and we welcome the
steps taken by the Court and its Management
Committee to address these issues.
We also understand that continuing international
support is indispensable to achieving the orderly
completion of the Court’s work, which in turn will be
the best guarantee for securing its lasting legacy. As an
ad hoc institution, the Special Court will once again
break new ground in the field of international justice
by having to provide solutions to support its residual
functions while respecting international standards in
ensuring the ongoing protection of the human rights of
individuals affected by its work. We support the
Court’s efforts to that end.
Croatia has highly appreciated the opportunity to
consult with the representatives of the Special Court in
the context of the ongoing discussions within the
Security Council’s informal working group on
international tribunals, which is currently examining
options for setting up residual mechanisms for the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. Croatia hopes to see the continuation of this
exchange, which could certainly be of mutual interest
and benefit for both sides.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to thank the President of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, Justice Renate Winter, and its
Prosecutor, Mr. Stephen Rapp, for their very
informative briefings. Allow me to add that we are
honoured that an Austrian national, who previously
distinguished herself as an international judge in
Kosovo, is presiding over that important Court.
Austria has a long-standing commitment to
support and contribute to efforts to strengthen the rule
of law, promote human rights and end impunity for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes. My delegation
thus highly commends the efforts of the Special Court
to bring to justice those responsible for the crimes
committed during the armed conflict in Sierra Leone
since 1991, including former Liberian President
Charles Taylor, who was arrested in the spring of 2006.

09-40569

The Court’s work is vital to ensuring
accountability
and
promoting
reconciliation,
peacebuilding and the re-establishment of the rule of
law in Sierra Leone. The Special Court plays a
pioneering role in combating impunity and
strengthening the rule of law at both the international
and the national levels. As the President and the
Prosecutor have already pointed out, judgements
delivered by the Court have greatly contributed to the
development of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law, in particular regarding
the recruitment and use of child soldiers and forced
marriages. As the Prosecutor has said, it is important to
note that lawyers from Sierra Leone have played a very
important part in these developments.
At the national level, the activities of the Court,
including through its capacity-building and outreach
programmes, have assisted in strengthening the justice
system in Sierra Leone. Further efforts in this field are,
however, needed.
As was highlighted by President Winter today, the
Special Court also faces a number of important
challenges. First and foremost, the very serious
financial situation of the Court is of great concern. As
is well known, the Special Court is funded exclusively
by voluntary contributions, and currently available
funds, as has been said, will be exhausted by early
August. We join in President Winter’s urgent call upon
all States to help alleviate the dire financial situation of
the Court. The Austrian Government has made repeated
voluntary contributions to the Court, most recently
following the appeal of the Secretary-General in
March.
Secondly, the Court is doing its utmost to
accomplish its completion strategy and finish its work,
including the Taylor case, at the earliest date, while
maintaining all standards of fair trial and due process,
as well as undertaking effective outreach among the
local population in the region. Austria fully supports
these efforts and appreciates the projections that all of
the Court’s judicial activities will be complete by
February 2011.
Finally, we must bear in mind that the work of the
Special Court will not be finished at the time of the
completion of the last case, but that a number of
residual functions, as has been said, will have to be
performed even after its closure. As chair of the
Security Council’s informal working group on

9

S/PV.6163

international tribunals, which deals with the residual
issues of the ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, Austria follows very closely
the ongoing discussions in the Special Court and its
Management Committee on setting up a small
successor body to manage and perform such residual
functions, including the enforcement of sentences, the
maintenance of archives, witness protection and the
possible trial or transfer of the case of Johnny Koroma,
who is still at large.
In this context, Austria also supports the proposal
to establish a trust fund to cover the costs for the
upkeep of prisoners of the Special Court so that they
can serve their sentences in appropriate enforcing
States. Despite a number of legal and practical
differences between the Special Court for Sierra Leone
and the two ad hoc Tribunals, in essence we are facing
the same challenge — closing down an international
criminal tribunal, which, as some have said, seems to
be a much more complex task than setting up a new
tribunal. We stand ready to further intensify the
informal dialogue and exchange of views between the
members of the working group and the Special Court
and its Management Committee.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the President,
judges, Prosecutor, Registrar and all of the staff of the
Special Court for their tireless efforts in the name of
international justice, and to reaffirm Austria’s
continued cooperation and support for the Special
Court.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to welcome Justice Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Stephen Rapp,
Prosecutor of the Court, to the Council today and thank
them for their briefings. My Government would like to
congratulate them on the significant achievements of
the Court to date. I would also like to welcome the
representative of Sierra Leone to the Council.
Today’s briefings come at a critical juncture as
the Court completes the final phase of its mandate. The
successful completion of the Court’s work and the
establishment of a viable residual mechanism remain
priorities for the United States.
The United States was instrumental in the
establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
and has been its largest financial supporter. Since the
Court’s inception in 2002, the United States has
contributed more than $60 million to it. We welcome

10

the broad financial support that the Court has enjoyed
in the past, and we encourage all Member States to
support the Court to help ensure that justice is served,
impunity is not tolerated and Sierra Leone and the
region can sustain accountability, peace and security in
the years to come. The Court must be supported if it is
to conclude its mandate.
The Government of Sierra Leone has been a
strong and committed partner in the work of the Court.
The Court has been instrumental in contributing to
peace and stability in Sierra Leone through the creation
of a transparent and independent judicial process.
When the Court closes, it will effectively end a chapter
in Sierra Leonean history.
The United States fully supports the Court’s
efforts to transfer its institutional knowledge to Sierra
Leone authorities. We believe it important to the
country’s ongoing democratic development that all
lessons of the past be fully absorbed, and the Special
Court has much to offer in that regard. After the
Court’s mandate is completed, the international
community will, of course, continue its efforts to
support peacebuilding and long-term social and
economic development in Sierra Leone.
The United States has appreciated the opportunity
to serve on the Special Court’s Management
Committee. We commend the work of the Canadian
Chair. We also commend the work of the Court’s staff
in evaluating options for a residual mechanism, and we
applaud their efforts to reduce cost and improve
efficiency in the Court’s operations. The United States
remains committed to an efficient, cost-effective and
successful residual mechanism.
Finally, we again thank the President, the
Prosecutor, the Acting Registrar and their staff for their
dedication and commitment. The Court has broken new
ground in the field of international criminal law,
including the recognition of the use of child soldiers as
an international crime and sexual slavery as a war
crime and crime against humanity. And it has built a
powerful legacy by fighting against impunity and
working to bring justice to the people of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): My
delegation wishes to sincerely thank Justice Renate
Winter, President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
and Prosecutor Stephen Rapp for their briefings to the
Council on the activities of the Special Court, in
particular the implementation of its completion

09-40569

S/PV.6163

strategy. The Vietnamese delegation also welcomes the
presence of the representative of Sierra Leone at our
meeting today.
Viet Nam has been following closely and with
satisfaction the continued achievements of the
Government of Sierra Leone in the implementation of
its agenda for peace consolidation and economic
recovery. Those achievements were recognized in the
sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations
Integrated
Office
in
Sierra
Leone
(S/2008/281). In that context, the establishment and
operation of the Special Court for Sierra Leone have
proved to be positive contributions to the development
of peace and security in the country.
We would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Special Court for its completed and
ongoing trials, as well as for the important precedents
that the Court has set in international criminal law. We
are following with keen interest the formulation and
implementation of the Special Court’s completion
strategy, including the establishment of a residual
mechanism. These will serve as helpful guidelines to
the members of the Security Council in their
consideration of similar issues relating to the two other
international criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of the delegation of the Russian
Federation, I should like to thank the leadership of the
Special Court for today’s briefings and to note the
considerable contributions made by that institution to
the fight against impunity. We also welcome the
presence of the representative of Sierra Leone at
today’s meeting.
Since its establishment, the Special Court has
carried out serious work aimed at prosecuting
individuals who have committed serious violations of
international humanitarian law. It has accumulated
valuable and, in certain respects, unique experience in
the area of international criminal justice. The Court has
demonstrated its effectiveness despite the financial
difficulties facing it.
Of equal importance are the Special Court’s
contributions to strengthening stability in Sierra Leone
and throughout the subregion. Critical tasks in that
regard include assisting the country’s State institutions,
particularly in the area of security and justice, and

09-40569

resolving problems related to the reintegration of
ex-combatants into peaceful life.
The Special Court’s activities have shown that
justice and reconciliation in post-conflict societies
need not conflict with each other, but rather that they
can be complementary elements in the peacebuilding
process. We welcome the momentum in the Court’s
proceedings as we approach the deadline for the
completion of its work. Two major cases have been
fully considered thus far, which will make it possible
to focus on the remaining trials. The most complex and
politically sensitive of these is generally recognized to
be the trial of Mr. Charles Taylor, former President of
Liberia. We are closely following the developments in
that regard.
We note the progress made by the Special Court
regarding its future residual mechanism, which we
believe will be a compact and cost-effective temporary
structure.
In conclusion, we note the Special Court’s
considerable achievements in the area of public
outreach regarding its activities, as well as its efforts to
build the judicial and law-enforcement capacities of
Sierra Leone. In our view, the projects undertaken by
the Special Court in that area, if successfully
implemented, will become an important part of the
Special Court’s future legacy.
Mr. Koudougou (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I should like at the outset to thank Justice
Renate Winter and Mr. Stephen Rapp, President and
Prosecutor, respectively, of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, for the very useful information that they have
shared with us on the Court’s judicial activities and its
completion strategy. We also welcome the presence
among us of the representative of Sierra Leone.
Established to shed light on all crimes, atrocities
and other human rights violations and thus to combat
impunity in a country ravaged by several years of civil
war, the Special Court has succeeded in integrating
itself into the Sierra Leonean institutional landscape
and in making a major contribution to the
reconciliation and reconstruction process and to the
establishment of a lasting peace in that country. That is
why, like previous speakers, I should like to
congratulate the Court on the results achieved, despite the
difficulties of every kind — particularly financial — that
it has had to face. We take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the Government and the people of Sierra

11

S/PV.6163

Leone for their cooperation with the Court, without
which those results would never have been achieved.
We welcome the cooperation shown by the States of
West Africa, and we are also grateful to those countries
and institutions that have provided the financial
support essential to the Court’s functioning.
On the political front, we note that Sierra Leone
has made notable progress thanks to the firm resolve of
its people; to subregional support, in particular from
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); and to significant support from the entire
international community, all of which have contributed
to Sierra Leone’s admission to the Peacebuilding
Commission.
As a State member of ECOWAS, Burkina Faso
believes in the possibility of lasting stability in that
country. We call on the international community to
continue to support the Special Court, in particular in
implementing its completion strategy.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): I, too, wish to thank President
Renate Winter and Prosecutor Stephen Rapp of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone for their informative
briefings. Their briefings to the Security Council are
very timely in view of the commencement on 13 July
of the defence case in the trial of Charles Taylor and of
the progress made in the other cases since the most
recent briefings in 2007. I also welcome the presence
of the representative of Sierra Leone in the Council
today.
Japan is strongly committed to the realization of
justice and the rule of law at both the national and the
international levels, and believes that international and
hybrid criminal tribunals have played an important role
to that end. We have therefore been making the utmost
effort to contribute to the activities of the various
criminal tribunals.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm Japan’s strong
support for the activities of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The Special Court was established in a country
where serious crimes had been committed. Although
the case of former President Charles Taylor had to be
conducted in The Hague for several reasons, the
closeness of the Special Court to the people of Sierra
Leone and its effective outreach programmes have
contributed to gaining the understanding and
acceptance of the affected people. This unique feature
of the Special Court is noteworthy and provides

12

important lessons for future trials for serious crimes
committed in conflict situations.
Japan highly appreciates the efforts made by the
judges, prosecutors and registrars, who have
contributed greatly to the significant progress made so
far. We also appreciate the tireless efforts of the
Management Committee chaired by Canada, which has
been addressing a number of difficulties faced by the
Special Court. Japan strongly hopes that, through the
continued efforts of the Special Court and the
contributing States, the Court will be able to overcome
the current financial challenges and successfully
complete its mandate.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone has played a
pioneering role in addressing unprecedented legal and
practical challenges. The issue regarding the residual
functions of the ad hoc tribunals after the completion
of trials is another unprecedented challenge that the
Special Court must address before the other
international tribunals. Although there are important
differences between the Special Court and the other
tribunals, Japan hopes that the experience of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone will offer useful
insights on that issue for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and other tribunals.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico,
like other members, thanks President Renate Winter
and Prosecutor Stephen Rapp of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone for the detailed information they have
provided to the Council on the work of the Special
Court, its successes and the challenges ahead. We also
welcome the presence of the representative of Sierra
Leone in the Council.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone is a pioneer
and exemplar in the field of international criminal
justice. It has made significant contributions to the
development of international jurisprudence and made
decisions of great importance to the international
community. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the
most important work of the Court has been the
extremely positive effect its work has had on the
people in Sierra Leone, first because it showed the
population that the worst violations of international
humanitarian law of which they were victims
throughout most of the previous decade will not go
unpunished. It also reconfirmed the theory that, if

09-40569

S/PV.6163

peace and reconciliation are to be achieved, they must
be accompanied by justice.

developments in the work of the Court with great
interest.

Secondly, the Court has done essential work at
the national level and, we hope, beyond its borders to
build a culture of dissuasion and prevention of the most
serious crimes, and to strengthen institutional capacity
in Sierra Leone based on a criminal justice system in
conformity with international standards. In brief, the
work of the Special Court for Sierra Leone has made a
decisive contribution to the transition to peace and the
rule of law and has been critical to ongoing efforts to
ensure national reconciliation and reconstruction.

Ms. Chen Peijie (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank President Winter and
Prosecutor Rapp of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
for their briefings. We also welcome the presence at
this meeting of the representative of Sierra Leone.

My delegation listened closely to the information
provided to the Council on the completion of all the
Court’s legal proceedings in Freetown by October. We
are also following the trial of the former President of
Liberia, Charles Taylor, in The Hague. On the latter
point, of particular importance is the enormous
contribution, for which we are extremely grateful,
made by the Special Court for Sierra Leone to the
development of international justice by setting limits
on the immunity of a head of State before an
international court.
President Winter also gave us estimates contained
in the completion strategy recently adopted by the
Management Committee of the Special Court for the
conclusion of the Court’s legal activities. She also
identified some of the challenges the Court will face in
carrying out its residual functions, such as the
management of archives, the protection of witnesses,
and the execution of sentences, among others. Without
a doubt, those functions and tasks must be supported
by the international community.
At the same time, my delegation has taken due
note of the urgent needs facing the Special Court, in
particular with regard to financing its activities.
Mexico has supported the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, in particular in the light of its results.
In most recent years, my country has made a modest
contribution to financing the work of the Court. That
was the result of an enormous effort on the part of the
Mexican Government, but it was done in the conviction
that it is important to combat impunity with regard to
the commission of the most serious crimes against
humanity.
Once again, Mexico thanks President Winter and
Prosecutor Rapp for their timely appearance before the
Council and assures them that it will continue to follow

09-40569

We have taken note of the fact that over the past
two years the Special Court has continued to make
progress in its work, including the finalization of two
trials. That means that only two trials remain to be
completed. We express our appreciation for that
progress. As the trials and appeals approach
completion, the goals set in the Special Court’s
completion strategy are coming into sight. We are
pleased to note that the Special Court’s judicial
activities could conclude in early 2011. We look
forward to that.
China has always supported the work of the
Special Court. We anticipate that the Court will
continue effectively its work on both trials and appeals,
that it will successfully address legacy issues in an
appropriate and effective manner and that it will
achieve the goals set out in its completion strategy in
an appropriate and timely way. We hope that countries
in a position to do so will continue to support the
Special Court in order to help it to overcome the
difficulties it faces and assist it to effectively carry out
its completion strategy.
Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I join previous speakers in expressing our
appreciation to Justice Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and to Mr. Stephen
Rapp, Prosecutor of the Special Court. I also welcome
the presence among us of the representative of Sierra
Leone.
We thank the Special Court for Sierra Leone for
its endeavours, as described today by its President and
its Prosecutor, whom we thank for their briefings and
for the exceptional work they, the other judges and the
Court staff have done. There is no doubt that history
will record their role in enriching international criminal
and humanitarian law in a number of important ways.
Like those given yesterday to the Security
Council Committee on Sierra Leone, today’s briefings
outlined the Court’s activities, which indicate that there
has been palpable progress towards fulfilling the

13

S/PV.6163

completion strategy in keeping with the principles of
due process, fairness and respect for the rights of
indictees. We support measures adopted by the Court
and its Management Committee, in particular those
adopted so far this year. Such measures include
amending the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
providing support to Court staff and updating the
timeline for trials and appeals.

response commensurate with the violence. It was a
matter of fighting impunity for those who committed
those serious violations of international humanitarian
law. That is why, since the Court’s establishment in
2002, France has provided full political support for the
activities of this criminal court established jointly by
the Government of Sierra Leone and the United
Nations.

In the light of the briefings and the SecretaryGeneral’s letters, we believe that in spite of that
progress it is important for States in a position to do so
to take concrete measures to provide financial and
human-resources support for the Court. That is a matter
of urgency given the Court’s current difficult financial
situation.

In that respect the trial of Charles Taylor is a
good example, because it is the first trial of a sitting
head of State indicted by an international judicial body.
His trial, which has just entered the defence phase, is
being followed fervently not only in Sierra Leone but
also, and especially, in Liberia. That illustrates the
sometimes tragic interweaving of the history of those
two countries and the fragility that persists, particularly
in Liberia — a fragility that can be addressed only by
Liberians themselves.

We attach high value to the Court President’s
comments on the Court’s relationship with the Sierra
Leone judicial and legal system, and on its impact on
that system. In discussing ad hoc courts, my country
has always advocated building national judicial
capacity. We reaffirm that today with a view to
enabling national judicial bodies to continue the
proceedings of all ad hoc courts when those courts
have completed their work, with full commitment to
the principles of due process and fair trials. That would
guarantee respect for the principle of equality and
would entrench the rule of law in the States concerned.
It would also ensure State ownership of court archives,
whose importance transcends the actual proceedings
and involves the history of the States concerned and
the process of national reconciliation. The situation has
changed, and the national judiciaries of States in which
such crimes have been committed and where evidence
and witnesses are available are capable of
professionally handling all unresolved issues, with the
support and assistance of the international community.
Our concern that the Special Court for Sierra
Leone complete its work in line with the completion
strategy — a concern shared by the Court — places
upon us the responsibility to enable the Court to decide
as soon as possible on measures with respect to legacy
issues, through a mechanism with defined tasks and
resources.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I too
wish to thank Ms. Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Mr. Stephen Rapp,
Prosecutor of the Court, for their work. The gravity of
the crimes perpetrated during the civil war called for a

14

In that context, it is noteworthy that the United
Nations has succeeded in adopting an approach with a
regional orientation: in Sierra Leone, the Special Court
is guarded by a contingent from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. That should encourage us to
continue on that path, including the transformation of
the United Nations presence in Sierra Leone into an
integrated office, linked with the inclusive approach
advocated within the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
From today’s briefings, I understand that the
Special Court for Sierra Leone will complete its work
by 2011 at the latest. The Council should therefore
express itself on the Court’s completion strategy soon.
In that regard, France hopes that the final strategy will
be financially sustainable. The Sierra Leone court
system should be closely associated with this and
should play its full part in taking over residual
functions; likewise, other countries could provide
support so that those convicted by the Special Court
can serve their sentences on the territory of those
countries.
Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to start by thanking Renate Winter,
President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, and
Prosecutor Steven Rapp for their presence among us
and for their briefings. This Council and the
international community must be proud of the work of
and the trail blazed by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.

09-40569

S/PV.6163

The Special Court has been a bellwether. It was
the first Court to be established with a shared model of
responsibilities under an agreement between the United
Nations and one of its Member States — Sierra Leone.
Primarily, however, it was the first step taken by that
country in its fight against impunity and accountability
for serious crimes whose excessive cruelty shocked
humankind.
As Justice Winter eloquently described, the
Special Court for Sierra Leone has set precedents in
many matters. Its jurisprudence was the first to develop
the principle of non-applicability of amnesties in
international prosecution and to establish limitations on
the immunity of heads of State before an international
criminal court, and it was the first to recognize the use
of child soldiers as an international crime. Its
invaluable legacy to international criminal justice and
to international law deserves our acknowledgement and
the praise of the international community.
Now, it is to be the first to end its judicial
proceedings and to set up a residual mechanism that
will remain once it has closed its doors. It will serve as
an example for other courts. In that regard, we
acknowledge the need to redouble the international
community’s efforts towards completion and to ensure
justice for the victims.
The last trial, which has been pending since
October, is that of the former President of Liberia,
Charles Taylor, which is a clear example that the arm
of the law reaches the highest political leaders,
guaranteeing their right to a legitimate defence with
internationally recognized procedural guarantees.
My delegation fully agrees that the conclusion of
the trial of Charles Taylor is essential to making peace
and stability sustainable in West Africa. The work of
the Court proves to this Council that the contradiction
between peace and justice that is sometimes posited is
non-existent. The achievements of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone show us that peace and justice are not
incompatible, but that, on the contrary, justice is a
decisive factor in ensuring sustainable and lasting
peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.
I wish to join other members of the Council in
welcoming Justice Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Steven Rapp,

09-40569

Prosecutor of the Special Court, and I thank them for
their briefings. I would also like to welcome the
representative of Sierra Leone to this meeting.
Uganda appreciates the tremendous work carried
out by the Court over the past six years. We attach
great importance to the delivery of justice and to the
fight against impunity for persons who bear the
greatest responsibility for heinous crimes and
violations of international humanitarian law. Uganda
applauds the President, the Prosecutor and the Court on
the completion strategy and on the timely manner in
which they plan to complete the cases before the Court.
To that extent, the Court can rightly claim the
accolades it has received for being an exemplary model
for international criminal justice.
We note, however, the challenge of the residual
issues, which also concerns other interim tribunals. It
is imperative that those issues be dealt with properly
and ensure the smooth conclusion of the work of the
tribunal. Uganda welcomes the capacity-building
programmes and the training extended to the Sierra
Leone police on investigations. In that way, the Court
ensures that, even when its mandate is over, there will
be continuity. There is no substitute for programmes
such as victim and witness protection until the last
sentence has been served.
We also welcome the outreach programmes,
which ensure that the victims and the community are
informed at every stage of the process. Only thus will
they develop confidence that the system works, so that
the healing process can start in full awareness that their
abusers were punished for their transgressions. Justice
must not only be done — it must also be seen to be
done. The Special Court’s outreach programmes
reinforce that long-held legal adage.
We have noted with concern that, based on
current available funds, the Court will experience a
significant shortfall by the beginning of next month,
which is likely to disrupt its work. It is important that
the resources of the Court be predictable and consistent
in order to enable the Court to concentrate on its
judicial work and not to be encumbered by engaging in
fund-raising activities. We therefore appeal to the
international partners to urgently provide the requisite
funds to the Court and thank the international partners
for the exemplary efforts that they have made in
mobilizing the resources that have supported the
Courts to date.

15

S/PV.6163

Finally, I thank the President, the Prosecutor and
the staff of the Special Court for their good work.

The President: I now give the floor to Justice
Winter to respond to comments.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Ms. Winter: I do not wish to take up much of the
Council’s time. We have had a meeting of great
importance, especially to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. Once again, I would like to express my
gratitude in the name of the Court and thank the
Council for the continuous help that we have received
so far. I urge the Council not to forget all those victims
and witnesses who risked so much to come forward
and help justice to achieve its cause. I urge the Council
not to forget us now in our final efforts to complete our
work. I thank all its members very much.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Sierra Leone.
Mr. Davies (Sierra Leone): I want to thank the
Council for organizing this meeting and the President
and the Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone for briefing the Council on the considerable
achievements that the Court has made.
As already highlighted by previous speakers, we
have come a long way since the cessation of hostilities.
We have been able to successfully organize three
elections, the last of which brought a change of
Government that saw the former opposition party
leader, President Ernest Bai Koroma of the All People’s
Congress, form the present Government.
Sierra Leone has had a unique experience in its
peacebuilding process. Being maybe the first country
to introduce a hybrid Special Court and a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in which perpetrators of
atrocities and victims were able to expel the venom in
them, whilst those responsible for serious atrocities
were brought to justice in the Special Court.
I want to use this opportunity to thank the
members of the international community who have
consistently supported the Court, both financially and
morally, and to appeal for their continued support with
a view to concluding the Court’s valuable work until it
completes its deliberations early in 2011. We note with
satisfaction that two trials have already been
completed, with two remaining trials to be concluded.

The President: I shall now give the floor to
Mr. Rapp to respond to some of the comments that
have been made.
Mr. Rapp: I wish to join President Winter in
thanking the Council for convening this meeting and
you, Sir, for presiding over it. I should also like to
thank Council members for their presentations on
behalf of member States, and particularly for their
commendation of and praise for the work of the
Special Court. I think I speak for the staff of the
Special Court, and in particular the staff of the Office
of the Prosecutor, in saying that those who are working
in this endeavour will continue until our mandate is
complete to work in such a way that we are worthy of
the support that the Security Council has provided.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

Let me once again thank the Council for this
meeting and President Winter and Prosecutor Rapp for
their lucid presentations.

16

09-40569
