United Nations

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4259

th meeting
Friday, 19 January 2001, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jayakumar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Singapore)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ryan
Miss Durrant
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Neewoor
Ms. Sydnes
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Kuchynski
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
The responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security: HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping operations.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-21989 (E)

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.40 p.m.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing on the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) in relation to
United Nations forces. I should also like to thank Dr.
Piot for his informative and exhaustive briefing on how
the various United Nations organizations, in
cooperation with the World Bank, have responded to
the devastating effects of the AIDS epidemic at the
global level.
I should also like to express, through the
representative of the United States, my gratitude to
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke for his active efforts in
encouraging the Security Council to deal with this
matter. As this is his last meeting with us in the
Council, I should like to wish him great success in his
future endeavours.
For my delegation it is clear the world AIDS
epidemic around the world is a phenomenon that
requires the greatest efforts on the part of all nations,
acting individually as well as collectively.
We are encouraged by the adoption, at the most
recent session of the General Assembly, of resolution
55/13, through which it was decided to convene a
special session in June of this year to deal with various
aspects of this problem, including those linked to the
peace and security of nations. We hope that the
Assembly will continue to be the appropriate forum for
dealing with this topic, in order to ensure that it
receives the consideration it deserves from all of the
States Members of the United Nations.
The global problem of AIDS is a daunting
challenge for the authorities of many of our countries
in the areas of public health, economic development
and national security. Of all that has been said and
written on this topic, my delegation is clear, at least, on
the following aspects.
AIDS, having claimed 20 million lives so far,
represents the greatest global epidemic the world has
known since the appearance of the bubonic plague in
Europe six centuries ago. Of the 36 million people who
live with the disease today, two thirds of them live in
sub-Saharan Africa, where 8 million of them are
orphaned children.

The best strategy to fight the epidemic consists of
national programmes aimed at preventing the spread of
the disease, alleviating its effects on its victims, and
access to low-cost medications, including a vaccine.
AIDS also poses a threat to economic
development. A World Bank study estimates that thus
far we have seen only 10 per cent of the potential
manifestations of this disease and 10 per cent of the
number of deaths. People with AIDS in developing
countries will not have access to a vaccine or to lowcost medication for another 10 years. Indicators
relating to productivity, family income and the training
of human resources will also be broadly affected by
this epidemic.
As a result, this situation requires political
leadership on the part of Governments, action by the
affected communities and a responsible attitude on the
part of international pharmaceutical companies.
As concerns the impact of AIDS on peace and
security, the Council clearly pointed in resolution 1308
(2000) of July last that an out-of-control epidemic
could threaten the stability and security of countries,
and adopted a series of measures within the scope of its
jurisdiction.
Let us imagine an extreme and complex scenario
resulting from the effects of AIDS. A town that is
overwhelmed by the incidence of this disease and
facing the collapse of its public health system decides
to seek the assistance of the health authorities of a
neighbouring country instead of passively awaiting its
gradual destruction. Thus the humanitarian emergency
is transferred to the neighbour, generating resistance
among the local population, and there we have the
beginning of a new conflict.
We realize, nevertheless, that this is an extreme
scenario. What we are seeing today is that wars and
armed conflicts help to spread the epidemic. Where
there are armies on the march, camps overflowing with
refugees and women who are sexually assaulted, the
probability of spreading the disease increases.
In this respect, studies by non-governmental
organizations carried out before and after the Rwanda
genocide are revealing. The average rate of infection
among refugees increased sixfold while they were in
the camps.
The Council, acting within its jurisdiction, has
repeatedly urged countries that provide troops to

2

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

peacekeeping operations to provide the necessary
education and assistance to troops in the field. We are
encouraged by what is being done by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and what it will continue
to do to strengthen such preventive actions.
My delegation is committed to the action begun
by the Council and is in favour of continuing to
consider at future meetings the potential repercussions
of the AIDS phenomenon on various areas of
international peace and security.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): As noted earlier by my
European Union colleagues Ambassadors Greenstock
and Levitte, Sweden will speak a little later on behalf
of the European Union. I wish to associate Ireland fully
with the statement of the Swedish European Union
presidency in advance. We would like to make the
following points in our national capacity.
We welcome today’s debate on HIV/AIDS, and
we recognize the efforts of the United States and of
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke in helping to inscribe
this critical issue on the agenda of the Security
Council.
We
commend
the
Department
of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for the
cooperation framework just presented, which is an
important follow-up to resolution 1308 (2000).
The analyses and the detailed action programmes
which we heard earlier from Jean-Marie Guéhenno and
Peter Piot reflect very clear, unblinking responses by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS. I commend their frankness and the
practicable character of their proposals, as well as the
evident
intensive
cooperation
between
their
departments.
The intensified cooperation envisaged at the
Headquarters and field levels, encompassing military
and civilian peacekeepers as well as humanitarian
workers and vulnerable populations, will constitute a
very important further step in the fight against the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. We particularly welcome the
proposal for extensive training for peacekeepers
before, during and after their participation in missions,
which has already been identified by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as one of the
key factors in this area. We encourage Member States
to support the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in this regard.

I should like also to echo and to underline the
important point made earlier by Jean-Marie Guéhenno
that we need to move quickly to fully staff the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and, during
the comprehensive review, to look at the staffing needs
related to the crucial issues he covered today.
The Council has recognized that, in large areas of
the world, HIV/AIDS poses a threat to international
peace and security. Where this threat is most
conspicuous, the Governments and peoples concerned
are faced already with the huge challenges of forging
national and regional development. Ireland is firmly
convinced that in building international peace and
security, the international community must recognize
that no peace can be whole or secure if it is not
underpinned by a sustainable process of economic and
social development. Many different challenges flow
from this assertion. Effective combat against, and
reversal of, HIV/AIDS is one of them.
The problem of HIV/AIDS is an extremely
complex one. It is abundantly clear that the success of
the struggle against HIV/AIDS in developing countries
depends on the implementation of policies and
programmes that deal with the fundamental problems
of global poverty and inequity. I would like to make
some comments on what Ireland sees as the major
challenges in combating this pandemic.
On a global scale, the impact of HIV on
international development is similar to the impact of
the HIV virus on human immunity; it is progressively
weakening the fabric of societies and increasing their
vulnerability to conflict and poverty. Though there is
now genuine commitment on the part of many leaders
to fighting the disease, it is a hard reality that the
countries most affected by HIV/AIDS are those least
able to afford the mobilization of a sustained, effective
response.
There is no single other issue that presents such
an enormous challenge to the attainment of the
international development goals than HIV/AIDS. We
know that low levels of development are associated
with poverty, illiteracy, poor access to health services,
gender inequality, economic migration and political
instability. We know that these are the same factors that
have greatly facilitated the spread of HIV in poorer
countries. We know also that the existence of high rates
of HIV/AIDS in communities leads to a reversal of
development progress. In short, HIV/AIDS is both a

3

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

cause and a result of high levels of poverty and
underdevelopment. The fight against HIV/AIDS will
never be won unless it is situated within a
comprehensive response which effectively addresses
global poverty and disadvantage.
Despite the very considerable efforts to stop the
halt of HIV/AIDS over the past decade, the number of
people infected with the virus, particularly in countries
where there are high rates of poverty and instability,
continues to grow. Twenty years into this pandemic the
international community is more aware of which
interventions have succeeded in curtailing the spread of
HIV and which have not. More than this, there is now a
much greater understanding of which approaches to
development aid have been found to be effective and
which are inappropriate or are no longer valid. One
clear message has been learned, however, and that is
that complex development problems are not amenable
to quick-fix, vertical-type interventions.
There is a very real sense that HIV/AIDS has
transformed the development agenda. The global
spread of HIV/AIDS has highlighted the inadequacies
and failures of the international development effort to
date. Ireland believes that there is no single issue that
provides a more compelling reason for strengthening
our commitment, including the financial commitment
of the donor community, to international development
cooperation than the global HIV/AIDS crisis.
Ireland has developed a specific HIV/AIDS
strategy for our national programme of development
cooperation. HIV/AIDS is now a core issue cutting
right across all development programmes supported by
the Irish Government. The commitment by our
Government to reaching the United Nations target of
0.7 per cent of GNP to be spent on official
development assistance (ODA) by the year 2007
provides us with an opportunity to advocate and to
provide substantial additional financial support to
address this huge global challenge.
There is a need for the international community
to assist poorer countries in providing care and support
for people infected with the HIV virus. In particular,
we must redouble our efforts in conjunction with the
relevant United Nations bodies, in addition to DPKO
and
UNAIDS,
industry
and
other
relevant
organizations, to address the complex issues of access
to medicines in developing countries and overcoming
the obstacles in that regard. We need clarity about

4

issues such as tiered pricing, compulsory licensing,
parallel imports and the rights and obligations of both
patent holders and signatories to international patent
protection agreements.
We hope that all of these issues will be addressed
in the forthcoming special session of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS next June. We welcome the
proposal that one of the round tables scheduled as part
of the special session should include a discussion on
HIV/AIDS as a security issue. We look forward to
participating in the preparatory process and in the
special session itself, which, hopefully, will secure a
full global commitment to fight the pandemic.
I heard, and share fully, Richard Holbrooke’s
conviction that resolution 1308 (2000) should become
one of those watershed resolutions in the history of the
United Nations thus far.
Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia, in his address
to the HIV/AIDS meeting organized by the African
Development Forum in Addis Ababa last month, stated
that “the struggle against HIV/AIDS is a struggle for
the future of the African continent”. Our presence here
today demonstrates a very clear affirmation of Mr.
Meles’ statement and recognizes also that HIV/AIDS is
a major development crisis not just for Africa but for
the global community. We also recognize that the only
solution will be a global one involving sustained
coordination and cooperation by us all.
Finally, I join other speakers in bidding au revoir
soon to our colleague, New Yorker and man of the
world, Richard Holbrooke. I would be grateful if his
colleagues could convey this message to him.
Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over today’s meeting
on the question of particular importance for the entire
United Nations membership, and for my delegation in
particular. I want also to welcome the Minister of
International Development of Norway, who spoke
today. I would like to join other speakers in expressing
our appreciation for the briefings by Mr. Jean-Marie
Guéhenno and Dr. Peter Piot and for their information
on the implementation of the Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000) and on the steps undertaken
within the framework of the United Nations system and
worldwide to address the problem of HIV/AIDS.
We regard this meeting as an important review
stage in the ongoing work in the United Nations in this

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

field. A year has passed since the Security Council held
its first open discussion on the issue of HIV/AIDS.
Now there is a need to assess how much has been done
and how effectively the bodies and agencies of the
United Nations system have worked in carrying out the
tasks entrusted to them.
Today, one can hardly dispute the fact that the
problem of AIDS has become one of the key issues on
the agenda of the United Nations, as well as of the
work of many other international and regional
organizations. The representatives of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) have
provided us with detailed information regarding these
developments and the efforts that are being undertaken
within their respective agencies.
I want to join my colleagues in paying tribute to
Ambassador
Holbrooke,
specifically
for
his
outstanding role and his tremendous efforts in
promoting the effective consideration of the issue of
HIV/AIDS in the United Nations and in the Security
Council. Undoubtedly, the issue of HIV/AIDS on the
Council’s agenda will remain as one of the most
important
accomplishments
in
Ambassador’s
Holbrooke rich United Nations diplomatic heritage. We
are thankful to him and wish him every success in his
future endeavours.
On the whole, we consider that the past year was
rather productive and demonstrated significant progress
in tackling the problem of HIV/AIDS. I wish, in this
connection, to address such an important aspect as
coordination within the United Nations. We have heard
quite often the criticism regarding the absence of
effective coordination between various bodies of the
United Nations system — in particular DPKO and
UNAIDS, field missions and Headquarters — and we
should recognize that a substantial part of that criticism
was justified. Still, we see that the situation in this area
is improving.
Today’s signing, as we have just heard from Dr.
Peter Piot, of a cooperation framework agreement
between UNAIDS and DPKO is, of course, a welcome
development.
We
hope
that
the
adequate
implementation of this document will also strengthen
the effective realization of Security Council resolution
1308 (2000) and improve the capacity of peacekeepers
to become advocates of and actors for the awareness
and prevention of HIV transmission. I cannot but agree

that it is incumbent on the United Nations to set the
highest possible standards for the conduct of troops
deployed under its flag, and we welcome further efforts
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UNAIDS in fulfilling this task.
At the same time, it should be pointed out that
awareness-raising and prevention of HIV/AIDS is not
only the task of these two bodies. All other sectors and
United Nations bodies dealing with the problem should
be involved in this work. My delegation is convinced
that the key role and responsibility for coordinating
these efforts lies within the General Assembly. The
delegation of Ukraine made every effort to advance the
idea of convening a special session on the problem of
AIDS, which is expected to elaborate a comprehensive
agenda for mutual action against the pandemic and to
become a coordinator of further efforts of the United
Nations and the world community in this direction.
I would also like to commend the work done by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations during the
past six months in implementing resolution 1308
(2000). Taking into account the significant constraints,
including the absence of adequate resources and
staffing, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
has managed to accomplish most of what could be
realistically expected of it. We are grateful for that, and
we hope that its work in this field will continue to
improve.
The success of our undertaking should be
measured by the results achieved. Unfortunately, as we
have just been informed by Dr. Peter Piot, despite all
the efforts made, the HIV pandemic continues to
advance. During the past year alone over 5 million
people were infected with HIV worldwide and 3
million people died of AIDS — more annual deaths
than ever before. These facts confirm that the scourge
of HIV/AIDS will continue to be a serious challenge
for humankind for many years to come. The results of
the work, which is being undertaken on a large scale,
will not be seen immediately. That is why it is critically
important to accelerate the coordinated efforts of the
international community in fighting the disease. Let me
echo what has been said by a number of speakers
before me: we need real commitments to accomplish
what we are aiming at, and only when those
commitments become a reality will we be able to
respond adequately to this epidemic.

5

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We thank you,
honourable Minister, for presiding over this important
meeting today. We also welcome the Minister of
International Development of Norway and thank her
for her participation in the discussion today.
We wish to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
for their important briefings this morning.
The open meeting of the Security Council today
on the theme “The responsibility of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security: HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping
operations” is a timely event, in our view, for two
distinct reasons. First, the AIDS pandemic continues to
take a heavy toll of human lives daily across the world,
leaving in its wake destitution and despair in millions
of homes. The HIV/AIDS tragedy has afflicted the
African continent more severely than anywhere else.
Communities have been wiped out wholesale; valuable
human resources so essential for the social and
economic development of nations have fallen victim,
leaving behind voids not easy to fill. I can only
reiterate what has been said on so many occasions
before — that African Governments need a much larger
measure of international support and assistance as they
grapple relentlessly with the deadly AIDS pandemic
with their limited resources.
In July last year the Security Council adopted
resolution 1308 (2000), in which the impact of
HIV/AIDS on societies and nations was brought into
focus, and several measures have been recommended
to be taken by relevant United Nations agencies and at
national levels aimed at containing the pandemic. It
also addresses the risk factor for men and women
deployed in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We commend all the efforts undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in creating
awareness among its personnel on the seriousness of
the issue. However, these efforts need to be further
intensified, as well as complemented by the initiatives
of the troop-contributing countries to better prepare
their troops by training them in and informing them on
the preventive measures necessary in the field.
More importantly, the resolution recognizes for
the first time that HIV/AIDS has impacts on the
stability and security of nations and societies. The

6

work carried out by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Medical Support Unit in tandem has
been most encouraging not only from a training point
of view, but as a joint effort to act as a facilitator in
testing and counselling individuals affected by the
virus. Obviously, we know that there remains a great
deal to do, as mentioned both by Mr. Guéhenno and Dr.
Piot today.
The second reason why we regard today’s open
meeting of the Security Council, devoted to the AIDS
issue, as timely is that it is an opportunity for us to
express our appreciation and thanks to Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, on this day when he completes his
tenure as Permanent Representative, not only for his
initiative of placing the HIV/AIDS question on the
Security Council agenda for the first time in January
2000, during the United States Council presidency, but
also for the impetus he provided, under which
President Clinton, Vice-President Al Gore and the
United States Congress came forward to commit
substantial new funds to help fight HIV/AIDS. In this
regard, we recall particularly the order signed by
President Clinton last year to encourage the United
States pharmaceutical industry to bring down the costs
of medicine for treatment of HIV/AIDS sold in Africa.
Ambassador Holbrooke undoubtedly has made a
significant contribution to raising awareness about
HIV/AIDS through his action at the United Nations.
We thank him warmly as we wish him well in his
future endeavours. We thank him, finally, for having
been a good friend of Africa and my country during his
tenure and for his very frank and candid statement in
this Chamber this morning, covering a host of very
important issues of concern to the international
community.
Fortunately, there are drugs today that help in the
treatment of HIV/AIDS, and the use of such drugs has
already brought about a marked decline in the
incidence of AIDS in the industrialized nations. The
initiative President Clinton has taken to help bring
down the costs of drugs in Africa for HIV/AIDS
treatment may not necessarily make the drugs cheap
enough and affordable for all in the near future, but it
is an important step in that direction. Similar initiatives
need to be taken to cover all developing nations and,
more importantly, to ensure access by all HIV victims
to life-saving medication at reasonable costs. We also
believe that international financial institutions that
have the resources at their disposal need to do a lot

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

more, in concert with the United Nations system, in the
global battle against HIV/AIDS.

remarks this
challenge.

The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

During our recently ended tenure on the Council,
Canada consistently argued that the Council must
broaden its definition of security to include nontraditional threats, particularly those that affect human
security. As we stated exactly a year ago in this
Chamber, there is no question that the HIV/AIDS
pandemic has reached proportions that pose a clear
threat to stability and development.

Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is pleased that the Security Council is once
again addressing the important issue of HIV/AIDS. We
are grateful for the briefings provided by Dr. Piot and
Under-Secretary-General Guéhenno on the ongoing
efforts across the United Nations system and on the
efforts, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1308
(2000), within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, to deal with the tragedy of AIDS.
We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Mr. Guéhenno and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for the efforts they have
made, with resources that remain too limited, to
enhance training for Blue Helmets, both in general and
regarding HIV/AIDS prevention in particular. We also
wish to encourage them to go further in their
endeavours.
(spoke in English)
In last year’s Council consultations on resolution
1308 (2000), led by Ambassador Holbrooke, Canada
particularly welcomed the early engagement of troop
contributors in the process, because HIV/AIDS in the
context of peacekeeping is a matter that affects them
directly. At that time we recommended that this process
be a model for future Security Council consultations,
and underscored our belief that the views of troop
contributors should be given particular weight on
issues such as HIV/AIDS.
We would therefore like to suggest now, in line
with the important open debate on strengthening
cooperation with troop contributors, held earlier this
week, that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and UNAIDS meet soon with troop contributors to
assess the progress made in undertaking the
requirements of resolution 1308 (2000).
At the same time, let us take care not to demonize
peacekeepers. Every aspect of HIV/AIDS is important
and needs to be addressed effectively, but I trust that no
one here believes that peacekeepers are at the heart of
this problem. HIV/AIDS is, nonetheless, as
Ambassador Holbrooke so well demonstrated in his

morning,

a

very

serious

security

Like others, we wish to express our appreciation
for the work of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, who
brought such commitment, determination and
humanitarian energy to this crucial issue.
No region of the world is unaffected by the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, nor can any region be
complacent. This morning Under-Secretary-General
Guéhenno and Executive Director Piot discussed the
truly shocking statistics on this issue. Those numbers
are seared into the minds of everyone in this Chamber.
They tell of devastation with long-term consequences
potentially the equal of conflict and war; indeed, left
unattended, these consequences can lead to State
failure.
There are fortunately, however, some bright spots
with regard to the international community’s response
to HIV/AIDS. We would be remiss if we did not
recognize efforts made by many countries to address
this issue through the adoption of comprehensive
national strategies, integrating prevention, treatment,
support and human rights, and aimed at all segments of
society.
No country is spared this problem. In Canada, we
are currently implementing our own national strategy,
and we urge all countries that may not have done so to
put into place their own strategies. While there is
clearly an important role for the international
community to play in assisting this process, it cannot
succeed in the absence of national efforts.
But the international community does have a
major responsibility. For this reason, Canada is
quadrupling its spending for international efforts in the
fight against HIV/AIDS, for a total investment of
approximately $270 million Canadian dollars, which is
about US$ 170 million, over the next five years. This
increase in funding underlines our recognition of the

7

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

magnitude of the crisis and our determination to do our
share.
Beyond additional funding by the international
community is the fact that there has been a turning
point in the fight against HIV/AIDS. HIV/AIDS is now
firmly on the international political agenda. And the
first step in solving a problem is acknowledging that
one has one. Thanks to Ambassador Holbrooke’s work,
the Security Council has taken that step.
We look forward to concrete results being
achieved this summer at the June special session on
HIV/AIDS. The AIDS pandemic poses a fundamental
challenge to human security and, above all, to our
humanity. It is a challenge that we can and must meet.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Sweden. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Norström (Sweden): Thank you for the
opportunity to address the Council today.
First of all, since Ambassador Holbrooke is not
here, I would like to ask the American delegation to
convey to him the European Union’s warm thanks for
his contributions in putting the HIV/AIDS issue high
on our agenda, as well as for his dedication and efforts
in highlighting the problems of Africa and for all the
other issues he has put his heart into. We wish
Ambassador Holbrooke the best of luck in all of his
future endeavours.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union —
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area — Iceland and Liechtenstein — align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union is very pleased to participate
in this meeting today on the subject of HIV/AIDS and
the follow-up to resolution 1308 (2000), and welcomes
in particular the efforts by the United States and by
Ambassador Holbrooke personally.
We participated in the Security Council debate
led by the Vice-President of the United States, Mr. Al
Gore, a year ago. We also supported resolution 1308

8

(2000), which was adopted by the Council in July last
year. The Council is today once more sending a strong
message that HIV/AIDS is a global crisis that, if
unchecked, may threaten international peace and
human security. The European Union fully endorses
this message. The Union also recognizes the evolution
of the HIV/AIDS epidemic from a health crisis to a
severe development crisis and a potential security risk.
Attempting to describe the long-term effects of
the HIV/AIDS crisis is beyond the scope of a statement
like the one I am making today. The epidemic causes
tremendous human suffering, especially in those
developing countries that lack sufficient resources for
treatment, care and support. HIV/AIDS is also
destabilising entire societies through systemic damage,
threatening development itself.
The spread of HIV/AIDS is alarming. The latest
update published by the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), in December
last year, states that in the year 2000, 5.3 million
people were infected with HIV. The number of people
living with HIV/AIDS in the world today is
36.1 million. These numbers are 50 per cent higher
than the predictions made by the World Health
Organization in 1991. However, we must recall that it
is possible to do something to stop the spread. The
critical situation is an urgent call to implement the
plans of actions regarding HIV/AIDS that already
exist.
The European Union recognizes that there is a
vicious circle involving AIDS, poverty and armed
conflict. Movements of people resulting from conflict
fuel the spread of HIV/AIDS, but the epidemic itself
also causes social and economic crises that can threaten
stability and security. The Security Council clearly has
a role here. Fighting the spread of HIV/AIDS is
directly linked to preventing armed conflict.
Resolution 1308 (2000) addresses peacekeepers’
health and the danger of spreading the disease, but also
their advocacy role as promoters of responsible
behaviour. The European Union is convinced that
peacekeepers can contribute to the work of prevention.
Furthermore, we welcome the ongoing discussions in
the United Nations system on the ways in which
conflict and humanitarian situations sometimes bring
about an elevated risk of HIV transmission for refugees
and host communities, as well as for the personnel of

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

non-governmental

situation of individuals and how the international
community should move forward.

National
Governments
carry
the
prime
responsibility to make sure that peacekeepers are
adequately trained and educated. Moreover, the
European Union considers national strategies as crucial
to coping with HIV/AIDS and encourages the
development of long-term national strategies. Those
national
strategies
should
include
education,
prevention, voluntary and confidential testing, and
counselling. Increased cooperation among Member
States is imperative. The United Nations should
support the creation of national HIV/AIDS
programmes wherever such are not already in place.

It has been proposed that one of the round tables
to take place during the special session should be
devoted to a discussion of HIV/AIDS as a security
issue. Today’s important debate, as well as earlier work
done by the Security Council on this topic, will provide
an essential input for our deliberations in June.

the
United
organizations.

Nations

and

The European Union strongly supports the
coordinating work of UNAIDS and urges all United
Nations bodies to cooperate fully and at all levels with
UNAIDS. The entire United Nations system must act
on a global scale and in a holistic manner.
The European Union commends UNAIDS and
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
their efforts in the area of HIV/AIDS and
peacekeeping. The cooperation framework presented to
the Council today is an important step forward and
constitutes a clear result of resolution 1308 (2000).
Intensified coordination in the area of HIV/AIDS at
both Headquarters and the field mission level is of
utmost importance to fighting the epidemic and
reducing its spread. The international community bears
a responsibility to fight this epidemic that knows no
borders.
The European Union notes with satisfaction the
broad approach taken by UNAIDS and DPKO by
addressing military and civilian peacekeeping
personnel as well as humanitarian workers and
vulnerable populations. We also welcome the wide
range of areas of cooperation and the emphasis on a
multisectoral approach in the proposed framework.
The European Union wishes to express its firm
commitment to the preparation for and holding of the
General Assembly special session on HIV/AIDS this
June. The special session will provide an excellent
opportunity to talk frankly and in depth about
HIV/AIDS in a broad perspective, notably together
with representatives of civil society. We are pleased to
have on the agenda such issues as prevention and care,
the long-term consequences of the epidemic, the

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Costa Rica. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and, through you Singapore, for your
well-deserved election to the Security Council. We are
convinced that your country will faithfully represent in
this body the interests of the smallest members of the
international community.
I would also like to congratulate the
representatives of Ireland, Colombia, Norway and
Mauritius on their joining the Council. It is now for
them to be standard bearers for the interests and will of
the other members of the Organization so as to make
this body a more effective, democratic and legitimate
organ.
I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Dr. Peter Piot, for the briefing he made at
the beginning of the meeting.
The AIDS epidemic has become a catastrophe of
vast proportions. As we have heard, today over
36 million people live with the HIV virus, while over
3 million persons died of AIDS in the year 2000. The
crisis is most acute in sub-Saharan Africa. Over
25.3 million people in Africa carry the HIV virus, in a
continent which is home to 70 per cent of the world’s
adult HIV infections and 80 per cent of child
infections. Africa is also home to the majority of both
children made orphans and older persons made
destitute by the disease.
Although the human and social effects of AIDS in
Africa are incalculable, the economic effects are, on
the other hand, horribly clear. The epidemic will
dramatically reduce the annual economic growth of
sub-Saharan countries, and it is estimated that by 2010
those losses will exceed $22 billion.

9

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

We also cannot forget the more than 2 million
persons who suffer from this infection in Latin
America and the Caribbean. My continent has also
been a victim of the devastating effects of the
epidemic, on both the personal and the social levels.
Controlling this disease requires firm and clear
measures. High-risk behaviours should be avoided at
all costs. Although in some extreme cases measures
such as distributing hypodermic needles and condoms
can be taken to reduce the level of risk, those measures
are not enough; they inevitably entail a margin of error
and their success is dependant on careful and
continuous use. Reducing risk is not enough; it must be
eliminated.
A long-term AIDS prevention strategy must
promote the widespread adoption of safe practices. We
must promote social standards and values that
encourage responsible behaviour and the rejection of
the use of intravenous drugs as well as of casual and
risky sexual relations.
A comprehensive strategy to deal with the
scourge of AIDS requires, in addition to the adoption
of health programmes to provide medical and
psychological assistance to the sick and those who are
infected, as well as programmes to meet the basic
needs of vulnerable orphans and elderly people. The
human aspect of the crisis is enormous, and requires
extensive political and financial investment in
programmes designed to assist the neediest
populations. At the same time, we must guarantee that
the best medicines are readily accessible to the ill in
developing countries.
Considering the problem of AIDS in relation to
United Nations peacekeeping personnel, the Security
Council is faced with a worrisome problem. Could it be
that some United Nations personnel are carriers of the
HIV virus and thus, through their behaviour, endanger
the health of civilians in the field? That would be
unacceptable. Could it be that United Nations
personnel are at risk of contracting the HIV virus by
engaging in risky practices with the civilian
population? That situation would be equally
unacceptable. My delegation trusts that such situations
will not arise.
The behaviour of United Nations personnel
should always be beyond reproach. We cannot allow
United Nations personnel to have casual relations with
the local population, putting civilians and themselves

10

at risk of infection. We trust that the troop-contributing
countries, as well as the Secretariat, will take the
appropriate disciplinary and health measures to prevent
such situations from occurring.
Because of the judicious division of powers and
functions that the founders of the United Nations
incorporated into the Charter, the Security Council’s
competency in the area of AIDS and the HIV virus is
severely limited. It is for the General Assembly to
study and coordinate, in a comprehensive manner,
efforts to combat this epidemic. It is for the Economic
and Social Council to assess and deal with the social
and developmental effects of the disease. That is why
my delegation is looking with keen interest to the
special session of the General Assembly on AIDS,
which will be held in June this year. We trust that that
meeting will provide a new impetus to the fight against
this disease.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Richard Holbrooke and wish
him every success. I can assure him that his innovative
approach, character and special style will not be
forgotten in this Chamber.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Nigeria. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): As we bid farewell to
our colleague Ambassador Holbrooke, it is only fitting
to recognize that under his visionary and informed
leadership, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, hitherto seen as a
social and health issue, was for the first time
considered by the Security Council as constituting an
international security problem.
It will be recalled that in January 2000 the
Security Council convened a meeting, under the agenda
item “The situation in Africa”, on the impact of AIDS
on security, over which Vice-President Al Gore of the
United States of America presided. That momentous
occasion — the first of its kind in the Security
Council — attracted a broad spectrum of stakeholders
concerned with the HIV pandemic, which has become
not only a developmental problem, but also an
international security issue. This was followed by a
meeting, held in the Council in July, on the impact of
HIV/AIDS on international peace and security.
Resolution 1308 (2000), adopted by the Council at that
meeting, brought attention to the devastating effect of
the HIV pandemic and its threat to peace and security,

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

particularly its effect on United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
One year later, a number of activities have taken
place at the national, regional and international levels,
aimed at bringing the international community together
to develop coherent and concerted plans and strategies
aimed at controlling the scourge. One such forum is the
special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS,
scheduled to take place in June 2001.
The HIV/AIDS pandemic constitutes the most
immediate challenge to humanity and to the security
and stability of our world. Today, HIV/AIDS is the
fourth leading cause of death worldwide, with the toll
rising every day. A total of 21.8 million people around
the world are believed to have died of AIDS, 4.3
million of them children. According to figures from
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) and the World Health Organization (WHO),
36.1 million people are now living with the HIV virus,
while 5.3 million were infected with the disease last
year. The figure is estimated to reach 40 million before
the end of the decade. Among those infected have been
soldiers and civilian personnel who participated in
various United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Beyond the human suffering and misery caused
by the pandemic, it is now widely acknowledged that
HIV/AIDS has evolved into a developmental problem.
Governments in developing countries, struggling with a
lingering external debt problem, are forced to allocate a
disproportionate part of their meagre resources to the
health sector. Yet the disease strikes the most
productive age groups — from 15 to 49 years old —
thus causing massive losses in production and, indeed,
disruption in vital sectors of the economy. The
challenge before us, therefore, is how to strengthen the
capacities of developing countries, which are the
hardest hit, by providing adequate resources to
translate the quantum of existing political will into
action for the eradication of the disease. That we must
do urgently.
It is very important, in the discourse on the global
impact of HIV/AIDS in different regions of the world,
to recognize that the African continent continues to
experience the most devastating effects of the disease.
According to a United Nations report, some 16.4
million Africans have already died from the disease,
while another 25.3 million are now living with the HIV
virus. The pandemic poses an unprecedented threat to

the region’s development. Its hard-won developmental
progress is therefore under real threat of reversal as a
result of the scourge.
In Nigeria, preparations for the African summit
on HIV/AIDS are at an advanced stage. This week, a
consensus workshop aimed at the development of a
Nigerian national vaccine strategy took place,
addressed by a cross-section of stakeholders. Nigeria is
the first country with a very large population to cross
the 5 per cent prevalence rate, which is the threshold of
an explosive epidemic. This frightening figure has
made it imperative for Nigeria to explore all possible
means to prevent the further spread of the virus. My
President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, has declared
personal leadership of the campaign against HIV/AIDS
in Nigeria, and policies have been reviewed to ensure a
favourable environment for AIDS control. The
Government has also allocated additional funds to the
national AIDS programme, and intensive media
campaigns continue throughout the country. Local and
international non-governmental organizations are also
very active in the campaign against HIV/AIDS.
The frontiers of previous efforts at the regional
level were further expanded through the bold initiative
taken at the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Summit in Lomé last July. In spite of the lack of
resources, African leaders at that Summit demonstrated
a firm commitment to confront the pandemic. At the
continental level, programmes have been put in place
to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS through advocacy,
education and prevention. African leaders adopted the
Lomé Declaration on HIV/AIDS, which was an
expression of Africa’s commitment, at the highest
political level, to rid the continent of the disease. We
strongly believe that this African initiative merits the
support of the international community to enable
Africa to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic in all its
ramifications.
The enormity of the HIV/AIDS pandemic as a
global developmental crisis and the important role of
international efforts in finding a solution are some of
the reasons for the planned special session of the
General Assembly, scheduled for June this year. My
delegation welcomes this global initiative. The special
session, in the view of the Nigerian delegation, will
provide an appropriate forum for the evaluation of the
various programmes of action the world has so far been
engaged in. We also hope it will generate the
appropriate political commitment at the highest levels

11

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

and
strengthen
coordination.

international

cooperation

and

In this connection, the pronouncements of world
leaders at the Millennium Summit, as contained in the
Millennium Declaration, provide the requisite
reference point. In that Declaration, our leaders
resolved to halt and reverse the trend of HIV/AIDS and
halve the number of people living with the disease by
2015. This provides the forthcoming special session of
the General Assembly with a framework for the
development of its ultimate objectives — hence the
necessity for the identification of priority areas for
intensified action. This should include such areas as
prevention, better access to care and treatment, and an
increased level of national resource allocation, which is
needed for addressing the problem in a holistic manner.
In view of the obvious implications the spread of
HIV/AIDS has for peacekeeping operations, my
delegation is of the opinion that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should embark on a massive
information campaign to educate United Nations
peacekeepers on the HIV/AIDS pandemic before they
are deployed in the field. This recommendation has
been made several times by the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. Indeed, the
United States delegation had openly threatened, in the
Security Council, to veto any Security Council
peacekeeping mandate that did not provide for such a
programme, and we support that position.
Furthermore, we wish to suggest that troopcontributing countries should be equally assisted with
information materials for their troops, and also assisted
with resources to enable their countries to provide
adequate medical facilities for their infected soldiers
who served as United Nations peacekeepers, upon
termination of their service.
It would also be appreciated if the Secretariat and
the Security Council, during their consultation with
troop-contributing countries, could provide data on the
prevalence of HIV/AIDS in a particular field of
operation, before the troops are deployed. This would
facilitate the taking of preventive measures by troopcontributing countries before the departure of their
troops.
At this juncture, let me pay tribute to Mr. JeanMarie Guéhenno and Dr. Peter Piot for their insightful
briefings this morning. We are happy to note the
commencement of cooperation between the Department

12

of Peacekeeping Operations and the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in their
efforts to contain the spread of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic among United Nations peacekeepers.
During this period of unprecedented knowledge
and general development in medical science in the
world, we are convinced that the problems posed by
this disease can be successfully solved. In this regard
we must, first, open a new chapter in human history by
jointly fashioning an appropriate solution to this
devastating epidemic; and secondly, intensify
international cooperation and mobilize all segments of
society, including the private companies, which have
made some breakthroughs on certain drugs, to provide
such drugs at concessionary rates to the developing
countries.
In conclusion, let me say that there can be no
better farewell tribute to our friend Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, through whose initiative the
narrow definition of security within the Security
Council was expanded to include the threat of
HIV/AIDS to global security. He brought the subject to
the front burner, albeit in terms of an African problem.
We know today that it is no longer an African problem
but a world problem, as its impact is being felt even in
the United States, as it is in all other parts of the world.
We would like to commend his courage and the
foresight of his colleagues in accepting his viewpoint at
the time. In his honour, this effort must be kept alive
until the war against HIV/AIDS is won.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of India. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (India): I see you, Mr. President,
and members of the Council looking at me with some
alarm, but I speak on the trochaic principle: the short
follows the long. We are happy that you have been
detained for a day to preside over this Council meeting.
We gain by your presence, as we did from that of the
Minister of International Development of Norway, Ms.
Ann Kristin Sydnes.
In resolution 1308 (2000), the Council, bearing in
mind its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, stressed that
HIV/AIDS, if unchecked, may pose a threat to stability
and security. We have tried to follow the Council’s
reasoning, because AIDS is not, and has not been, a
cause of conflict; no country has gone to war because

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

of AIDS. Resolution 1308 (2000), of course, made no
such claim, but it did say that the pandemic is also
exacerbated by conditions of violence and instability.
The evidence does not support this either.
In Africa, the area of gravest concern, the
countries with the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS are,
without exception, democracies with stable recent
histories, either completely or largely free of conflict.
The countries in conflict, including those where
peacekeeping operations are based or planned, are in
fact far less affected. They have frightening problems
brought on by conflict, but a higher incidence of AIDS
is not among them. There is, in fact, a published study
which found that in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the country that, sadly, has been in the most
violent upheaval over the last decade, “HIV prevalence
rates have remained relatively unchanged in selected
populations despite the political instability and poor
environment observed since 1991 in DRC.” Even taken
with caution, because data may not be either reliable or
complete in an area of conflict, this finding shows that
there is no organic link between conflict and AIDS.
This should not surprise the Council. In
resolution 1308 (2000), it noted the importance of
epidemiology, and studies throughout the world, which
confirm that HIV/AIDS has spread fastest in peaceful,
settled societies, show that it travels rapidly along
commercial arteries, such as truck routes; through
tourism, particularly the sordid phenomenon of sex
tourism; in countries with large concentrations of
expatriate workers separated from their families; in
societies where it is traditional for teenage girls to have
sexual relations with much older men; and through
intravenous drug abuse. Almost by definition, these
patterns are generally either absent from or cannot
coexist with, conditions of violence and instability.
Commerce, tourism and expatriate workers all flee
from conflict, which also forces changes in traditional
patterns of social behaviour.
The Council expressed its concern at the potential
damaging impact of HIV/AIDS on, and by implication
through, peacekeepers, and asked that they be given
training on AIDS issues. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations has recommended predeployment orientation on AIDS issues. However, we
would find unfortunate the imputation that
peacekeepers are either necessarily at risk or carriers of
the disease. India has participated in almost every
peacekeeping operation, and certainly in every

operation set up by the United Nations in Africa. Not
one Indian peacekeeper has either arrived in theatre in
Africa with HIV/AIDS or left with it. Our soldiers have
died in Africa and elsewhere of diseases — most
recently in Sierra Leone from a particularly virulent
form of cerebral malaria — but not one has died of
AIDS. Preventive measures are part of the preparation
and discipline that all good peacekeeping forces must
have.
Singling
out
HIV/AIDS
awareness
for
peacekeepers, as the Council has done in its recent
resolutions, is not only needless, it presents a
misleading picture of the problems that peacekeepers
face and must prepare for. If peacekeepers are properly
trained and disciplined, AIDS awareness will come,
too. If they are not, they and the operation will fail.
We are puzzled, therefore, by the case that the
Council is making, but, if it wishes to make a
difference, it must take action where it can. Over the
last year it has felt it justified to go well beyond its
Charter mandate in investigating, and laying down
conditions for, the international trade in diamonds in
order to root out the trade in blood diamonds, which
constitute less than 4 percent of the global trade but
help to finance conflicts in Africa. The international
trade has cooperated with the Council to prove its bona
fides and to help relieve human suffering.
The problem of the treatment of AIDS also boils
down to one of trade. A small group of pharmaceutical
companies invoke the provisions of the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) to deny affordable medicines to the vast
numbers of patients, particularly in Africa, who cannot
pay what is charged. Cheaper generic alternatives are
available, but TRIPS is used to stop their export.
Millions, therefore — far, far more than the numbers
killed by conflict diamonds — are being condemned to
a painful death through the policies of these
pharmaceutical companies.
The massive number of people who will die from
AIDS, if they do not get treatment, could indeed create
a security problem for several of the Governments most
directly concerned. In some of the countries most
affected, the young and the middle-aged are being
decimated. Societies face the terrible problem of
having destitute old people and bereft orphans left
saddled with the responsibility of looking after each
other.

13

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

Societies that have been exemplars of peaceful
development could easily slip into turmoil, or conflict,
or become vulnerable to others, and indeed the fear is
that this is what the looming crisis will produce. This is
how we see and understand the reference made by
Ambassador Holbrooke this morning to a broadened
definition of security which guides our deliberation. If
AIDS is a security problem, this is how it will emerge.
We appreciate the point made by the Permanent
Representative of France, Ambassador Levitte, this
morning, concerning the unacceptable pricing of
pharmaceutical products from the North that are
intended for consumption in the South; and here, the
Council can help.
Members of the Council will know that the
TRIPS Agreement contains a provision for security
exceptions. Article 73 reads, in part,
“Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed:
b)

to prevent a Member from taking any action
which it considered necessary for the
protection of its essential security interests;
(iii) taken in time of war or other
emergency in international relations;
or

c)

to prevent a Member from taking any action
in pursuance of its obligations under the
United Nations Charter for the maintenance
of international peace and security.”

I put it to this Council that, if it believes, as it has
said, that HIV/AIDS is a threat to international peace
and security, it has not only the right but also the duty,
bearing in mind its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to rule
that article 73 of the TRIPS Agreement must be
invoked to urgently provide affordable medicines that
help in the treatment of the epidemic.
I have listened with great interest to UnderSecretary General Guéhenno, to Dr. Peter Piot,
Executive Director of Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, and to members of the Security Council,
in particular to Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. My
country completely supports the global campaign
against this scourge and is determined to work with this
campaign and to augment it, cognizant of the
importance and gravity of the task. We endorse the
stress laid by the Secretary-General on this issue.

14

In conclusion, Mr. President, may I take this
opportunity to wish Ambassador Holbrooke and his
family well and all success and distinction in his future
endeavours; we have become quite accustomed to such
success and distinction. I would be grateful if the
delegation of the United States would kindly convey
our sincere sentiments of best wishes and goodwill to
Ambassador Holbrooke. To say that we will miss him
in the United Nations is an understatement.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Singapore.
Let me first thank Under-Secretary-General JeanMarie Guéhenno and Dr. Peter Piot for their
informative remarks. They have reminded us that the
HIV/AIDS pandemic is a subject that requires urgent
action by the international community.
When this subject was first raised in the Security
Council one year ago, 33 million people were affected
by the HIV/AIDS virus. Today, the latest figures
released by the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) show an increase of 3 million,
or a total of 36 million people infected. These are
startling statistics. I do not think that it is an
exaggeration to describe the HIV/AIDS pandemic as
the black death of the new millennium. It is clear that
despite our best efforts, more needs to be done.
I therefore applaud the foresight of Ambassador
Holbrooke and his pioneering efforts in bringing the
HIV/AIDS issue before the Security Council. By
raising the political signature of this issue and by
encouraging concrete measures to address the problem
through resolution 1308 (2000), the Council has sent a
clear and unequivocal demonstration of its commitment
to the crusade against HIV/AIDS.
After resolution 1308 (2000) was adopted in July
last year, some were disappointed that its provisions
were voluntary in nature. But we should not
underestimate its historic importance. This was the first
time the Security Council recognized a health issue as
a threat to international peace and security. We are here
therefore today to build on this achievement.
There is strong empirical evidence to suggest a
nexus between the proliferation of armed conflict and
the spread of HIV/AIDS. Populations ravaged and
displaced by war are the most vulnerable, as they do
not have access to adequate medical treatment. It is

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

precisely in such conditions that peacekeepers can
make a difference. With the correct training in
education and prevention of HIV/AIDS, peacekeepers
can act as positive agents through playing an advocacy
role in conflict areas. In this regard, we welcome the
announcement of the memorandum of understanding
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and UNAIDS to strengthen their cooperation.
We also thank DPKO and support their efforts in
ensuring that effective pre-deployment orientation and
training on HIV/AIDS is given to all United Nations
peacekeepers.
A global epidemic requires global solutions.
HIV/AIDS does not distinguish between race, creed or
nationality. It cannot be dealt with in isolation. The
multisectoral approach practised by UNAIDS is the
right way forward. We commend the untiring efforts
and leadership demonstrated by UNAIDS on this issue.
Ultimately, however, the onus falls on national
Governments to establish effective strategies to deal
with the HIV/AIDS crisis. In the preface of its report
on HIV/AIDS, UNAIDS rightly points out that
“While international political, financial and
technical support are important, lowering the
incidence and mitigating the epidemic’s impact
must be a nationally driven agenda.”
The fruits of an effective national strategy are
plain for all to see. Successes enjoyed by Uganda and
Thailand are well documented. Key lessons we can
draw include a need for strong political commitment
from the highest levels and taking a broad-based
approach to implementing preventive measures. It is
essential that such best practices are disseminated
widely to all countries so that a global rollback of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic is made possible.
Singapore is fortunate to have a low incidence of
HIV/AIDS infection. Nonetheless, we have made
prevention and treatment of the disease a high priority
through a comprehensive national AIDS control
programme. For example, HIV/AIDS education is
given to every student, as well as to all national
servicemen who serve in the uniformed services.
Stringent measures are undertaken to safeguard the
national blood supply. HIV/AIDS patients are given
access to subsidized medical treatment and are
counselled regularly. The Government also works
closely with community groups to promote further
training and research activities, to raise awareness of

HIV/AIDS and to prevent discrimination against
patients and families. At an international level, our
health authorities cooperate with the World Health
Organization to provide it with regular updates on the
HIV/AIDS situation in Singapore.
Prevention, while crucial, is only one side of the
coin. Equally important is the proper care and
treatment of the 36 million people afflicted with the
virus. Access to health care should not be separated
from prevention. It is not right that victims in
developing countries are denied the same level of
health care made available to those from the developed
world. When we consider that over 90 per cent of those
suffering from HIV/AIDS reside in the developing
world, the availability of affordable drugs and
treatment must be made a top priority.
We are all aware of the deleterious effects of an
HIV/AIDS epidemic on a country’s economic capacity.
Just as peace and stability in developing countries are
threatened by this epidemic, their economic
development and potential are also likewise crippled.
While the Security Council can play a significant
catalytic role in the fight against HIV/AIDS, the
multidimensional effects of the epidemic can be
represented only by UNAIDS. We therefore view
today’s debate as only one part of our wider struggle
against the proliferation of the disease.
I resume my function as President of the Security
Council.
I call on Mr. Guéhenno to respond to any
comments raised.
Mr. Guéhenno: I would just like to say how
heartened I have been and encouraged by the debate
that took place today, and I would like to thank the
members of the Council for their supportive statements
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and of
our strengthened cooperation with UNAIDS. Such
announcements as the one made by the Minister of
International Development of Norway provide a
tremendous boost to the efforts of all those in the
United Nations system who want to take an ever more
active role in the global war against AIDS.
I would also like to say, to borrow Ambassador
Holbrooke’s own words, that I did not take any of his
remarks personally. On the contrary, I consider them as
a reflection of the priority that he rightly attaches to the
issue of HIV/AIDS, and I welcome the suggestions that

15

S/PV.4259 (Resumption 1)

were made. Ambassador Holbrooke can be forceful in
his criticism. He has also been effectively forceful in
his support of peacekeeping, and for that I would like
to put on record that he will enjoy the lasting gratitude
of all peacekeepers. I would be grateful to the United
States delegation if it would convey to the Ambassador
our gratitude.
The President: The Security Council has
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

16
