UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/6
3 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3333rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 February 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security Council made
the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned that the Republic of Croatia
has deployed elements of the Croatian Army (HV) along with heavy military
equipment in the central and southern parts of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as described in the Secretary-General’s letter of
1 February 1994 (S/1994/109).
"The Security Council strongly condemns the Republic of Croatia for
this serious hostile act against a Member State of the United Nations,
which constitutes a violation of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 752 (1992), in which the Council demanded an immediate end to
all forms of interference and full respect for the territorial integrity of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council demands that the Republic of Croatia withdraw
forthwith all elements of the Croatian Army (HV) along with military
equipment and fully respect the territorial integrity of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council once again reaffirms the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the unacceptability of the acquisition of territory by
force or ’ethnic cleansing’, and condemns such acquisition as well as the
practice of ’ethnic cleansing’ by whomsoever committed.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to monitor
closely the situation and report to the Council within two weeks from the
date of the present statement on progress towards the complete and full
withdrawal of all elements of the Croatian Army (HV), as well as military
equipment, from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

94-06308 (E)

030294

/...

S/PRST/1994/6
English
Page 2

"The Security Council will consider other serious measures if the
Republic of Croatia fails to put an immediate end to all forms of
interference in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council reiterates its statement of 7 January 1994
(S/PRST/1994/1), in which it expressed its deep concern at the continuing
widespread hostilities in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Security Council calls once more on all the parties to cease hostilities
throughout the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to honour the
commitments they have entered into and refrain from actions which escalate
or widen the conflict. It calls upon them to negotiate in earnest in the
framework of the International Conference on the former Yugoslavia to
achieve an early settlement.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
