United Nations

A/52/PV.68

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

68th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 9 December 1997, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Statement by the President
The President: I have just been advised that
consultations on the issues that we are going to consider at
this plenary meeting are still ongoing and that the
delegations involved in those consultations require more
time.
The meeting was suspended at 3.25 p.m. and resumed
at 4.45 p.m.

The President: After consultations with concerned
delegations, it has been agreed that the General Assembly
will proceed in the following manner. The Assembly will
begin with the introduction of draft resolutions A/52/L.49,
L.50 and L.51 and take action on these three draft
resolutions. Explanations of vote on these three draft
resolutions will be heard before and after the action. Next,
in a similar manner, the General Assembly will proceed
with consideration of and action on draft resolution
A/52/L.52. Then the General Assembly will consider draft
resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1 and the amendment thereto
contained in document A/52/L.59.
I now give the floor to Mr. George Saliba,
Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to introduce
draft resolutions A/52/L.49, L.50 and L.51.

Agenda item 36 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/52/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/581)
Draft resolutions (A/52/L.49-L.51, L.52 and Corr.1,
L.53/Rev.1)
Amendment (A/52/L.59)
Letter from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/52/571)

Mr. Saliba (Malta), Rapporteur of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People: On behalf of the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, who is not in New York at present, I have the
honour to introduce three draft resolutions under agenda
item 36, “Question of Palestine”: draft resolution
A/52/L.49, entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the
Palestinian People”, draft resolution A/52/L.50, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”, and
draft resolution A/52/L.51, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine”. I would also
like to announce that Bahrain and the Comoros have
joined as sponsors of those three draft resolutions.

Letter from Namibia (A/52/704)

97-86722 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Draft resolutions A/52/L.49, A/52/L.50 and A/52/L.51
respectively renew the mandates of the Committee, the
Division for Palestinian Rights and the Department of
Public Information to continue their endeavours and
programmes in their respective areas of activity. The
mandates of those entities have been consistently
reconfirmed by the General Assembly by overwhelming
majority votes. This is clear testimony to the fact that the
Assembly considers them vital to the overall efforts of our
Organization to bring about a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the question of Palestine. Also, this
year again, many delegations in their statements in plenary
meetings reiterated the clear position of the entire
international community that the United Nations should
continue to have a permanent responsibility towards the
question of Palestine until it is resolved in all its aspects.
The sponsors are submitting these three draft
resolutions driven by a strong desire that the Organization
should make a further concrete and constructive
contribution to the multiplicity of efforts — bilateral,
multilateral or undertaken by individuals or by
Governments — aimed at bringing about a comprehensive,
just and lasting settlement of the question of Palestine.
As members of the Assembly can see, the texts of the
three draft resolutions have been updated as necessary to
reflect the changes in the work programmes of the
Committee and of the Secretariat's Division for Palestinian
Rights and Department of Public Information. The
corresponding financial provision has been made in the
programme budget for 1998–1999.
Allow me, on behalf of the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to express profound gratitude to all
those Members that have through the years supported the
work done by the Committee, the Division for Palestinian
Rights and the Department of Public Information in
implementation of their important mandates. I would also
like to call upon all delegations present here to express their
support for and solidarity with the Palestinian people by
voting in favour of the draft resolutions before the
Assembly.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/52/L.49, A/52/L.50 and A/52/L.51.
Before giving the floor to the representative who wishes to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting, let me
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.

2

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): In the
interest of time, I would like to give one explanation of
vote that addresses all five draft resolutions under agenda
item 36, “Question of Palestine”. My Government
opposes them all. These draft resolutions are remnants of
an earlier time overtaken by events in the Middle East.
Three of these draft resolutions promote institutions
whose activities and approaches to Middle East peace are
unbalanced and outdated. They do nothing to support the
process of negotiation now underway directly between the
parties concerned, and they scarcely take note of the
considerable achievements of the negotiating partners to
date.
What these draft resolutions do instead is drain away
millions of dollars each year in precious financial and
human resources that could better serve the cause of
economic development in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. The international community has clearly stated its
support for assisting the Palestinians in building needed
self-government institutions, economic infrastructure and
social services. We believe the General Assembly should
consider carefully whether the activities supported by
these draft resolutions represent the most effective use of
United Nations resources in support of these objectives.
What this money does instead is underwrite reports
few people read and produce resolutions, like these, that
hurt, not help, the peace process. In a reform-minded era
in which every dollar counts, these resources should be
transferred from these committees and activities to other
United Nations organizations — such as the Special
Coordinator in the Occupied Territories, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East or the United Nations Development
Programme — that would carry out programmes directly
benefitting the Palestinian people.
Draft resolution A/52/L.52, entitled “Peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine”, injects the
General Assembly into questions that are the subject of
direct negotiation between the parties. That is, in our
view, inappropriate and unhelpful. At this sensitive
moment, we want to support that process of negotiation
rather than focus on issues or statements that divide and
polarize.
My Government would also like to state its strong
opposition to the new draft resolution offered by the Arab
group in document A/52/L.53, which would upgrade the
status of the Palestinian Observer Mission. If approved,
this draft resolution would grant to the Palestinian

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Mission all rights of Member States except the right to vote
and the right to put forward candidates for election to
United Nations bodies. The Palestinians would then have
rights exceeding those of Observer States. This draft
resolution, if adopted, would set a provocative precedent
that will not be easy to walk away from and will affect the
conduct of United Nations business for years to come.
We oppose this proposal on three grounds. First, the
Palestinians are not a State and should not have rights in
the General Assembly nearly equal to those of States. This
has been a long-standing principle of membership in the
General Assembly, and we see no reason to amend it now.
This is especially true since the ultimate disposition of the
West Bank and Gaza is very much a permanent-status issue
which the Palestinians themselves have agreed in the
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements to resolve in the context of direct
negotiations with Israel.
Secondly, we are concerned that this proposal could
have negative consequences for extremely sensitive
diplomatic efforts to inject new momentum into the peace
process. This is not the time to take precipitate actions that
might appear merely symbolic to those in this Hall but that
could have very real and very negative repercussions for
the negotiations now going on.
Thirdly, this move, if successful, would likely
encourage other groups involved in other regional political
disputes to attempt similar status upgrades in the United
Nations and its associated bodies, with chaotic political
consequences for those organizations. I am sure that the
members of the General Assembly can appreciate the
implications for their own regions should this occur.
The United States strongly supports the achievement
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. To our regret, the unbalanced draft resolutions before
us complicate the achievement of that objective. We will
vote against these five draft resolutions and we invite others
to do the same.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolutions contained in documents
A/52/L.49, A/52/L.50 and A/52/L.51.
We turn first to draft resolution A/52/L.49, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 115 votes to 2,
with 45 abstentions (resolution 52/49).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Latvia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The President: We turn now to draft resolution
A/52/L.50, entitled “Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
3Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, the former Yugoslav

4

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 113 votes to 2,
with 47 abstentions (resolution 52/50).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Latvia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/52/L.51, entitled “Special information programme on
the question of Palestine” of the Department of Public
Information of the Secretariat.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Rwanda
The draft resolution was adopted by 158 votes to 2,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 52/51).
The President: Before giving the floor to the speakers
in explanation of vote after the vote on draft resolutions
A/52/L.49, L.50 and L.51, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Yousefi (Islamic Republic of Iran) (interpretation
from French): My delegation has voted in favour of the
draft resolutions on the question of Palestine. However, my
delegation would like clearly to express its reservation on
any parts of these instruments that may imply recognition
of Israel.
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour of taking the floor on behalf of
the European Union to explain our vote on the draft
resolutions on the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the
Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat.
In spite of some real difficulties, important progress
has been achieved in recent years towards the establishment
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. The European Union, therefore, regrets that the
mandates of these two departments dealing with the
question of Palestine within the United Nations do not take
better account of the spirit of the peace process, which is
why the member States of the European Union, as in the
past, abstained in the vote on draft resolutions A/52/L.49
and L.50.
The European Union, however, welcomes the dialogue
that was established in recent months with the Bureau of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. We intend to continue this exchange

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
of views, particularly with a view to adapting the
Committee's activities and mandate to the new situation
that obtains in the Middle East, so that the latter may
make a constructive contribution to United Nations action
in support of the peace efforts in the region.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): In an effort to explain the
position taken by my delegation, I would like to start with
A/52/L.51. My delegation voted in favour of this draft
resolution because the information which should flow, as
advocated by this draft, is necessary for Member States to
know what obtains in the Middle East.
We abstained on draft resolutions L.49 and L.50
because the delegation of Swaziland believes that we
should all be committed to persuading the parties to
negotiate. My delegation supports the current mission of
the United States Secretary of State — that of requesting
all parties in the dispute to rekindle the spirit of
negotiations. If, therefore, we abstain, we are saying what
is happening now, while not supporting the effort. In
other words, we are tracing the truth because we know
the truth. The truth is that all parties should talk.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.
The General Assembly will now turn to draft
resolution A/52/L.52 and Corrigendum 1.
I give the floor to the representative of Indonesia to
introduce draft resolution L.52 and Corr.1.
Mr. Donokusumo (Indonesia): On behalf of the
sponsors, which include Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Guinea,
Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen and my own country,
Indonesia, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “Peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine”, as contained in document A/52/L.52.
As noted in the preamble of this draft, 1997 marks
50 years since the adoption of resolution 181 (II) of 29
November 1947 and 30 years since the occupation of
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. In the first and
second preambular paragraphs, the General Assembly
would recall its relevant resolutions, including those of
the tenth emergency special session, as well as relevant
Security Council resolutions.

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The preamble of this draft also indicates, inter alia,
that the Assembly is aware that the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples is among the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as affirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war and the illegality of the
Israeli settlements in the territory occupied since 1967 and
of Israeli actions aimed at changing the status of Jerusalem.
The last preambular paragraph expresses the
Assembly's concern about the serious difficulties facing the
Middle East peace process, including the lack of
implementation of the agreements reached and the
deterioration of the socio-economic conditions of the
Palestinian people as a result of the Israeli positions and
measures.
In operative paragraph 1 of the draft, the General
Assembly would reaffirm the necessity of achieving a
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine, the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, in all its aspects. The Assembly
would also express its full support for the ongoing peace
process, which began in Madrid, and for the 1993
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements, as well as the subsequent implementation
agreements, and expresses the hope that the process will
lead to the establishment of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.
In operative paragraph 3, the General Assembly would
stress the necessity for commitment to the principle of land
for peace and the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which form the
basis of the Middle East peace process, and the need for the
immediate and scrupulous implementation of the
agreements reached between the parties, including the
redeployment of the Israeli forces from the West Bank and
the commencement of the negotiations on the final
settlement.
Operative paragraph 4 calls upon the concerned
parties, the co-sponsors of the peace process and other
interested parties, as well as the entire international
community, to exert all the necessary efforts and initiatives
to bring the peace process back on track and to ensure its
continuity and success.
In operative paragraph 5, the Assembly would stress
the need for the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, primarily the right to self-determination,
and for the withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967. This draft also stresses the

6

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
need for resolving the problem of the Palestine refugees
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 11 December 1948.
Operative paragraph 7 urges Member States to
expedite the provision of economic and technical
assistance to the Palestinian people during this critical
period. In paragraph 8, the Assembly would emphasize
the importance for the United Nations to play a more
active and expanded role in the current peace process and
in the implementation of the Declaration of Principles.
Finally, the last operative paragraph requests the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts with the parties
concerned, and in consultation with the Security Council,
for the promotion of peace in the region and to submit
progress reports on developments in this matter.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/52/L.52 and corrigendum 1.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to make statements in explanation of vote before the
voting. May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hizlan (Turkey): Although Turkey supports
draft resolution A/52/L.52, we see that it does not reflect
all the obstacles on the road to lasting peace and stability
in the Middle East. We believe that terrorism is one of
the fundamental threats to the peace process. We would
like to emphasize, therefore, the urgent need for countries
which lend their support to terrorism to desist from this
illegal and destructive practice and refrain from using
terrorism as foreign-policy leverage.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): My delegation had
intended to give an explanation of vote after the voting,
but because of a certain slur, which we would like to
stress here, we decided to give our explanation of vote
before the voting.
Draft resolution A/52/L.52 is in our view a good
draft resolution. It is persuasive, and embodies the
principle of persuasive diplomacy which the United
Nations and all its partners should continue to advocate.
In particular, it refers, in operative paragraph 2, to the
agreements reached at Madrid. This is what we should
seek to achieve today: to remind our friends on the
question of the Middle East that they should lay down the
arms of war, and should talk and fulfil their obligations.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
For this reason, I feel that this draft resolution is less
harmful to anybody, because it is talking the language of
renegotiation.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/52/L.52 and corrigendum 1,
entitled “Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of)
The draft resolution was adopted by 155 votes to 2,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 52/52).

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document A/52/L.52, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”. The
fact that we voted in favour of the resolution just been
adopted does not mean that we either support or oppose
the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements signed by the Palestine Liberation
Organization and Israel and referred to in the tenth and
eleventh preambular paragraphs and operative paragraph
2 of the resolution.
Regarding the ninth preambular paragraph, we would
like to stress once again that the complete withdrawal of
Israel from all occupied Arab territories and the
establishment of a just and comprehensive peace, in
accordance with the principles and the mandate of the
Madrid Conference and the principle of land for peace, is
the only way to enable the people of the region to live in
peace within secure and internationally recognized
borders.
Mr. Macedo (Mexico) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation voted in favour of draft resolution
A/52/L.52, because it feels that the solution to the
question of Palestine is an indispensable element in the
settlement of the Middle East conflict.
However, I would like to make the following
statement regarding the content of operative paragraph 3.
Mexico takes note that one of the basic principles of
the peace process in the Middle East has been the
exchange of land for peace. The land-for-peace formula
has proven its usefulness in the search for a solution to
this particular conflict. However, it would seem risky to
make it a universal legal principle, to be applied as a
norm in all conflicts.

Against:

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Beyond that basic principle lies the general principle
of international law holding that conquest does not grant
territorial rights. We all recognize, as a fundamental norm,
that the acquisition of land through the use of force is
inadmissible. As a corollary to this universal principle, it
must be concluded that the entirety of any territory
occupied during an armed conflict must be returned to its
legitimate owner without conditions.
For these reasons, the delegation of Mexico reiterates
that while we recognize the political value of the basic
principle, we feel it would be unsound to raise it to the
level of a general principle of international law. Mexico
would like to call once again for greater precision in the
language used to describe a political understanding that is
not, and cannot be, a universal legal principle.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
The General Assembly will now consider draft
resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1, and the amendment thereto
contained in document A/52/L.59.
I give the floor to the representative of Indonesia to
introduce draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1.
Mr. Donokusumo (Indonesia): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Full participation of
Palestine in the work of the United Nations”, contained in
document A/52/L.53/Rev.1, on behalf of its sponsors, which
include Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, the
Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, Jordan,
Kuwait, Malaysia, Mauritania, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and
Yemen.
In the first preambular paragraph, the draft recalls
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 29 November
1947, in which the Assembly, inter alia, partitioned
Palestine into an Arab State and a Jewish State.
In the second preambular paragraph, the draft recalls
resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, in which
the General Assembly granted observer status to the
Palestine Liberation Organization. That resolution was the
first in a series of General Assembly resolutions dealing
with the status, rights and privileges of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, or, later, Palestine.

such

8

The third preambular paragraph recalls the second
resolution, namely, resolution 43/160 A of

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
9 December 1988, adopted under the agenda item entitled
“Observer status of national liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or
the League of Arab States”. In that resolution, the
Assembly decided that the Palestine Liberation
Organization, like the South West Africa People's
Organization, was entitled to have its communications
issued and circulated as official documents of the United
Nations. To date, no other observer has enjoyed such a
privilege.
In the fourth preambular paragraph, the draft recalls
resolution 43/177 of 15 December 1988, in which the
Assembly acknowledged the proclamation of the State of
Palestine by the Palestine National Council on
15 November 1988 and decided, inter alia, that the
designation “Palestine” should be used in place of the
designation “Palestine Liberation Organization” in the
United Nations system.
In the fifth preambular paragraph, the draft recalls
that the Security Council, at its 2041st meeting, on
27 October 1977, decided by a vote that an invitation
should be extended to the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in the debate on the situation
in the Middle East and that that invitation would confer
upon it the same rights of participation as those conferred
upon a Member State when it is invited to participate in
the discussion under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council. That same paragraph also
recalls that the invitation has been repeated on numerous
occasions and that, since February 1994, Palestine has
been invited to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the established practice.
It is obvious from this preambular paragraph that the
participation of Palestine in the Security Council, when
invited by the Council, is more advanced than its
participation in the General Assembly.
The sixth and seventh preambular paragraphs deal
with the status of Palestine in certain bodies. The sixth
recalls that Palestine enjoys full membership in the Group
of Asian States of the United Nations and the Economic
and Social Commission for Western Asia. Palestine is
also a full member of the League of Arab States, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the Group of 77 and China,
as stated in the seventh preambular paragraph.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
In the eighth preambular paragraph, the Assembly
expresses its awareness that general democratic Palestinian
elections were held on 20 January 1996 and that the
Palestinian Authority was established on part of the
occupied Palestinian territory.
In the ninth and last preambular paragraph the
Assembly would make it clear that it is driven by a desire
to contribute to the achievement of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, thus achieving a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
After all the facts are mentioned in the preambular
part, the operative part of the draft resolution is concise.
I should like to make an oral revision to operative
paragraph 1. The words “the same” at the end of the first
and beginning of the second lines should be replaced with
the word “similar”. In operative paragraph 1, therefore, the
Assembly would decide to confer upon Palestine, in its
capacity as observer, similar rights and privileges of
participation as those conferred upon Member States, with
the exception of voting and candidature, in the sessions and
work of the General Assembly and the international
conferences convened under the auspices of the Assembly
or other organs of the United Nations as well as in United
Nations conferences.
In operative paragraph 2, the Assembly would
authorize the Secretariat of the United Nations to implement
the provisions of the present resolution and request the
Secretary-General to proceed expeditiously in this regard.
Let me make it clear that this draft resolution does not
seek full membership or balloting in the United Nations.
The draft resolution, however, does seek additional rights
and privileges to be conferred upon Palestine and, as a
practical way to do that, the text confers on Palestine, in its
capacity as observer, rights and privileges of participation
similar to those conferred upon Member States, with the
exception of voting and candidature.
We believe that the draft resolution produces useful
and practical results concerning the participation of
Palestine in the sessions and work of the General Assembly
and the international conferences convened under the
auspices of the Assembly or other organs of the United
Nations as well as in United Nations conferences. We
expect this to include, but not be limited to, participation in
the general debate of the General Assembly, normal
inscription in the list of speakers under all agenda items,
whether in plenary meetings or in the Main Committees,

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
the right of reply, the right to raise points of order and
new seating arrangements, as well as new listings and
other issues of protocol and internal arrangements.
On behalf of the sponsors, allow me to thank all
those Member States that contributed to the extensive
consultations that took place to reach broad agreement on
the present draft resolution.
As the draft resolution says, we expect that its
adoption will contribute to the achievement of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, thus achieving
a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The
Palestinian people deserve the Assembly's support, and
we hope that the draft resolution, as orally revised, will
be adopted by a large majority.
The President: I now call upon the representative of
Luxembourg to introduce document A/52/L.59.
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union to introduce an amendment to draft
resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1, as orally revised by the
representative of Indonesia, entitled “Full participation of
Palestine in the work of the United Nations”.
The European Union has traditionally shown a great
deal of sympathy for the Palestinian cause, as it recently
demonstrated in the course of the emergency special
session of the General Assembly. The European Union
understands the desire of the Observer of Palestine to
improve and facilitate his daily working conditions in
order to enable him to participate as fully as possible in
the work of our Organization.
As introduced today by Indonesia, however, the draft
resolution goes well beyond a practical improvement in
the participation of the Observer of Palestine in the work
of the General Assembly and other United Nations
organs. It raises questions of principle which relate, inter
alia, to the draft resolution's implications not only for the
precise status of Palestine in the United Nations but also
for the relationship between States Members and
Observers.
The European Union is prepared to participate in
such a discussion here in the Assembly, but we believe
that it must be properly prepared so that we may all take
a well-considered decision in full awareness of all the
facts and after an in-depth exchange of views.

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The European Union therefore proposes that we take
a decision of principle with regard to a review of the rights
and privileges that the Observer of Palestine currently
enjoys and that we request the Secretary-General to submit,
as soon as possible, and before the end of the fifty-second
session of the General Assembly, the current session, a
report that would enable us to take a decision on the issues
addressed in the draft resolution. We have reflected this
concern in the text of A/52/L.59.
The President: I call upon the representative of
Yemen on a point of order.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen): On behalf of the sponsors of
draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1, “Full participation of
Palestine in the work of the United Nations”, in connection
with the amendment just introduced by the representative of
Luxembourg, I should like to move a motion pertaining to
the voting on amendments.
The last sentence of rule 90 of the rules of procedure
reads as follows:
“A motion is considered an amendment to a proposal
if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises part of the
proposal.”
The so-called amendment contained in document
A/52/L.59 is the complete antithesis of the draft resolution
so ably introduced by the representative of Indonesia. Our
draft resolution seeks to confer upon Palestine new rights
and privileges of participation, while this amendment
actually reaffirms the existing rights of Palestine as an
observer. In other words, it seeks to perpetuate the status
quo of the Palestine delegation.
In addition, the amendment seeks to delete the
important body of our draft resolution, contained in its two
operative paragraphs. It seeks to delete both and insert
paragraphs that have a completely different meaning.
Therefore, this is a new proposal and not an
amendment to which rule 90 would apply. I move therefore
that the amendment in document A/52/L.59 be considered
a new proposal, in accordance with rule 90. In such a case,
I suppose, rule 91 would be applicable, by which the voting
would begin with the draft resolution contained in
document A/52/L.53/Rev.1.
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): The European Union cannot share the view
expressed by the representative of Yemen with respect to

10

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
the nature of the text contained in document A/52/L.59,
which I had the honour of introducing a few moments
ago. Indeed, we consider the text of that document clearly
to represent an amendment to draft resolution
A/52/L.53/Rev.1, for the following reasons.
First, from the subjective point of view, document
A/52/L.59 clearly amends draft resolution
A/52/L.53/Rev.1. Secondly, from the objective point of
view, the structure of draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1 is
respected and its preamble maintained in its entirety.
Thirdly, the amendment relates to the same subject as that
of draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1: the full participation
of Palestine in the work of the United Nations. It also
pursues the same objective: to confer upon Palestine the
necessary rights to participate properly in the work of the
General Assembly and international conferences convened
under United Nations auspices.
The only difference between the two texts is that of
the methods selected to achieve that aim. While draft
resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1 would take today a hasty
decision of great importance in terms of the principles
governing our Organization, the amendment in draft
resolution A/52/L.59 would require the decision on the
rights of the Observer of Palestine to be taken in a
reasoned manner, in conditions of objectivity and
transparency, following the submission of a report of the
Secretary-General that would inform the General
Assembly of the implications of the decisions which it is
called upon to take.
Thus, the amendment that we have submitted clearly
respects the criteria laid down in the General Assembly's
rules of procedure, in particular rule 90, which states that:
“A motion is considered an amendment to a
proposal if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises
part of the proposal”.
To conclude, I wish to state that it would not appear
to be in keeping with the principle of fair play, which
should govern the deliberations of this body, to
endeavour, through a procedural argument, to prevent the
General Assembly from taking a decision on the
substance of the question addressed by the amendment
before us.
The President: We have heard a motion made by
the representative of Yemen and a statement by the
representative of Luxembourg. From these two

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
interventions, it appears that the views of Member States on
this issue are divided.
I therefore propose that the General Assembly take a
decision on the proposal by the representative of Yemen
that document A/52/L.59 does not constitute an amendment.

I therefore now put to the vote the proposal by the
representative of Yemen that document A/52/L.59 does not
constitute an amendment. To clarify, a vote in favour will
mean that document A/52/L.59 does not constitute an
amendment. Am I clear?
Before we proceed to the vote on the motion made by
the representative of Yemen, I now give the floor to the
representative of Swaziland on a point of order, though I
appeal to him not to make me more confused and lost
among the rules of procedure.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): I do not have the intention
of confusing the presidency, but I would request that, since
we are handling matters of delicacy now, the President
proceed very slowly and be more enunciative, speaking at
dictation speed. This is a matter of delicacy. In fact, if it
were not for the rules of procedure, my delegation would
say: “Why can’t you go and have tea, so that you may rest
and we may rest, or even call it a day?” But because we
have said what we have said, I am saying: Let us move at
a tortoise's speed and proceed very clearly.
The President: I shall repeat what I have said as
clearly as possible and at dictating speed.
It appears from the motion made by the representative
of Yemen and the statement by the representative of
Luxembourg that the views of Member States on this issue
are divided. I therefore propose that the General Assembly
take a decision on the proposal by the representative of
Yemen because, in his statement, he made a reference to a
statement in accordance with points of order.
As I informed the Assembly at the beginning, we have
discussed with the delegations involved in this issue how
we are going to proceed. As members are well aware, the
point of order can be taken up at any moment. Therefore,
I am very grateful to the representative of Yemen that he
followed an agreement we reached before the proceeding
that he would ask to speak on a point of order after the
representative of Luxembourg introduced his amendment.
Am I slow enough? Very good.

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
We followed this procedure, which was agreed by
the Assembly and not to complicate the consideration of
this issue, because the main purpose is to facilitate the
peace process in the Middle East.
The representative of Yemen raised a point of order
in accordance with rule 71. He also made reference to
and quoted rule 90. It is therefore not necessary for me to
quote that rule. In accordance with rule 71, on points of
order, I have to put his proposal to the vote immediately.
I therefore suggest that the General Assembly now
take a decision on the proposal by the representative of
Yemen that document A/52/L.59 — the Luxembourg
amendment — does not constitute an amendment; in other
words, that it be interpreted to be a proposal and not an
amendment.
Before I put Yemen's proposal to the vote, I would
like to clarify that a “yes” vote will mean that document
A/52/L.59 does not constitute an amendment.
The General Assembly will now proceed with the
voting.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Cape Verde, Colombia, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan,
Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary,

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Swaziland,
Sweden, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Brazil,
Chile, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, Honduras,
Jamaica, Kenya, Liberia, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Nepal, Peru, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Solomon Islands, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, United Republic of Tanzania,
Vanuatu
The proposal was rejected by 65 votes to 57, with 32
abstentions.

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
The President: Members have heard the statement
of the representative of Egypt on behalf of the sponsors
of draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1, to the effect that the
draft resolution should not be put to the vote. I shall take
it therefore that the sponsors of the amendment thereto
contained in document A/52/L.59 agree not to put that
amendment to the vote.
The Assembly will therefore not proceed to take
action on draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1 or on the
amendment thereto contained in document A/52/L.59.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 36, “Question of Palestine”.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/52/467,
A/52/581)
Draft resolutions
A/52/L.62)

(A/52/L.54,

A/52/L.55,

Amendments (A/52/L.63)
The President: I call on the representative of Egypt
on a point of order.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt): On behalf of the co-sponsors,
I would like to request a 15-minute recess so that they can
look at the matter at this stage.
The President: I think that this request meets the
rules of procedure. I therefore suspend the meeting for 15
minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 5.50 p.m. and resumed
at 6.10 p.m.
The President: I call on the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt): After consultations among the
sponsors of draft resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1, it has been
decided that it is appropriate at this stage to request that the
draft resolution not be put to the vote. Further consultations
will take place on the matter.
I would like on behalf of all the sponsors to thank
you, Mr. President, for your leadership and for your
understanding, and I would like above all to thank all the
States represented here for their patience.

12

The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly concluded its debate on agenda item 37 at the
61st plenary meeting, held on 3 December 1997.
I call on the representative of Norway.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): On behalf of the Russian
Federation, the United States of America and my own
country, Norway — the sponsors of draft resolution
A/52/L.62, entitled “Middle East peace process” — I wish
to inform the Assembly that the sponsors have decided to
withdraw that draft resolution for the moment. Since
similar texts were first adopted by the General Assembly
in 1993, these draft resolutions have been an expression
of support for the peace process in the Middle East. In
the light of efforts now underway by the sponsors of the
peace process and others, with the parties, to inject new
momentum into the process, the sponsors are ready to
resubmit the draft resolution at a time when we, as well
as the parties themselves, believe it will be appropriate
and useful again to seek this expression of support for the
peace process from the international community.
The President: As draft resolution A/52/L.62 has
been withdrawn by its sponsors, I shall take it that the

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997

sponsors of the amendments thereto contained in document
A/52/L.63 agree also to withdraw those amendments.

The sponsors of draft resolution A/52/L.54 hope that
it will enjoy the endorsement of all the States.

The Assembly will therefore not proceed to take action
on draft resolution A/52/L.62 or on the amendments thereto
contained in document A/52/L.63.

The Egyptian delegation this year is pleased to
introduce to the General Assembly the draft resolution
contained in document A/52/L.55, entitled “The Syrian
Golan”, also presented under the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East.

I call on the representative of Egypt to introduce draft
resolutions A/52/L.54 and A/52/L.55.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of Egypt is pleased to introduce draft
resolution A/52/L.54, entitled “Jerusalem”, under agenda
item 37, “Situation in the Middle East”. I wish to announce
that Bahrain and the Comoros have become sponsors of the
draft resolution.
The draft resolution on this subject has not changed
since last year. It has three preambular paragraphs in the
preamble and four operative paragraphs. In the first
preambular paragraph, the General Assembly recalls its
resolutions on Jerusalem, in particular those from 1981 until
last year, all of which confirm that the Israeli practices in
Jerusalem are null and void.
The second preambular paragraph recalls Security
Council resolution 478 (1980), in which the Council
decided not to recognize the “Basic Law” and called upon
all Member States which had established diplomatic
missions at Jerusalem to withdraw such missions from the
Holy City.
Operative paragraph 1 determines that the decision of
Israel to impose its laws and administration on the Holy
City of Jerusalem is illegal and therefore null and void and
has no validity whatsoever.
Operative paragraph 2 deplores the transfer by some
States of their diplomatic missions to Jerusalem in violation
of Security Council resolution 478 (1980), to which I have
just referred. In operative paragraph 3, the General
Assembly would call once more upon those States to abide
by the provisions of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
with their commitment under the Charter.
Operative paragraph 4, the final one, requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-third session on the implementation of the present
resolution.

At the outset, we wish to inform the Assembly that
Viet Nam and the Comoros have joined as sponsors of
this draft resolution.
In its fourth preambular paragraph, the draft
resolution reaffirms the fundamental principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, in
accordance with the international law and the principles
of the United Nations Charter. The draft resolution also
reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, to the occupied Syrian Golan.
Moreover, the preamble refers to the Madrid Peace
Conference convened on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and
the formula of land for peace. Another preambular
paragraph stresses the illegality of the Israeli settlement
construction and settler activities in the occupied Syrian
Golan.
In operative paragraph 2 the draft resolution
reaffirms Security Council resolution 497 (1981), which
considered the Israel decision to annex the Golan as null
and void and of no validity whatsoever. Operative
paragraph 4 determines that the continued occupation of
the Syrian Golan and its de facto annexation constitute a
stumbling block in the way of achieving a just and
comprehensive peace in the region.
In operative paragraph 5 the draft resolution calls
upon Israel to resume the talks on the Syrian and
Lebanese tracks and to respect the commitments and
undertakings reached during the previous talks. Operative
paragraph 6 demands that Israel withdraw from all the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967, in
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In the new operative paragraph 7, the draft
resolution calls on all the parties concerned, especially the
co-sponsors of the peace process, and the entire
international community, to exert all the necessary efforts
to ensure the resumption of the peace process and its
success.

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The sponsors of the draft resolution hope that all
States will vote in favour of this draft resolution that
reflects the international will embodied in the relevant
United Nations resolutions in order to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/52/L.54 and L.55.
I shall first call on those representatives who wish to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting. I would
again like to remind delegations that explanations of vote
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hizlan (Turkey): Although Turkey supports draft
resolution A/52/L.55, I would like to clarify the position of
my delegation on one aspect of the situation in the Middle
East.
There are several reasons for the current impasse in
the peace process. We do not think it is fair to assign all
responsibility to one of the elements or to one of the
countries involved. We need to deal with each of the
factors contributing to the existing situation.
In this respect, we wish to emphasize once again that
one of the most important obstacles to peace is terrorism.
The countries which regrettably lend support and
encouragement to terrorism must immediately cease using
this inhuman and destructive policy as leverage to advance
their foreign-policy interests.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The cosponsors of the peace process are working tirelessly to
inject renewed momentum into the peace process.
Palestinians and Israelis are negotiating the next important
steps in their mutual search for peace. To reinvigorate the
possibility of a helpful United Nations role in the peace
process, we continue to believe that at the appropriate time
there should be a positive resolution that would serve to
note the progress made by the parties to date, encourage
them to continue efforts to reach a just and lasting solution
to the problems that divide them and express the strong
support of the international community for that process.
We believe that the draft resolution entitled “The
Syrian Golan”, like others that deal with the long-standing
Arab-Israeli dispute, serves only to complicate the
achievement of a mutually acceptable outcome. Syria and
Israel have committed themselves to a negotiating process
to resolve their differences and achieve a lasting peace

14

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
agreement.
The General Assembly can only make
this goal more elusive by injecting itself into issues that
the parties have agreed will be decided in face-to-face
negotiations.
As a co-sponsor of the peace process begun at
Madrid, the United States is firmly committed to helping
the parties resolve their differences. However, we do not
believe that resolutions such as these are conducive to
creating an atmosphere of trust and reconciliation that will
help this process succeed.
As has been our practice in the past, the United
States will abstain on the draft resolution concerning
Jerusalem. Jerusalem and its future should be decided
through permanent status negotiations, as agreed by the
parties in their 13 September 1993 Declaration of
Principles. This Assembly should not interject itself into
this most complex and emotional issue.
The President: The Assembly will now take
decisions on draft resolutions A/52/L.54 and L.55.
We shall turn first to draft resolution A/52/L.54,
entitled “Jerusalem”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Costa Rica, Fiji, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Swaziland, United States of America, Zambia
Draft resolution A/52/L.54 was adopted by 148 votes
to 1, with 9 abstentions (resolution 52/53).
The President: Draft resolution A/52/L.55, on the
situation in the Middle East is entitled “The Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kazakstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Zambia
The draft resolution was adopted by 92 votes to 2,
with 65 abstentions (resolution 52/53)
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in
explanation of vote.
Mr. Yousefi (Islamic Republic of Iran)
(interpretation from French): My delegation voted in
favour of draft resolutions A/52/L.54 and L.55, on the
situation in the Middle East. However, my delegation
would like to state its reservations with regard to any part
of those texts that might imply recognition of Israel.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): I should like briefly to express our deep
gratitude to the representatives of Member States in this
Assembly that voted in favour of the draft resolution
regarding the occupied Syrian Golan. Their support
reflects an emphasis on justice and the upholding of
resolutions previously adopted by the General Assembly
and the Security Council of the United Nations.
Mr. Mársico (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): The Republic of Argentina voted in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document A/52/L.55, on

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
the Syrian Golan, because we believe that proscribing the
acquisition of territory by force and defending the territorial
integrity of States, which are fundamental principles of the
United Nations Charter and of international law, are the key
elements of the resolution. Our vote in favour, however,
should not be understood to reflect our position on the
content of paragraph 6 of the resolution, relating to the line
of 4 June 1967.
Mr. Izquierdo (Ecuador) (interpretation from
Spanish): Ecuador believes it essential to support and
encourage the full resumption of the peace process in the
Middle East and to contribute as effectively as possible to
strengthening the bilateral and multilateral negotiating
mechanisms that are developed. Therefore, my delegation
voted in favour of the relevant draft resolutions under item
37 of the agenda, on the situation in the Middle East, on
the basis of the steadfast principles of Ecuador's foreign
policy, some of which are embodied in the resolutions that
have just been adopted. These include, principally, the
following: first, the fundamental principle that the
acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible, in
accordance with international law and the United Nations
Charter; second, the need not to change the climate of
confidence in the peace negotiations and to promote a
search for a peaceful and negotiated resolution of the
territorial problems among the States without the threat or
use of force; third, strict respect for international
humanitarian law; fourth, the rejection of terrorism and
violence, which mainly affect the civilian population; fifth,
respect for the commitments undertaken in the peace
process; sixth, the formula of land for peace; and seventh,
the achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the conflict as the essential goal for
strengthening international peace and security, as well as
for full cooperation and mutual development.

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): The European Union remains deeply dedicated
to the peace process, which is the only way to establish
lasting security and peace in the region of the Middle
East. It is therefore essential to ensure that all aspects of
the peace process move forward so that we can overcome
the current deadlock.
The European Union continues to support the
opening of negotiations between Israel and Lebanon that
fully respect the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of that country. In that context, the European
Union reiterates the need for the full and complete
implementation of Security Council resolution 425 (1978).
The European Union would also like to support the
resumption of negotiations between Syria and Israel. The
Union reaffirms that the occupation by Israel of the
Syrian Golan and the imposition of its laws, jurisdiction
and administration is illegal. In the past two years the
draft resolutions dealing with the Syrian Golan, however,
have contained geographic references that prejudge the
outcome of the bilateral negotiations that the European
Union keenly hopes will take place. That is why the
States members of the European Union abstained in the
voting on this text, as in similar cases in the past.
This year it was not possible to reach agreement on
a text regarding the Middle East peace process. The
European Union regrets this. We believe that, despite the
serious difficulties which the process has encountered,
this resolution, which reflects a very broad international
consensus on the basis of the peace process, is more
necessary than ever. It is of the greatest importance that
the parties to the conflict honour their obligations and the
commitments they have undertaken within the framework
of the Madrid and Oslo process, and that they regain the
spirit of mutual confidence which will allow the IsraeliArab conflict as a whole to be resolved.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of agenda item 37.

16

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Agenda item 36
Question of Palestine (continued)
Letter from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (A/52/571)
Letter from Namibia (A/52/704)
The President: With the concurrence of the General
Assembly, we now return briefly to agenda item 36,
“Question of Palestine”.
I would like to inform the Assembly that I have
received a letter dated 5 November 1997 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, contained in
document A/52/571, and a letter dated 1 December 1997
from the Permanent Representative of Namibia, contained
in document A/52/704.
By those two letters, I have been informed of the wish
of the Governments of Namibia and South Africa to
become members of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. As delegations
are aware, in accordance with resolution 3376 (XXX),
dated 10 November 1975, members of the Committee are
appointed by the General Assembly.
The proposal before the General Assembly is for
Namibia and South Africa to be added to the membership
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to the
enlargement of the membership of that Committee by
appointing Namibia and South Africa as members of the
Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with General Assembly
resolutions 3237 (XXIX), of 22 November 1974, and
43/177, of 15 December 1988, I now call on the observer
of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from
Arabic): Allow me to take this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation to all the Member States that supported
resolution 52/54, on Jerusalem, which has just been
adopted. This crucial issue is extremely important to us as

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997
Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims, and to the international
community as a whole. The massive support for the
resolution, and the fact that there was only one vote
against it, is of deep significance, and undoubtedly sends
the appropriate message to all the parties concerned.
At the same time, I would also like to express our
thanks to all the States that supported the resolutions
adopted under agenda item 36, “Question of Palestine”,
particularly the important resolution 52/49, on the work
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, which performs a task of
great usefulness with a view to the attainment of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. While we
thank the Chairman and other members of that
Committee, we would also like to welcome South Africa
and Namibia, colleagues in our long struggle for freedom,
as new members.
We feel the same appreciation with regard to
resolution 52/50, on the Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat of the United Nations, and resolution
52/51, on the Department of Public Information. Allow
me to express our sincere thanks to all those international
civil servants of the United Nations who work for these
two important parts of the Organization.
Another important resolution is that on the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, resolution 52/52,
which was also adopted by an overwhelming majority,
with 155 votes in favour and two against. That resolution
included several principled positions adopted by the
United Nations over many years.
To us, all of these resolutions are great and positive
contributions to the peace process in the Middle East and
the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.
The draft resolution entitled “Full participation of
Palestine in the work of the United Nations”, draft
resolution A/52/L.53/Rev.1, is also extremely important
to us. Certainly we would have wished to see it put to the
vote and adopted today. We would like to express our
thanks to all the sponsors of that draft resolution and to
those who supported it from the start. On the other hand,
we also understand the reasons that led some Member
States to view the situation from a perspective which
differs from ours, in particular with regard to the need for
further study of the issue. We are confident that through
consultations we will be able to overcome the difficulties
and attain broad support for that draft resolution, which

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
we hope will be submitted to the Assembly again at a
future stage.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our thanks and
appreciation to all who support the just struggle of the
Palestinian people, to all supporters of our inalienable rights
and the peace process in the Middle East, and to all who
have understood the necessity for all parties to be

18

68th plenary meeting
9 December 1997

committed to implementing the agreements that have been
reached so far and on the basis already agreed upon.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 36.
The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.
