UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/13
29 March 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3511th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 March 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned about the escalation of
violence in Burundi. It condemns the murders of the Minister of Energy and
Mines and of the former Mayor of Bujumbura by extremists, and deplores the
ensuing ethnic killings of many people that have caused thousands to flee
their homes. It stresses the futility of resorting to violence and
condemns the activities of the extremist elements who try to destabilize
the country and threaten the whole region. It encourages all States to
take the measures deemed necessary to prevent them from travelling abroad
and receiving any kind of support. It reaffirms its determination to
support the Convention of Government of 10 September 1994, the provisions
of which constitute the institutional framework for the necessary national
reconciliation. The Council calls on all political parties, military
forces and all elements of civil society fully to respect and implement it
in a spirit of dialogue, moderation and compromise.
"The Security Council urges all parties to work together to further
the dialogue. It underlines the urgency of organizing, in accordance with
the Convention of Government, a national debate with the participation of
all elements of the nation with a view to consolidating national
reconciliation and restoring democracy. It invites the Secretary-General
to help the various political parties and elements of civil society to
initiate this comprehensive consultation.
"The Security Council warns that those who commit crimes against
humanity are individually responsible for their crimes, and will be brought
to justice. The Council specifically warns that if acts of genocide are
committed in Burundi, it will consider taking appropriate measures to bring
to justice under international law any who may have committed such acts.

95-09016 (E)

290395

/...

S/PRST/1995/13
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reaffirms its view that the perception of
impunity is a fundamental problem in Burundi, one which seriously endangers
security in the country. The Council expresses once again its grave
concern at reports indicating that systematic, widespread and flagrant
violations of international humanitarian law have been committed in
Burundi.
"The Security Council recalls the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 9 March 1995 (S/PRST/1995/10), in which the Security
Council, inter alia, underlined the role that could be played in Burundi by
an international commission of inquiry into the October 1993 coup attempt
and into the massacres that followed. It requests the Secretary-General to
report to the Council on an urgent basis on what steps should be taken to
establish such an impartial commission of inquiry.
"The Security Council favours measures to restore a state of law and
improve the functioning of the judicial system. It also favours the
organization of a round table of donors. It urges States to provide for
these projects financial contributions directly or through a trust fund to
be created for this purpose.
"The Security Council supports the reinforcement of the action decided
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and welcomes the
dispatching of experts.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the actions taken by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). It calls upon the OAU and its members
in the subregion to continue to use their influence to help stabilize the
situation in Burundi. It further calls upon all States, in particular
neighbouring States, to refrain from supplying or allowing the transit of
arms and to deny sanctuary and any other assistance to those extremist
elements which seek to destabilize the situation in Burundi.
"Aware of the close interconnection between various humanitarian and
political problems in the region and of the risk of subsequent
destabilization, the Security Council reaffirms its support for a regional
conference on peace, stability and security and calls upon the countries of
the region to convene such a conference as a matter of urgency.
"The Security Council remains seized of the matter.
consider taking action as the situation demands."

-----

The Council will
