S/2002/341

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 1 April 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the statement by the President of the Security
Council (S/PRST/2002/5) of 25 February 2002, in which the Council requested the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) to submit to the Council a first assessment of the number of members of
the Rwandan armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Please find attached information I have received from MONUC in response to
the Council’s request. This assessment takes the form of an introductory narrative,
supported by a map and detailed fact sheets. There is also a section on information
sources and methodology.
This assessment provided by MONUC concerns not only the number of
members of the Rwandan armed groups, but also, to assist the Security Council in
understanding the background to the armed-group problem, the number, location,
leadership, structure and armaments of all armed groups listed in the annex to the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. In view of the importance of the Mayi-Mayi presence
to the military situation in the east, data on the Mayi-Mayi is included in a separate
appendix.
A refined version of this preliminary assessment will be provided once
MONUC has made more progress in the implementation of the third phase of its
deployment.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-31980 (E)

090402

*0231980*

S/2002/341

Annex
First assessment of the armed groups operating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
Introduction
1.
This note is submitted pursuant to the statement by the President of the
Security Council (S/PRST/2002/5) of 25 February 2002, in which the Council
requested MONUC to make a first assessment of the number of members of the
Rwandan armed groups (ex-Forces armées rwandaises and Interahamwe) in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to report to the Council by
the end of March.
2.
In accordance with that request, and pursuant to its mandate to initiate
preparations for the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration into society of former combatants, MONUC has been gathering and
analysing data from various sources, including in and around Kindu, on the armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Sources of information
3.
In compiling the information to be submitted to the Security Council, MONUC
has relied on a wide range of sources. The first of these was the information
submitted by the signatories of the Lusaka Agreement themselves in accordance
with the request made of them by the Council in paragraph 8 of its resolution 1355
(2001) of 15 June 2001. In that resolution, the Council requested all parties that had
not already done so to provide “inter alia, the numbers, location and armaments of
the armed groups, and the proposed sites of their demobilization areas, in order to
facilitate United Nations planning to assist the parties in the implementation of these
plans”.
4.
MONUC has conveyed to the parties its view that the Council’s request should
be considered as an invitation for the establishment of mechanisms for the sharing
and joint analysis of the information sought, rather than for a one-time submission
by the parties of an information package which might become incomplete or
outdated as the situation on the ground continued to develop.
5.
At the same time, MONUC has been proceeding, on the basis of the approach
outlined in the tenth report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/169), to inform itself in
as much detail as possible on the number, location, armaments, leadership, structure,
movements and intentions of the armed groups, and the number of their dependants.
To that end, since late January, the Mission’s disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR) Division has been dispatching
teams to the capitals of the signatories and throughout the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to gather information, and to cross-check and analyse it. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Amos Namanga Ngongi, brought these
activities to the attention of the Political Committee at its meeting in Luanda in
February 2002, and requested that signatory parties extend their full cooperation to
these efforts.
6.
Phase III of the deployment of MONUC in Kindu and elsewhere in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo will greatly assist in the further collection and

2

S/2002/341

analysis of the information required. To that end, shortly after military deployment
began in Kindu in February 2002, a DDRRR team was sent to the town to make
contact with the local civilian and military authorities and, to the extent possible,
with civil society and other sources that might be in a position to throw further light
on the situation of armed groups in the eastern part of the country. Other sources
include members of the armed groups themselves, government representatives from
Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi, Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, nongovernmental organizations, civil society and personnel of United Nations agencies
on the ground, as well as MONUC military observer teams, which are stationed at
55 locations throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
7.
The armed groups are dynamic entities. Alliances within and between the
groups are constantly shifting, and often linked to short-term goals or individual
operations. The groups themselves are subject to leadership struggles linked to
political, economic or other objectives. They also undergo change in the course of
victory or defeat in military actions. They are in constant motion and their locations,
although generally known, cannot be precisely pinpointed.
8.
In order to give the Security Council the fullest possible picture of the
situation as it appears at this stage, including the full military and security context of
the information gathered so far, MONUC would like to present information not on
the numbers of the Rwandan armed groups only, but on all the armed groups listed
in the Lusaka Agreement whose disarmament, demobilization and repatriation is
being sought.
9.
MONUC would also like to present information on the Mayi-Mayi that it has
gathered in the course of enquiries on the armed groups. Since the Mayi-Mayi are
not listed among the armed groups that appear in the annex to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, but are an important element in the military situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, this information is contained in the appendix to
the present report.
UNITA
10. MONUC has no recent reliable reports of UNITA activity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, though the group may use that country’s territory as a transit
route for logistic supplies. There may also be some UNITA presence associated with
the refugee camps close to the border in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Zambia.
11. Having consulted with the Government of Angola, MONUC has concluded
that such UNITA presence as there is in the Democratic Republic of the Congo takes
the form of groups or individuals who are not under coherent command, and who
may have been assimilated into other armed groups, or simply become dormant. The
Mission’s Radio Okapi has begun broadcasts in Portuguese aimed at former UNITA
fighters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, giving them the latest information
concerning the situation in Angola, including the implications of the death of Jonas
Savimbi and details of the Angolan Government’s reinsertion programmes. There
are plans to invite Angolan government officials to participate in these broadcasts.

3

S/2002/341

Ugandan armed groups
12. Information gathered by MONUC indicates that only one of the six Ugandan
armed groups mentioned in the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is still active in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, namely, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF).
Three of the other five groups listed are reported to have been disbanded. The
National Army for the Liberation of Uganda (NALU) is recognized to have been
absorbed by ADF, and the Ugandan National Rescue Front II (UNRF II) and the
Former Ugandan National Army (FUNA) were dissolved following negotiations
with Kampala. The last two groups, the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and West
Nile Bank Front (WNBF) are still operational but not in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
13. The Allied Democratic Forces are reckoned to have 200 to 300 fighters,
mainly in the Ruwenzori Mountains close to the border with Uganda. Unlike some
of the other foreign armed groups operating in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, ADF are not known to have external allies. Like most other armed groups,
ADF are believed to be only lightly armed.
14. In view of the apparent isolation and vulnerability of the remaining ADF
presence in the field, and their severely reduced effectiveness as a fighting force,
MONUC has been working with the World Bank post-conflict fund and the
Government of Uganda on plans to disseminate information about the Government’s
amnesty and reinsertion programme in order to encourage ADF elements to give
themselves up.
Burundian armed groups
15. The Forces pour la défense de la démocratie (FDD) and the Forces nationales
pour la libération (FNL) maintain a presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and are also very active in their country of origin.
16. The Forces pour la défense de la démocratie are the armed wing of the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD). FDD consist of two wings, led
by Pierre Nkurunziza and Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye, respectively. There are,
however, unconfirmed reports that Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye has recently been
toppled by Pierre Nkurunziza, uniting the armed wing under one leader.
17. MONUC estimates that there are 3,000 to 4,000 FDD troops operating in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. These are mainly located in the South Kivu and
Katanga Provinces, along the shores of Lake Tanganyika. In Katanga Province, FDD
are said to fight alongside the Forces armées congolaises (FAC) and in South Kivu
they are known to have undertaken joint operations with Rwandan armed groups and
with the Mayi-Mayi. They are also said to receive outside support from a variety of
sources including the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
allies. MONUC has not been able to verify these reports. Approximately 1,000 FDD
fighters were believed to be in Moliro, but were scattered when the Rassemblement
Congolais pour la démocratie (RCD) seized the village in mid-March.
18. The Forces nationales de libération (FNL) are the armed wing of the Parti pour
la libération du peuple hutu (PALIPEHUTU). Although it is generally recognized
that FNL are present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in small numbers,
MONUC has no precise information as to their strength and location.

4

S/2002/341

Rwandan armed groups
19. Although the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement refers to the ex-Forces armées
rwandaises (ex-FAR) and the Interahamwe, evidence gathered since the signing of
the Agreement indicates that these groups are now collectively known as the Armée
pour la libération du Rwanda (ALIR), which is divided into two parts, designated as
ALIR I and ALIR II. Despite, or perhaps because of, the multiplicity of sources with
information on the Rwandan armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, establishing precise and reliable figures has proved particularly difficult.
ALIR I and ALIR II represent the bulk of the foreign fighters to be disarmed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
20. The present submission contains information provided by the Government of
Rwanda to MONUC and to the Political Committee up to December 2001, as well as
information gathered by MONUC from other sources. The numbers provided by the
Government of Rwanda have usually been higher than those gathered elsewhere.
Nevertheless, during recent meetings, Rwandan authorities have agreed with the
MONUC estimates of the strength of ALIR I and ALIR II. The estimates do not
include the Rwandan elements from these armed groups that may have been
incorporated into FAC.
21. It is customary to describe the Rwandan armed groups as structured
organizations with traditional military appellations, such as division, brigade,
battalion and company. While these appellations have been used in the present
submission, MONUC is not convinced that the Rwandan armed groups conform to a
traditional military structure, or that they necessarily operate under coherent
command and control.
22. ALIR I is believed to include in its ranks the majority of the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe who fled Rwanda in 1994. Estimates of the number of ALIR I troops
vary considerably according to which source is consulted. MONUC estimates that
there are between 4,000 and 6,000 troops.
23. ALIR I is based in North and South Kivu and Maniema Provinces. It is
believed to have two divisions, Division Arbre/Yaounde, which operates on the
Shabunda-Fizi-Kabambare axis, and Division Beor/Douala, which operates on the
Masisi-Walikale axis.
24. ALIR I fighters are currently thought to suffer from low morale following their
failed attempt to invade Rwanda in May 2001. They are believed to be isolated and
living in harsh conditions. MONUC is aware of indications that outside support that
may once have been provided to the group is now no longer available, and has been
trying, with the cooperation of the RCD and Rwandan authorities and the help of
Mayi-Mayi representatives, to establish direct contact in order to discuss
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration with some
ALIR I elements near Masisi, north of Goma.
25. ALIR II is said to be larger and better equipped than ALIR I. Its members are
thought to be younger, and not to have participated in the 1994 genocide. Estimates
of the group’s size vary considerably, with some knowledgeable sources placing the
number between 4,000 and 6,000.
26. ALIR II is believed to have at least one division with three brigades in the
South Kivu and Katanga Provinces and headquarters in Lubumbashi. The existence

5

S/2002/341

of a second division remains unconfirmed. However, reports that there may be two
or three more brigades in Katanga would, according to traditional military
structures, tend to indicate the existence of a second division whose headquarters
remain unknown. ALIR II is said to be equipped with more sophisticated weaponry
than other groups, including light anti-aircraft guns.
Conclusion
27. The preliminary information contained herein has been collected and analysed
in the framework of the implementation of the third phase of the mandate of
MONUC, a principal objective of which is the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration of armed groups. As MONUC embarks
on step I of Phase III and reinforces its presence in the East, in particular with the
establishment of the Task Force in Kindu, the Mission is expected to have increased
access to concrete data concerning the presence and activities of the armed groups
and will, accordingly, refine the information contained herein and update its
operational plans for disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration.

Fact sheets on the armed groups
Uganda
ADF (Allied Democratic Forces/Front)
Structure
ADF had been organized in four companies. Following successful operations by
the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, they now operate in small groups of 10 to
15 men with little coordination between them.
Strength
Between 200 and 300 fighters
Location
• West and north of Lake Edward
• Butembo
• Mount Varunga
• Beni
• Kanyabayonga
• Area south of the Semliki River
• Ruwenzori Mountains, Buhira, Isale, area above Rugetzi
Weapons
Primarily small arms (AK-47 rifles). In the past they were reported to have 60mm and 82-mm mortars as well as heavy machine guns (12.7 mm) and SPG-9

6

S/2002/341

recoilless rifles. With their present limited numbers, however, it is unlikely
that they would be able to move with any heavy weapons.
Other equipment
The group has been reported to have access to satellite telephones, man-pack
radios and Motorola walkie-talkies.
Links with other groups
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
(NALU)
Support
• Given that the leaders of the ADF rebellion are thought to come from central
and eastern Uganda, support from that area may continue
• There are reports that the Sudan and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have previously supported this group. MONUC is
unable to confirm this.

Burundi
FDD (Forces pour la défense de la démocratie)
Political leaders
Pierre Nkurunziza
Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye
Strength
FDD forces operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are estimated
at around 3,000-4,000 troops
Location
• 1,000 men are or were located in Moliro, Mwenge and Moba; the location of
those dislodged from Moliro is not known
• 2,000 are scattered around Fizi and along Lake Tanganika, near Ubwari
• 1,000 towards Lumbumbashi (Kampini, north of Pweto, Kinsense River,
Kamamba, Kilewa, Kilinga)
Weapons
Rifles and grenades; heavy machine guns (12.7 mm and 14.5 mm); RPG rocket
launchers; 60-, 82- and 107-mm mortars
Other equipment
Speed boats on Lake Tanganyika (for transport of personnel and supplies).
FDD use Motorola transmitting/receiving sets within fighting units. For long-

7

S/2002/341

distance communication, they have some satellite telephones and GSM
telephones
Links with other groups
FAC, Zimbabwe Defence Forces, ALIR II and Mayi-Mayi
Support
FDD have been fighting together with FAC, ex-FAR, Interahamwe and MayiMayi troops in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Rwanda
ALIR I (Armée pour la libération du Rwanda I)
Structure
Two divisions in Kivu: headquarters Kahuzi-Biega; North Kivu Beor/Douala,
South Kivu Arbre/Yaounde
• Brigade Limpopo/Tribune (Masisi)
• Brigade Lilongwe (Walikale)
• Brigade Misissipi/Tensiometre (Shabunda)
• Brigade Kolwezi (Fizi)
• Brigade Matadi (Kabambare)
Strength
4,000-6,000; RPA estimations are around 13,000-15,000
Location
• Masisi
• Walikale
• Shabunda
• Fizi
• Kabambare
Weapons
RPA information: AK-47 and M-16 rifles; medium machine guns and
grenades; 60-82-mm mortars; rocket launchers like RPG and 107-mm
Katyusha single barrel; anti-tank and anti-personnel mines; light anti-aircraft
guns (11.5 mm, 12.7 mm)
Other sources: 80-mm mortars; RPG-7; machine guns (12.7 mm); AK-47
rifles; and anti-personnel mines

8

S/2002/341

Other equipment
Motorola radios and satellite telephones
Support
Sources indicate that the group has received support from the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but that this support may have stopped.
Furthermore, it was reported that the logistic support was received by airdrops
in Masisi, Lulimba and Kilembwe. The last supply (not confirmed) was
received on 1 and 3 May 2001, by Antonov 12. MONUC has not been able to
verify this.

Rwanda
ALIR II (Armée pour la libération du Rwanda II)
Structure
One division in Katanga with one active brigade (Horizon); brigades 11 and 12
are no longer active; Brigade Horizon is active in Nyunzu
• Brigades Kasai and Jaguar are no longer active. Some units of Jaguar are
scattered around Kabalo and Nyunzu. Brigade Kasai has moved to the north to
join forces with ALIR I. Its location is not known at the moment
• Brigade Albatros (unconfirmed) and two battalions (Samurai and Claire)
Strength
Total strength is 4,000-6,000. According to the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA)
and RCD, ALIR II organizes joint operations and mutual reinforcement with
FAC
Location
• Lubumbashi
• Nyunzu
• Kabalo
• Area along the southern end of Lake Tanganyika
Weapons
They are better equipped than ALIR I, but have less experience. ALIR II
seems to have lost heavy weapons (80-, 105- and 120-mm mortars) that were
captured by RPA at Makotano, the former ALIR II logistic base. According to
RPA, ALIR II is equipped with AK-47 and M-16 rifles; machine guns and
grenades; 60-82-mm mortars; rocket launchers like RPG and 107-mm
Katyusha single barrel; anti-tank and anti-personnel mines; and light antiaircraft guns (12.7 mm, 14.5 mm). This is generally confirmed by other
sources

9

S/2002/341

Other equipment
Satellite telephones and Motorola radios
Links with other groups
According to RPA, they operate in close cooperation with FDD/FAC
Support
ALIR II reportedly recruited in the United Republic of Tanzania. These
recruits cross into the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the zones of
Kazimia (Fizi), Simbi, Mungwe, and Swima. It is reported that they receive
supplies from the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Lulimba, Kilembwe and Masisi are drop zones. The supplies are sent mainly to
ALIR and Mayi-Mayi cooperating with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is reported that the lack of supplies is at the root of a
large number of banditry attacks, especially in the Bukavu and Uvira areas.
MONUC cannot confirm these reports.

10

S/2002/341

Appendix
The Mayi-Mayi
1.
All the armed groups explicitly listed in the Lusaka Agreement are foreign,
whether from Angola (UNITA), Burundi (FDD), Rwanda (ex-FAR/Interahamwe) or
Uganda (ADF and others). The Mayi-Mayi, by contrast, are a distinctly Congolese
phenomenon. Although, accordingly, they do not fall within the strict category of
“armed groups” within the meaning of the Lusaka Agreement and the various
Security Council resolutions governing disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration, it is impossible to consider the full picture of armed
groups in the east without considering the Mayi-Mayi.
2.
Gathering information on the Mayi-Mayi has proved to be a rather difficult
endeavour. Many groups and individuals claiming to represent the Mayi-Mayi have
contacted MONUC in the field. Some have provided documentation on their own
groups and on other groups. MONUC has established contacts with representatives
of some of the main Mayi-Mayi groups in Kinshasa. Finally, information obtained
from RCD officials, MONUC military observer teams in the east and other sources
have helped fill out the picture.
3.
The umbrella term Mayi-Mayi refers generally to community-based fighters
who come together to defend their local territory, including, as in this case, from
foreign invaders and their allies. The term includes seigneurs de guerre, traditional
chiefs, heads of villages, and resistance groups. The military capacity and political
orientation of these groups varies considerably, and can change rapidly. A high
proportion of Mayi-Mayi militia are reported to be child soldiers.
4.
The Mayi-Mayi are known to shift alliances to achieve their interests. This has
at times led to internal differences and strife and helps to explain why there is no
apparent pattern in Mayi-Mayi alliances with outside groups. Some Mayi-Mayi
groups have sided with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
others with the Government of Rwanda. Factions have collaborated with different
rebel groups, as well as with the foreign armed groups.
5.
Consequently, in the course of discussions with several Mayi-Mayi groups, it
has become clear that at least some Mayi-Mayi are prepared to assist the
international community in its effort to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and help in the disarmament process by creating a mixed force to
facilitate the location and identification of foreign armed groups. One major MayiMayi group has declared a unilateral ceasefire.
6.
In South and North Kivu, the territory under the control of RCD-Goma, there
are two main groups, led by General Padiri and General Dunia. These two groups
are well structured and generally recognized by other Mayi-Mayi groups as the
overall leaders of the groups in the region. Both are reported to have received
support from the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There are
also some smaller groups with no perceivable links or affiliations with other groups.
Some, such as Mudundu 40 and MLAZ, are reported to collaborate with the
Government of Rwanda and RCD-Goma.
7.
The highest concentrations of Mayi-Mayi groups in North Kivu are in the areas
of Walikale and Masisi north of Goma; in South Kivu, in the territory of Walungu
and Bunyakiri south of Lake Kivu; at the northern end of Lake Tanganyika around

11

S/2002/341

Uvira and Mwenga; and further south towards Fizi. Around Shabunda, halfway
between the Rwandan border and Kindu, there is another high concentration of
Mayi-Mayi groups. The total number of Mayi-Mayi active in the Kivus is estimated
at 20,000 to 30,000.
8.
There is also a large Mayi-Mayi presence in Maniema, including the areas
around Kindu, and, in the south, around Kalemie. For security reasons, precise
information about groups, leaders and numbers have proved very difficult to gather,
although MONUC deployment at Kindu will permit better information-gathering
and analysis.
9.
There are also Mayi-Mayi groups in Province Orientale, but these are
apparently active in connection with ethnic conflicts there, and are not expected to
participate in the MONUC disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration operations for the foreseeable future.

12

S/2002/341

Mayi-Mayi
Strength
20,000-30,000 in the Kivus
Military objectives
• Withdrawal of foreign troops
• Disarmament of “negative forces”: some propose a mixed force, in order to
facilitate location and identification of these forces
Support
Some groups reportedly receive military and logistic support from the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Group of Padiri
Location
• Shabunda: more than 2,000 men in the area (60 per cent armed, around 840
under the age of 18)
• Bunyakiri
• Walungu
• Mwenga
• Uvira
• Other locations: Lulingu, Kalehe, Hombo, Nzovu, Kaye Bunyakiri Forest,
Kalonge, Urega
• North Kivu: Masisi, Walikale
Strength
6,000
Group of Dunia
Location
• Fizi
• Uvira
• Maniema
Strength
4,000-5,000

13

S/2002/341

Mudundu 40/FRDKI (Front de résistance et de défense du Kivu)
Location
• Walungu: Odilon Kurhengamuzimu
• Mwenga
• Shabunda
• Kabare
• Uvira
Strength
4,000
Col Rubaruba Zabuloni
Location
Kagomba (near Uvira)
MLAZ/FURNAC: Mouvement de lutte contre l’agression au Zaïre/Forces unies
de résistance nationale contre l’agression de la Républíque démocratique du
congo
Location
• Kivu: Moleta, Uvira, Fizi
• Maniema

14

S/2002/341

15
