S/PV.8439

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8439th meeting

Friday, 21 December 2018, 1.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ndong Mangue
Mr. Abebe
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Mielus
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-45706 (E)
*1845706*

S/PV.8439

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 1.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/1147, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2451 (2018).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling the vote on
resolution 2451 (2018) at this time. I also thank my
colleagues, members of the Security Council, for their
collegiality and cooperation, allowing us to adopt a
unanimous resolution — the first resolution on this kind
of subject — a political settlement and humanitarian
issue — in more than two years.
The resolution we have just passed will hopefully
give the maximum possible backing to the outcomes of
the Stockholm meeting and the Stockholm agreement.
Once again, I would like to thank our friends in Sweden
2/9

21/12/2018

for everything that they have done to help bring that
moment about. We also salute the United Nations for
the work of the Special Envoy, the Secretary-General
and Mark Lowcock, who have been instrumental in
trying to bring about progress, including on the ground.
As we get to the end of 2018 in the Council under your
presidency, Mr. President, it is good that the Council
was able to show unanimity on this very important
issue that has affected so many millions of citizens in
Yemen today.
Resolution 2451 (2018) endorses all the agreements
reached by the parties at Stockholm, which critically
include a ceasefire and a mutual redeployment of forces
from Hudaydah city and port, which came into force
on 18 December. It authorizes the United Nations to
deploy support for implementation of those agreements,
including monitors. As we heard from the SecretaryGeneral the other day, he is working on an advance
team that will go to Yemen in the next few days.
The resolution also sets out the Council’s support
for the remaining urgent steps needed to address the
humanitarian situation. We have heard from Mark
Lowcock and David Beasley in this Chamber that
despite the progress made at Stockholm the situation
remains precarious, and work is urgently needed to
mitigate the risk of famine (see S/PV.8404).
The resolution sets out the Council’s clear
expectations with respect to the need for the parties
to comply with international humanitarian law.
The United Kingdom attaches great importance
to international humanitarian law, accountability
and the need to investigate alleged violations of
international humanitarian law and hold those
responsible accountable.
Finally, resolution 2451 (2018) obviously reiterates
our full support for the United Nations Special Envoy
and the political process that he is driving, and it looks
ahead to the next steps in that process. I am sure the
Council will want to join me in looking forward to
further progress in January. The most important matter
now is that we turn to urgent implementation. It is vital
that the parties follow through on their commitments
to pave the way for a formal relaunch of negotiations
and, at the same time, deliver real improvements on
the ground that make a tangible difference to ordinary
Yemenis. We have asked the United Nations to update
the Council on a weekly basis for the foreseeable future,
18-45706

21/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and I look forward to further action and unity from the
Council on one of the most important dossiers we have.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We voted in favour of today’s
resolution on Yemen (resolution 2451 (2018)), and we
strongly welcome its adoption for all the reasons that
my colleague from the United Kingdom just mentioned.
I want to thank her and her team and all other Council
members for having worked hard in favour of
this resolution.
As stated by Foreign Minister Margot Wallström,
the Stockholm agreement can be the breakthrough
for peace and a turning point for the crisis in Yemen.
Today’s resolution endorses the agreement, calls on the
parties to implement it, authorizes the United Nations
to support its implementation and sets out next steps
in the process. The resolution does not address all the
issues of the multifaceted crisis that Yemen faces, but
the implementation of the concrete measures in the
Stockroom agreement will provide much-needed steps
in that direction, with a direct and positive humanitarian
impact for the people of Yemen.
We commend the Yemeni parties for engaging
constructively at the United Nations-led consultations.
We welcome the tireless efforts of Special Envoy
Griffiths, and we also reiterate our deep appreciation
for the personal engagement of Secretary-General
António Guterres.
Implementation of the key provisions of the
resolution is urgently needed and must be our primary
focus. The ceasefire announced in Hudaydah as from
18 December is the most pressing of several important
steps. As tensions remain on the ground, following
years of conflict and lack of trust between the parties,
it is important that the Security Council insists on the
full respect of the ceasefire by all parties and that the
United Nations is authorized to monitor it.
We now look forward to the swift establishment
and deployment of the advanced team to begin the
monitoring and facilitation of the implementation
of the Stockholm agreement, and we appreciate that
the Secretary-General has moved very swiftly to
ensure that the United Nations fulfils its part in this
implementation. The United Nations does have a key
role in working with the parties to ensure that the
ceasefire is upheld and that ports and roads can remain
open so that provisions can enter the country. We stand
ready to participate in the United Nations presence that
will be established in Hudaydah.

S/PV. 8439

We remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian crisis and the looming threat of famine.
The measures in the Stockholm agreement will serve to
alleviate humanitarian suffering, but further measures
are urgently needed, as outlined several times to
the Security Council by Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock.
Looking ahead, we welcome the Special Envoy’s
intention to convene the two sides again in January
for continued discussions on the many issues at hand,
including further confidence-building measures and the
framework for a forward-looking political process. The
parties should show the same level of commitment as
there was in Stockholm to move forward on those issues.
Swedish engagement on Yemen will continue
beyond our tenure on the Council. During our term,
we have made continued efforts to keep Yemen high
on the Council’s agenda, including addressing the
humanitarian disaster. We will, for the third time,
co-host, together with Switzerland, the pledging event
for the United Nations humanitarian response plan for
Yemen, on 26 February 2019, as a further response to
the humanitarian disaster. We have also continuously
emphasized the importance of an inclusive political
process with the meaningful participation of women
and young people.
As we stated in this Chamber last Friday, the
breakthrough made by the parties in Sweden is truly
significant and it brings hope but it will be meaningful
only once it produces results for the Yemeni people (see
S/PV.8424). Today’s resolution is a strong manifestation
of the international community’s unity and commitment
to fully back it up.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We gather
to vote on resolution 2451 (2018) today in order to
address the ongoing conflict and humanitarian crisis in
Yemen and to endorse the Stockholm agreements.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen and maintains the
firm conviction that the best hope of resolving the
conflict and addressing the humanitarian crisis is a
political solution, taking the Stockholm agreements as
an important first step. The resolution empowers the
United Nations and its Member States to start the vital
work of implementing those agreements. We continue
to call on all involved in the conflict to allow unfettered
access and safe passage for humanitarian workers and to
facilitate the entry into and movement through Yemen

18-457063/9

S/PV.8439

The situation in the Middle East

of fuel, food, medicine and other supplies needed to
save lives.
The resolution also makes a clear demand on
all parties for unhindered humanitarian access
and adherence to international law. It calls for the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
These demands are important, and we urge the parties
to adhere to them. We also hope for rapid progress on
stabilizing the economy and removing any bureaucratic
impediments to the delivery of vital humanitarian and
commercial goods.
Like the Stockholm agreements, this resolution
is an important step, but it is only an initial one.
Our overriding priority remains implementing the
agreements to enforce the ceasefire and oversee a
redeployment of forces in Hudaydah. We will be
watching closely. Success depends on the parties living
up to the obligations agreed to in Sweden.
This text places a tremendous obligation on the
Government of Yemen and the Houthis to act in good
faith, engage and compromise, and give the Yemeni
people a lasting peace. We are grateful to Martin
Griffiths and his team and to Sweden for doing the hard
work and providing the support that resulted in this
much-needed pause. We all have hard work to do in the
coming weeks, and we will embark on this endeavour
with a newfound determination.
The United States fully supports the Sweden
outcomes and their implementation by the parties, and
we look forward to the Secretary-General’s forthcoming
proposals on how the United Nations will play its
role to support the commitments the parties made in
Sweden. We call upon all parties to give priority to the
rapid, safe and comprehensive delivery of humanitarian
assistance to millions of suffering Yemenis.
But just as the parties have responsibilities, so too
does the Security Council. When the Council speaks,
we must do so clearly and credibly, accurately reflecting
the facts on the ground and with the courage to address
those who choose to fan the flames of conflict. We had
hoped therefore to include a clear condemnation of the
Iranian regime for its role in prolonging this war. The
Council must not allow Iran’s nefarious activities in the
region to disturb this welcome yet fragile agreement,
which so many have worked so hard to achieve. Iran
violates international law with impunity, sending
weapons and associated material to the Houthi in
contravention of the arms embargo provisions set out in
4/9

21/12/2018

resolution 2216 (2015) and a violation of resolution 2231
(2015). These weapons pose a grave threat not only to
peace and security, but also to the innocent civilians
caught in the crossfire.
With a view to seeking clear accountability, the
United States has spoken out in this Chamber against
Iran’s malign activities. It is long past time for every
other member of the Council to do the same.
While we voted for the draft resolution put forward
by our friends the United Kingdom, we regret that it
does not call Iran to account for its destructive agenda
in Yemen. We hope that in the days to come, Iranian
missiles or misdeeds do not shatter the promise of
peace and bring us back to where we were before. But
if that does happen, the Council may come to regret
that omission.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2451 (2018) by the Security Council and
thank the permanent delegation of the United Kingdom
for its tireless efforts as penholder on the issue of
Yemen. We also commend the flexibility shown by the
delegation during the negotiations on the resolution.
We voted in favour of the resolution despite the
fact that it does not cover some of the concerns that
we expressed during the negotiations. There are several
reasons for that, most notably the need to preserve the
unity of the Security Council on the issue of Yemen.
We hope that such unity will be preserved and applied
also to other agenda items of the Council.
We also voted in favour as a response to the
sensitive and important nature of this articulated stage,
when there is a ray of hope and a real possibility of
reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis, which has
brought terrible destruction to that dear Arab country
with its deep-rooted civilization, threatening its unity
and stability as well as the security and stability of the
region. Our support for resolution 2451 (2018) reflects
our support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy and for the Stockholm agreement
reached by the Yemeni parties during the most recent
cycle of consultations, hosted by the Government
of the Kingdom of Sweden, concerning the city of
Al-Hudaydah, its ports and prisoner exchange. We also
support the declaration of understanding on Taiz.
We hope that all parties will fully implement
the agreement with a view to supporting the efforts
18-45706

21/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8439

of the Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, leading
to the upcoming round of negotiations on a political
settlement based on the three agreed terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and its
implementation mechanism, the outcome of the National
Dialogue Conference, and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, especially resolution 2216 (2015).
That would result in ending the crisis in brotherly
Yemen, maintain its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and ensure non-interference in its
internal affairs.

is key to preventing further indiscriminate attacks and
the targeting of civilians and civilian objects, wherever
they occur.

We also welcome the Secretary-General’s intention
to convene in Geneva on 26 February an international
pledging conference in support of the 2019 humanitarian
response plan. The State of Kuwait is eager to
participate in the conference so as to continue to ease
the humanitarian situation in Yemen and alleviate the
suffering of its brotherly people.

We thank the United Kingdom, as penholder, for
the wise manner in which it steered the process as
well as its tireless efforts, and we thank all Council
members for putting the interests of the Yemeni people
at the centre of their decision-making.

Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands is pleased that the Council
has ultimately been able to adopt unanimously a text
that will increase the chances for peace in Yemen.
In line with resolution 2417 (2018), on the link
between conflict and hunger, resolution 2451 (2018)
calls on the parties to allow and facilitate the safe,
rapid and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel
to all those in need. In the context of the tremendous
humanitarian challenges in Yemen, with millions
of Yemenis on the brink of a massive, conflictinduced famine, the text will help to alleviate the
humanitarian situation.
The resolution welcomes the consultations held in
Sweden, noting the vital importance of making progress
towards a political agreement to end the conflict. Such
an agreement is to be attained through an inclusive
political process; this also implies that the parties
themselves should include women in their delegations.
With this resolution, Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
and retired Major General Patrick Cammaert, as Chair
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee, will be
able to operate for the benefit of the people of Yemen.
In the presidential statement on Yemen of 15 March
(S/PRST/2018/5), the Council stressed the importance
of accountability and respect for the principles of
proportionality, precaution and distinction. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that accountability

We strongly reaffirm the need for all parties to
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The need for transparent, credible
and independent investigations into alleged violations of
international humanitarian law is clear. Without it, the
violence and instability in Yemen is likely to continue.
Those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law need to be held to account.

Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia voted in favour of resolution
2451 (2018) because it is urgent, it is necessary and it is
absolutely essential in order to support the burgeoning
dialogue, which is the only hope for peace for the
Yemeni people today.
We supported the resolution, and we strongly
support the efforts being carried out by the SecretaryGeneral, the Special Envoy and the United Nations
team to establish a space for negotiations and to provide
Yemen the humanitarian aid that it so desperately needs.
However, we deplore the fact that in the past
24 hours, once again we have witnessed a lack of
transparency and, frankly, a lack of respect, something
that we often see in the Council. Elected members
are the main actors in the issues that are discussed;
we demand to be taken into account. Bolivia has said
this repeatedly during the past few years as a Council
member, and we will continue to say it when our term
is over. We believe that transparency and full equality
among all members of the Council is a goal that remains
to be achieved.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has consistently advocated a political solution to the
issue of Yemen to support the political process there,
with consideration for the long-term interests of the
Yemeni people.
China voted in favour of resolution 2451 (2018), on
Yemen. The adoption of the resolution safeguards the
unity of the Council and has provided new momentum
for the solution of the Yemeni issue. Recently the

18-457065/9

S/PV.8439

The situation in the Middle East

Yemeni parties fully demonstrated their political will
and accomplished a breakthrough in the peace talks
in Sweden. China welcomes this and commends and
supports the Secretary-General and Special Envoy
Griffiths for their tremendous efforts. The international
community should doubly cherish the outcome of
the Sweden peace talks and effectively facilitate
its implementation.
The Yemeni political process is entering a crucial
stage. The Council should fully consider and respect
the views of the countries concerned and of those of the
region, and support the Yemen political process and the
good offices of the United Nations. The international
community should increase its humanitarian relief
measures for Yemen and support the country in efforts
to continue to improve the humanitarian conditions
there and meet the basic needs of its population.
We have taken only the first step in a 10,000-mile
journey. The Stockholm agreement and resolution 2451
(2018) are just the beginning but not the end. In the next
stage, the parties should focus on implementing the
outcome of the Sweden peace talks and, on that basis,
promote a sustainable and effective process of dialogue
and negotiations. The political route is the only way to
resolve the Yemeni issue.
The international community should safeguard the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity
of Yemen, and support efforts to reach an inclusive
political solution through dialogue and negotiations
on the basis of resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism, and the outcome of the Yemeni National
Dialogue Conference. To that end, China stands ready
to continue to play its constructed role.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru voted
in favour of resolution 2451 (2018), sponsored by the
United Kingdom, because we believe it is necessary
for the Council to support the important agreements
reached in Sweden by the parties to the Yemeni
conflict and to help facilitate the implementation and
monitoring of the agreement, in close coordination with
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. We thank
the United Kingdom for its efforts to achieve consensus.
At the same time, we believe that the Council has
a clear responsibility to meet the urgent needs of a
population facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the
world today, in particular in the light of the fact that the
looming threat of famine is a result of the conflict. We
6/9

21/12/2018

note that the resolution contains specific reference to
the need to investigate and ensure access to justice and
accountability for the atrocity crimes that have been
committed in the conflict in Yemen. We also express
our gratitude to and support for the work of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, his Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock and all humanitarian workers
deployed in Yemen.
Furthermore, we highlight the role played by
Sweden and all countries that have made it possible
for the parties to arrive at a ceasefire, pursuant to the
Stockholm agreement. We believe that, following the
Stockholm meeting, we are taking a step forward today
towards ending the conflict and alleviating the suffering
in Yemen. However, we must recognize that we have a
long way to go to achieve sustainable peace, which will
need the support of the international community and
the Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to start with a friendly but important
remark concerning procedure. Multilingualism is a
fundamental value of the Organization. The adoption
of resolution 2451 (2018) in a single language is linked
to exceptional circumstances and should not constitute
a precedent.
That being said, France welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2451 (2018) on Yemen.
The resolution is a strong signal of the unity and
commitment of the Security Council, which, as we had
hoped, is putting its full weight beyond the efforts of
the United Nations on Yemen. I pay particular tribute
to the work and commitment of the British penholder,
which brought the members of the Council together
after difficult negotiations.
The resolution marks the unity of the Council and
the international community in support of launching
a political process to end the crisis, as well as the
humanitarian and political action of the United Nations.
Three points emerge from the resolution.
First, it allows us to endorse the outcome of the
Stockholm negotiations, for which we again thank
Sweden, and the agreement on three main points:
prisoner exchange; the withdrawal of the armed forces
from the port and city of Al-Hudaydah and a ceasefire
throughout the province; and the establishment of a
mechanism for de-escalation in Taiz.
18-45706

21/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, the resolution provides the necessary
basis for the United Nations to act quickly to assist in
the implementation of the agreements on Al-Hudaydah
by allowing the rapid deployment of a United Nations
monitoring and control team.
Finally, the resolution cites the essential points
of Mark Lowcock’s humanitarian requests, which the
Council was called on to address by maintaining the
political course so as to ensure that the parties remain
involved with Martin Griffiths during the next phase.
The swift adoption of the resolution, on which the
penholders worked tirelessly in recent days with our full
support, was essential to preserving and maintaining
the positive momentum of Stockholm and to enabling
the immediate implementation of the arrangements
reached. We remain clear that much remains to be done.
There humanitarian situation remains a disaster and
the Council will have to maintain its mobilization to
respond more fully and to help the Yemeni population
to recover from the tragic conflict. In that context,
those responsible for the most serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law must
be held accountable.
The Council will also have to remain mobilized in
support of the mediation of the Special Representative,
whose efforts and initial results I commend once again.
Maintaining our commitment and unity will be crucial
to the discussions scheduled for January on the political
framework and solution. France is determined to do so.
Mr. Abebe (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which we believe
could contribute to maintaining the positive momentum
created by the successful intra-Yemeni political
consultations held in Stockholm under the auspices of
the United Nations. We thank the United Kingdom for
its role in facilitating the negotiations.
After welcoming the Stockholm consultations
and endorsing its agreements, the resolution rightly
emphasizes the importance of implementing the
outcomes that have brought a sense of hope to the
Yemenis, who seek and deserve peace and stability.
We also stress that the parties should fully honour the
agreements reached in Stockholm. In that regard, the
United Nations should support the parties, and the
resolution that we have adopted today authorizes the
United Nations to play a key role.

S/PV. 8439

While Stockholm has brought concrete results, it
is a positive beginning to the long journey. The parties
should therefore also continue to constructively engage
with the Special Envoy in the upcoming January talks
in the ultimate objective of arriving at a comprehensive
political solution that meets the aspirations of the
people of Yemen and addresses the legitimate security
concerns of the countries of the region.
As Yemenis continue to endure the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world, it is also vital to support
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in
delivering aid to all Yemenis. Maintaining the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah; protecting humanitarian supplies;
ensuring safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian
access; stabilizing the economy; and enhancing
funding for humanitarian response remains essential.
The implementation of the resolution could also help
in that regard. Preserving the current momentum is
indispensable at both the political and humanitarian
levels. We continue to support the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and the humanitarian work
of the United Nations and its partners. In that regard,
the unity of the Council remains critical to ending the
unspeakable tragedy in Yemen.
As we leave the Council, we hope that the positive
impetus generated by the Stockholm meeting will
be maintained and that the Yemeni parties, with the
support of the international community, will sustain
their engagement in search of peace and stability
in Yemen.
Mr. Mielus (Poland): Poland welcomes the adoption
of the important and timely resolution 2451 (2018). We
thank the United Kingdom for its efforts to have this
text adopted today.
The resolution reflects the significant achievements
of the recent consultations in Sweden and reiterates
the call upon the parties to ensure their swift and
full implementation. It also addresses the five points
on which Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
requested the Council’s urgent support. We are
pleased by the fact that the Security Council managed
to maintain its unity and was able to undertake this
much-needed step to address the humanitarian crisis in
the country.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express our full support for the five asks of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We reiterate
our call on the parties to implement the agreement

18-457067/9

S/PV.8439

The situation in the Middle East

on the cessation of hostilities across Al-Hudaydah
governorate and in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa, which will make it possible to reopen the
humanitarian corridors and facilitate the delivery of
life-saving assistance.
We urge all parties to guarantee the unimpeded flow
and movement of vital imports, humanitarian supplies
and personnel into and across the whole country,
including by removing any bureaucratic impediments
that could restrict such flows, and to ensure the full
and sustained functioning of all Yemeni ports and the
Sana’a airport.
Poland also underscores the obligation of all parties
to the conflict in Yemen to respect the principles
of international humanitarian law and to ensure the
protection of civilians. We urge them to cease all
indiscriminate use of weapons in populated areas and
attacks against the civilian population, including air
strikes and ballistic missile attacks, and to end the
use of civilian infrastructure for military purposes.
The parties must at all times respect the principles
of proportionality and distinction, taking all feasible
precautions to avoid harm to civilians, civilian facilities
and critical infrastructure. We also underscore the need
for independent, credible and timely investigations into
alleged violations of international humanitarian law
and for those found responsible to be held accountable.
Finally, we would like to highlight the need to
continue political dialogue through constructive
engagement with the Special Envoy and the next round
of consultations, which are due to take place in January,
as well as the importance of ensuring the meaningful
participation in the peace processes of all the relevant
groups of Yemeni society, including women and youth.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour
of resolution 2451 (2018) on Yemen, which was
submitted by the United Kingdom, based on the fact
that it seeks to strengthen the agreements reached in
Sweden through the mediation work of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths. It is most important that the document was
supported by the Yemenis themselves and regional
players, whose opinion is crucial to ensuring the
resolution’s effectiveness.
We trust that by continuing to work together in
the future, we will be able to achieve a comprehensive
ceasefire in the country and help the millions of Yemeni
8/9

21/12/2018

residents who are in dire need of some kind of assistance.
There is a need to support the implementation of the
agreements reached in the first round of intra-Yemeni
consultations and to provide further assistance to the
mediation work of Mr. Martin Griffiths, including in
the context of organizing a new round of negotiations
early next year.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank the President of the Security Council
for allowing us to take the floor in the Council for
the second time this month, and the delegation of the
United Kingdom, penholder on the Yemeni dossier,
for its efforts. We also thank the delegation of the
United States of America for its support to and interest
in Yemen. On my own behalf and that of the people
and Government of Yemen, I thank and commend the
delegation of the State of Kuwait, which is an authentic
Arab voice in the Council. I also thank the States of
the coalition for their firm and principled position for
Yemen, its territory and its people.
The Government of my country commends the
unified position that the members of the Security
Council have taken since the start of the Yemeni crisis.
We hope that this position will endure until we have
achieved lasting peace, put an end to the coup d’état
and implemented all Security Council resolutions. This
will ensure that the Yemeni people can finally see the
resolutions implemented on the ground.
The Republic of Yemen welcomes the Security
Council’s adoption today of resolution 2451 (2018),
which reaffirms the international community’s
position with regard to Yemen’s unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and stresses the importance of
achieving a comprehensive political solution based on
the three agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementation
mechanism; the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference; and relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015).
The Republic of Yemen also welcomes the call
on the parties to implement the Stockholm agreement
pursuant to the timelines determined therein, including
the withdrawal of Houthi militias from the city of
Al-Hudaydah and the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa ports, while implementing the exchange
18-45706

21/12/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of prisoners and detainees and the declaration of
understanding on the city of Taiz.
In that regard, the Yemeni Government reaffirms
that, from the outset and based on the guidelines of the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, it presented numerous
proposals during the Stockholm consultations with a
view to alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people.
Those proposals included the reopening of Sana’a
airport for domestic flights through Aden International
Airport, as well as proposals pertaining to the support
of its financial institutions and the Central Bank of
Yemen in Aden in order to enable it to pay the salaries
of all civil servants in accordance with the December
2014 payrolls. Nonetheless, the stubbornness of the
Houthi militias prevented that from happening. The
international community should have condemned the
Houthis who carried out the coup d’état supported
by Iran.
The Government of Yemen reaffirms its full
commitment to implementing the Stockholm agreement.
It calls on the international community to monitor the
violations by the coup party, seeking to impede the
agreement. The Government of Yemen is also ready to
work constructively, alongside the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, to implement all points
of the Stockholm agreement.
The Government of Yemen sees no point in holding
new rounds of consultations until the Houthi militias
withdraw from the city and port of Al-Hudaydah, the
legitimate authority of the Government is restored
and its hierarchy is respected, in accordance with
Yemeni law, as stipulated in Stockholm agreement on
Al-Hudaydah.

S/PV. 8439

The President (spoke in French): Before adjourning
the meeting, as this is the last scheduled meeting of
the Council for the month of December, I would like
to express the sincere appreciation of the delegation of
Côte d’Ivoire to the members of the Council, especially
the Permanent Representatives and their respective
staff, and to the Secretariat for all the support they have
given us.
As we conclude a busy month, we can congratulate
ourselves on having reached consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and
the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as of
all relevant conference service officers, interpreters,
translators, Verbatim Reporters and security staff.
Throughout its entire presidency, my country has
stayed true to its philosophy of dialogue and peace. It
has worked hard in consistently seeking the consensus
of all Member States in order to maintain the unity and
effectiveness of the Council. We pray that this unity
and effectiveness will endure.
As we end our presidency, I know that I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
the Dominican Republic good luck in its presidency
for the month of January. On behalf of the Council, I
should like to express my sincere appreciation to the
five outgoing members, namely, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and
Sweden. I commend the work they have done and the
contributions they have made during their terms on the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

18-457069/9
