UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2277) *....*.....*..**..I..*...............

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . , , , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*.. ..,..*...................*....

1

SjPV.2277

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrpplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisiom of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2277th MEETING
Weld in New York on Thursday, 30 April 1981, at 5 p.m.
President:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

(Guinea),
Mr. Sinclair (Guyana),
Mr. Rao (India),
Mr.
Kusumaatmadja
(Indonesia),
Mr.
Shearer
(Jamaica),
Mr. Kasina (Kenya), Mr. Burwin (Li bljan
Arab
Jamahiriya),
Mr.
Monteiro
(Mozambique),
Mr. Baba (Nigeria),
Mr. Shahi (Pakistan),
Mr. Marinescu (Romania),
Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Mr. Conteh
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Koh (Singapore),
Mr. Fourie
(South Africa),
Mr. Balasubramaniam
{Sri Lanka),
Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo
(Togo),
Mr. Salim (United
Republic
of Tanzania),
Mr. Vrhovec (Yugoslavia),
Mr. Katnanda
wa Kamanda
(Zaire),
Mr. Goma
(Zambia) and Mr. Mangwende
(Zimbabwe)
took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Preselzt:
The representatives
of the following
States: China, France, German Democratic Republic,
Ireland, Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines,
Spain, Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2277)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative
of Uganda to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14434)
The meeting

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite the Acting
President of the ‘United Nations Council for Namibia
and the delegation of the Council to take places at the
Security Council table.

was called to order at 9.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Bedjaoui
(Acting President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia)
and the other members of the delegation
took places at the Council table.

The agenda was adopted,

The situation in Namibia:
8
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434)

3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with another
decision taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President,
took a place at the Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT:
sions taken at previous

In accordance with decimeetings [2267th to 2272nd,
2274th and 2275th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil,
Burundi, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Pakistan, Romania,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka,
Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia,
Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe to participate in the discussion without the right, to vote.

Mr. Mueshihange

4. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2275th meeting, I invite the Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to
take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation
of thi> President,
Mr. Abdulah
(Chairman,
Special Committee
on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the
Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and
Peoples) took a place at the side of the Council
chamber.

At the invitation qf the President,
Mr. Benyahia
(Algeria),
Mr. Jorge (Angola),
Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. CorrPa da Costa
(Brazil),
Mr. Simbananiye
(Burundi),
Mr. Dupuy
(Canada),
Mr. R&a Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Gedle-Giorgis (Ethiopia), Mr. Jelonek (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Coumbassa

5. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to document
S/14460/Rev.l,
which contains the revised text of a
1

13. Thus we shall attempt to use all the means available to us to exercise the maximum pressure possible,
including the application of economic sanctions, in
accordance with those that might be adopted by other
countries, to compel South Africa to respect decisions
previously adopted by the Security Council, and in
particular its resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978).

draft resolution sponsored by the Niger, Tunisia
and Uganda.
6. I have been asked by the sponsors of the draft
resolutions to announce that the date “15 July 1981”
should be included as follows: in document S/14459,
in operative paragraph 11; in document S/14460/Rev. 1,
in operative paragraph 19: in document S/14461, in
operative paragraph 8; and in document S/14462, in
operative paragraph 17I

14. We shall also vote in favour of draft resolution
S/14463, since it deals with the establishment of a
committee entrusted with the task of supervising the
embargo measures for which Spain intends to vote.

7. In the course of consultations, members of the
Council have requested that the five draft resolutions
be put to the vote. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put those draft resolutions to the vote.

15. In my statement two days ago I pointed out
chat the application of indiscriminate drastic measures would perhaps not constitute the best means of
achieving the solution we advocate. We believe that
any form of political discrimination towards a State
Member of the Organization or the interruption of
communications, which presupposes isolation from the
rest of the international community, would be counterproductive. For that reason, we shall abstain in the
vote on draft resolution S/144S9, particularly because
of the reference in its preamble to Article 6 of the
Charter and the reference in operative paragraph
5 (N) to indiscriminate political sanctions.

8. The PRESIDENT: In order to facilitate the voting
procedure, I would request that those members of
the Council who wish to make statements before the
voting do so before the voting on the first text, and that
those who wish to make statements following the
voting do so after the voting on the last text,
9. I shall first call upon those members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.

16. We shall also abstain in the vote on draft resolution S/14460/Rev.l, which calls for the severance on
all diplomatic, consular and trade relations and advocates measures that would imply the interruption of
communications with South Africa-measures which,
I repeat, do not seem to us to be the best way for ihe
international community to put pressure on South
Africa to comply with its obligations.

10. Mr. de PINXES (Spain) (i,ltPlp~~~,tation ,fiwu
Spanisk): Two days ago, in my statement to the Security Council [2275tlr owetirrg], I expressed the view of
Spainwith regard to the item before us and the unshakeable support of my country for the right of the people
of Namibia to independence with full territorial integrity, in accordance with the guidelines set forth in
various resolutions of the Council, and in particular
resolution 435 (1978).

’

17. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
Rl~s,sicrn): In the course of this
debate [227&h I~Kx~~~H~
] the representative of Mexico,
Mr, Muiioz Ledo, quite rightly pointed out that Namibia has become a symbol, in the light of which the
foreign policy of States and the commitment of each
one to Ihe principles of the United Nations become
absolutely clear.

(iiltcrp~etotiun

11. Although we still believe that the parties concerned should continue on the course of negotiation
to find a just solution to the problem of Namibia, the
persistent refusal of South Africa to comply with the
Council’s resolutions with regard to the illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia, its cantinued delaying
tactics and the challenge to the international community’ constituted by the many acts of aggression
perpetrated against neighbouring African countries
compel us today to take upon ourselves the painful
duty of considering those measures that might induce
South Africa to reconsider its position on Namibia and
ensure respect for international law and the resolutions of the Security Council,

jhnl

18. In so far as concerns the German Democratic
Republic, we unreservedly support the exercise by
the people of Namibia of its right to self-determination. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic therefore welcomes the draft resolutions
introduced by the Chairman of the African Group and
will vote in favour of them.

12. For that reason, we shall vote in favour of
draft resolutions S/14461 and S/14462, which call
for the oil embargo and we shall strengthen the arms
embargo, already in existence. In connection with
operative paragraph 3 of draft resolution S/14461 and
operative paragraph 12 of draft resolution S/14462, my
delegation regards its affirmative votes as a commitment to adopt whatever measures are possible to
Put an end to the illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa,

19. I should like to assure the Council that the German
Democratic Republic will comply strictly with the
decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, just as we have done hitherto with regard
to South Africa and on the question of Namibia.
20. In deciding to vote in favour of the draft resolutions, we have been guided by the fact that the
continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by the crpc~r2

Arid rCgime represents

a violation, a breach of international peace and an act of aggression, as is indicated
in draft resolution S/14459. In the light of this we
believe it is necessary to take measures against South
Africa pursuant to Article 41 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

25. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now nut to the vote
the revised draft resolution S/14460/Rev. 1, sponsored
by the Niger, Tunisia and Uganda.
A vote was tuken by show qf hands.
In ~NVOLII’: China, German Democratic Republic,
Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Tunisia, Uganda,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

21. The assertion that the application of sanctions
against South Africa contradicts the solution of the
question of Namibia
by means of negotiations is
untenable,
from both a theoretical and a practical
standpoint.
The purpose of sanctions is to compel
South Africa to carry out the relevant decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly and to
engage in negotiations on the subject.

Against: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstuining:

The result of the vote was 9 in favor, 3 against and
3 abstentions.
The druft resolution was not adopted,
the negative votes being those of permanent members
of the Council.

22. We fail to understand how the representative
of the so-called contact group, a country which maintains very broad economic relations with the apartheid rdgime, could declare that the ‘imposition
of
sanctions would turn the south of Africa into a region
of instability,
as a result of whidh international conflicts of unforeseeable dimensiofis might arise. The
question arises, is this the threat to which we have
become accustomed from South Africa, or is it the
idea that the threat from South Africa is going to grow
even greater? In that ca.se, logic itself dictates the
imposition
of sanctions against South, Africa. Or are
these statements being made under the influence of one
of the great Powers, which openly supports dictatorships like the one which exists in South Africa?

26. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to the vote draft
resolution S/14461, sponsored by the Niger, Tunisia
and Uganda.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In fcrvou~: China, German Democratic Republic,
Ireland, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Against: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

23. The delegation
of the German Democratic
Republic, in its decision t.o vote in favour of the draft
resolutions
which have been submitted, has based
itself exclusively upon the need for the people of
Namibia to be able to exercise its right to self-determination and to be given independence, and for the
situation in that region, which poses a threat to peace,
to be eliminated.

Abstaining:

27. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution S/14462, sponsored by the Niger,
Tunisia and Uganda.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

111fuvow:
China, German Democratic Republic,
Ireland, Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines,
Spain, Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

yf hands.

In fcIvo~/~*: China, German Democratic Republic, ’
Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Tunisia, Uganda,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Against:

and Northern
Abstuining:

Against: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
Ireland, United States of America
Ireland,

Japan

The result qf the vote was 11 in frrvous, 3 agoinst
and I abstention. The draft sesolution was not adopted,
the negative votes being those of permanent members
of the Council.

24. The PRESIDENT:
I now put to the vote draft
resolution S/14459, sponsored by Mexico, the Niger,
Panama, the Philippines, Tunisia and Uganda.
A vote H’NS taken by show

Ireland, Japan, Spain

The result qf the vote was 12 in favour und3 against.
The druft resolution was not adopted, the negative
votes being those oj’ permanent members of the
Council.

Japan, Spain

The wsult of the vote was 9 infc0’onr, 3 against und
3 abstentions.
The drqft resolution
was not udopted,
the negutive votes being those of permanent members
of the Council.

The PRESIDENT:
As draft resolution S/14463
depends on the adoption of the preceding draft resolutions, I am advised that it would seem unnecessary t0

28.

3

that such a vote was necessary in order to keep open
the prospects for a negotiated settlement. SO, far from
having the desired effect, sanctions, if applied, would
simply cause economic harm to many African and
Western countries, including my own.

Put that text to the vote now in the light of the results
Of the voting on the four preceding texts.
29. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that
members of the Council are in agreement with that
view,

37. To those who have been tempted in the past, or
who may be tempted in the future, to frustrate progress
towards a peaceful, negotiated settlement, I say that
the imperative of internationally acceptable independence for Namibia will not go away. The concern and
the responsibility of the United Nations for Namibia
will not go away. A continued denial of independence
to the people of Namibia will perpetuate instability
and bloodshed in the region. Only a settlement offers
hope for peace and for stability.

30. There being no objection, it is so decided, and
accordingly the draft resolution contained in document
S/14463 will not be voted on by the Council.
31. I shall now call upon those representatives who
have asked to be allowed to make statements after the
voting.

.

32. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom has from the outset been vigorously involved in the effort to achieve internationally
recognized independence for Namibia-this
effort
that has been in progress since 1977.We were one of the
authors of the Western proposal [S/12636] which
formed. the basis for Security Council resolution 435
(1978).

38. Notwithstanding what has happened in the
Council today, my Government will continue actively,
with our partners in the contact group of five Western
Powers, to develop ways to enhance the possibilities
of the implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978).
The search for peace and justice must continue, and
the consensus of the Council on which we have all
depended for so long must be re-established as soon
as possible.

33. Throughout this arduous and protracted negotiation, the five Western Powers have drawn strength
and confidence from the united support demonstrated
by the Security Council, support which has also been
a crucial factor in the strenuous efforts exerted by the
Secretary-General and his staff to achieve the implementation of that resolution.

39. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (intrl72t.~~tatic~r? .fiom
Ff~nch): In my statement on 28 April [2275rh nzeering],
I explained the position of my Government on the
problem of Namibia and on the means for finding a
solution to it. We are very disappointed at the delays
and complications which have so far impeded the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978). However, we
remain attached to the United Nations settlement plan
because we believe that the only reasonable and truly
effective course is the search for a negotiated settlement which would be agreed to by all parties and
acceptable to the international community.

34. We bitterly regretted the failure of the preimplemen8atidn: meeting at Geneva last January, and
we sympathized with the feelings of frustration and
impatience which that setback inevitably produced on
the continent o,f Africa, and indeed in the international
community as a whole. Nevertheless, my delegation
profoundly regrets the fact that the previous unity of
the Council hasbeen broken by the deep division which
we have just experienced in the voting on the draft
resolutions which were before us.

40. As we have stated, we do not believe that recourse
to comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South
Africa would promote progress in the desired direction,
Indeed, we believe that the adoption of such measures
would run counter to the goal we seek, which is the
resumption and intensification of negotiations designed
to ensure that Namibia accedes peacefully to independence.

35. My delegation had worked until the very last
minute to reach a compromise which would have
preserved the unity of the Council. We and other delegations-including, notably, your own, Mr. President-which worked to the same end have, I am sad
to say, failed. I state without reservation that a negotiated settlement leading to internationally accepted
independence for Namibia remains the first objective
of my Government-and, we trust, the first objective
of all countries concerned for the future of Namibia
and of the region.% is our intention to keep open, if
at all possible, the prospects for such a negotiated
settlement.

41. That is why we voted against the texts submitted,
The way in which they were prepared, submitted and,
as it were-let me be quite frank about it-imposed did
not make their adoption at all likely, In such complicated subjects having such important and diverse
consequences, rigidity and haste and the absence of
negotiations on substance could only doom to failure
even attempts that seemed to have some aspects that.
merited more detailed study. A different approach
was followed by the sponsors of resolution 418 (1977)l
in November 1977,when the Council adopted that reso-t
lution on the embargo on arms to South Africa. That
resolution, I wish to stress, is still in force. The votes

36, But it is our firm view that the imposition of
comprehensive mandatory sanctions could not fail
to hamper efforts to reach such a settlement. It was for
that reason that we voted as we did. We voted against
the draft resolutions before us because we believed
4

just taken in no way call it into question, and my
country, which voted in favour of it, will continue to
abide strictly by the obligations flowing from it,

49. Having said that, I should like to explain my
delegation’s position in the voting on the draft resolutions.

42. Need I say that the votes cast by the French delegation just now in no way change the objective sought
by France, which remains that of promoting as soon
as possible the accession of Namibia to independence.

SO. My Government, which has supported and faithfully implemented
resolution 418 (1977), voted in
favour of the draft resolution contained in document
S/14462, since we support the idea of an arms embargo
against South Africa. My Government
has some
difficulties, however, with elements of the present
text which go beyond the existing arms embargo
framework and would like to record its reservations
on those elements.

43. South Africa should understand that very clearly,
The French delegation expressed itself unequivocally
on this subject also in the course of its statement of
28 April.
44. May I be allowed, at the end of your term of
office, Mr. President, to pay a tribute to your perseverance, to your prudence and to your even humour
-in short, to your devotion to your task, Up to the
very last day you have sought, at a time which everyone will recognize was particularly trying, to preserve
understanding and harmony in the Council. You have
succeeded in large measure, and my regret will be that
your efforts at conciliation
have not won the success
they deserved.

51. As for the other draft resolutions, my delegation abstained in the voting because it has certain
doubts, under the present circumstances, as to whether
such sanctions would in fact be the most effective and
expeditious means of achieving the desired end.
52. Before concluding my remarks, I should just like
to say a word about the outcome of the vote on these
four draft resolutions. Although each delegation will
interpret the results in its own way, I am convinced
that all members of the Council are earnestly and
sincerely seeking to achieve an early solution of the
question of Namibia. It is simply in considering which
approach would be most effective in realizing this
commonly cherished goal that a divergence of views
arises. For its part, Japan is ready to continue to cooperate with all constructive efforts towards a peaceful
solution of this problem so that the Namibian people
will be able to gain their independence in the near
future.

45. Namibia,
I repeat, is one of the distressing
problems which torment Africa and which, on all continents, trouble consciences. We understand and share
the feelings of impatience of the Namibians, of Africans
and of the whole international
community.
We are
determined, for our part, to pursue indefatigably, with
our partners in the group of five Powers and by maintaining contact with all the parties concerned, the
action undertaken to emancipate Namibia. We want
as soon as possible to see and welcome here amongst
us in the United Nations an independent and sovereign
Namibia, united and prosperous, at peace with itself
and its neighbours; we shall not allow ourselves to be
diverted from that goal.

,53, Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): In the previous discussions it was suggested that
here in the public consultations the world could observe
the attitudes of Security Council members towards
Namibia, most especially towards the independence of
Namibia. But the votes which have been registered
here did not reflect attitudes towards Namibia, least of
all towards the achievement of an independent, stable
and democratic Namibia. Those votes reflected, rather,
the views of members about quite different questions.
Neither did those votes reflect the intentions of members about the future, or their future actions, concerning the independence of Namibia.

46. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Japan has on every occasion strongly condemned
the illegal occupation of
Namibia by the Government
of South Africa. It has
repeatedly stressed the need to achieve, as soon as
possible,
Namibia’s
independence
through South
Africa’s withdrawal and through free and fair elections
held under the supervision of the United Nations, as
envisaged in Security Council resolution 435 (1978).

54. The voting here today in no way affects the
determination of the United States or our firm intention to make every possible effort to find a way to
achieve an early internationally
accepted independence for Namibia, My Government has set that as a
prime goal. We have already undertaken consultations
in Africa, and we have met at a high level with other
members of the contact group in London. With these
actions we continue a process begun years ago by our
predecessors. We will continue that process in the next
few days with discussions of the Namibia problem at
the ministerial level with our colleagues in the contact
group in Rome. The next step will be the preparation

47. My delegation holds South Africa responsible for
the failure of the Geneva meeting and for the consequent standstill in the implementation
of the United
Nations plan for enabling Namibia
to achieve its
independence within this year.
48. We fully understand the feeling among many
delegations-particularly
those of the African Statesthat too much time has already elapsed, with too little
progress made towards a solution to the Namibia question, We share their sense of frustration at the seemingly endless succession of obstacles which have
been thrown up to impede progress towards a solution.
5

implement those principles. I pledge the commitmeflt
of the highest levels of my Government to this effort:
I pledge our solidarity with the people of Namibia in
the search for independence.

of specific proposals which we would hope to discuss
with the parties concerned in the near future.
55. In view of our efforts, we regret that it was felt
necessary by some to press the sanctions issue in the
Council at this time. I asked you here last week [2271st
meeting] whether sanctions were a realistic alternative
to future efforts to resolve the issue peacefully by negotiation, While I understand the frustration of the
African countries with the length of time involved in
pursuing our common goal, my Government does
not believe-and I do not believe-that frustration is
cause for us now to abandon the search for effective
means of achieving that goal.

60. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(interywtution from R~~sk~iN:
The Soviet delegation is forced to note with profourld
regret that, in spite of the insistence of African and
other countries, the Security Council has erove:d
unable to adopt resolutions which would have Promoted a settlement of the Namibian problem in the
interests of the Namibian people fighting for their
freedom and independence.

56. Following the meeting of the contact group in
London last week, my Government participated in a
joint statement [S/14457, annex] that Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) continues to provide a solid basis
for a transition to an independent, stable Namibia.
Throughout the past week we have repeatedly restated
that view. My Government is firmly committed to make
every effort to achieve an internationally accepted,
lasting settlement in Namibia which will bring Namibia
finally the stability, democracy and independence
it deserves.

61. The decisions of the Council were blocked
primarily by the United States, but also by the Uniterd
Kingdom and France, who sided by so doing not with
free Africa, not with the Namibian people, but with
the Pretoria racists.
62. Once again, we have today witnessed a glaring
injustice done to the Namibian people. We have
witnessed a further manifestation of the policy of
indulging the South African racists, who once agaiin
have won time and the opportunity to strengthen the
puppet rCgime in Namibia. Even now, Prime Minister
Botha has been saying that South Africa will never
permit SWAP0 to come to power in Namibia. Behind
those words there lies a whole strategy on the part of
South Africa. That strategy is designed to preserve in
Namibia the colonial, racist order as a bastion against
the national liberation movements of southern Africa
and as a springboard for the carrying out of furthler
acts of aggression against neighbouring countries.

57. It is for that reason that we could not support the
draft resolutions contained in documents S/14459
through S/14463. Each of those drafts one way or
another relates to sanctions, and therefore represents
what we are persuaded is the wrong course towards
the achievement of our common goal of independence
for Namibia. We do not believe that economic sanctions are an effective means of influencing political
policy. We believe the study of history supports our
view that they were not effective when applied against
Italy in the 1930snor against Rhodesia in the 1970s.
I might mention that my Government’s low regard for
economic ,sanctions as an instrument of policy was
reflected in our recent decision concerning the grain
embargo,

63. It is quite clear now that the Pretoria racists
have no intention of leaving Namibia voluntarily. :In
the circumstances, the expansion of intensification of
efforts aimed at forcing South Africa to leave Namibia
have now acquired particular significance in regard to
forcing those who support the South African racists
to refrain from such support. Everything possiblle
must be done to intensify political and other kinds of
pressure on South Africa and those who are in practice
its allies.

58. I feel that I should make special mention of draft
resolution S/14462, which would have imposed an
arms embargo on South Africa. There is already such
an embargo in existence as mandated by resolution
418 (1977). The United States voted for resolution
418 (1977) and supports the measures imposed under
that resolution. We will continue to enforce the embargo. We do not at this time accept the need to adopt,
in addition to resolution 418 (1977), the provisions of
draft resolution S/14462.

64. In circumstances where decisions on Namibia
are being blocked and thus the possibilities for bringing
about a political settlement are being narrowed, tlhe
Namibian people are left no other choice but to continue the armed struggle under the leadership of the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
That is a conclusion to which the front-line States and
Nigeria came at the Lusaka meeting back in February
Of this year when they stated that SWAP0 had lno
alkrnative but to step up the liberation struggle in
Namibia.
also appealed to all “freedom- and
, . They
peace-loving
countries of the world to support SWAI’O i
in all areas, including the provision of 1Dolitical. ec:o.I
nomic and military a&stance.”

59. I should like to close with an appeal to all present,
and to the Governments of the front-line States and
to South Africa, to strengthen their own efforts to find
a peaceful, negotiated solution to the Namibia problem.
The people of Namibia have a right to self-determination to be achieved by free and fair elections. The
parties most directly involved have agreed to those
principles for a solution. We must all now find a way to
6

65. The Soviet delegation is convinced that no
efforts designed to impede the only just solution of
the Namibian problem-its genuine independencewill halt the struggle of the Namibian people for their
freedom. The cause of the people of Namibia will
triumph inevitably.

Article 41 of the Charter. We have indicated the measures to be taken by the Council-peaceful measuresbecause we are implementing the first principle of
the Lusaka Manifesto; and peaceful pressure. We have
not asked the Council to send any military contingent
to South Africa-even though we know that some
members of the Council have sent military contingents
to intervene in instances of foreign occupation that
have lasted for less than three years. We have not
asked for military contingents, even though we know
that the history preceding the formation of the United
Nations was written in blood-blood that was shed by
members of the Council; blood that was shed by my
own grandparents and parents, even though it was not
our liberty that was at stake, because one Power was
occupying other peoples’ lands, because one Power
had set in motion an oppressive system, because one
Power had set in operation a system of persecuting on
racial grounds certain peoples of the world.

66. Mr. OTUNNU (Uganda): The people of Africa,
in a document which has come to be known as the
Lusaka Manifesto,’ addressed themselves soberly
and squarely to the matter of liberation in southern
Africa. They clearly stated that Africa’s preference
would be to achieve liberation in southern Africa
through peaceful means, that we would like to see the
people of that region enjoy self-determination and
freedom through a negotiated process. That was made
‘very clear. However, the people of Africa naturally
said that in the event that other forces within and outside the continent of Africa obstructed the process of
peaceful change,then the oppressed people of southern
Africa and the rest of the peoples of the world who
stand in solidarity with them would be left no choice
but to employ other methods.

70. In spite of that we did not come to the Council
to ask for a commitment of troops. We did not come
to the Council to ask that an ounce of blood be spilled.
In the spirit of the first principle of the Lusaka Manifesto we came to the Council asking for peaceful
methods of change: asking that peaceful pressure be
applied in order to dislodge the illegal occupying Power
from Namibia, and in order that the people of that
Territory may achieve its independence. We have
come to the Council becauseof a global consensus-a
global consensus which has been expressed with a
clarity, with a forcefulness, with a power unprecedented in the history of the Council.

67. We have therefore come to the Council in the
continuing process of implementing the first principle
of the Lusaka Manifesto. We have come to the Council
on behalf of apeople which is aggrieved. We have come
to the Council on behalf of a people which is the injured
party in this situation. We have come to the Council
after having waited for 100 years. We have come to
the Council after having tried every measure outside
the context of the United Nations, within the United
Nations in the context of the General Assembly and,
finally, here at the highest authority of the United
Nations; here at the repository, the guardian, of international peaceand security-the Security Council. We
have tried here for over 15 years every measure to
achieve independence and self-determination for the
people of Namibia. After that period of waiting, we
have come to the Council; and we have come to the
Council with every bit of available evidence.

71. We have therefore come to the Council not on
behalf of a few delegations around this table; not on
behalf of the people of Africa, even though they are
numerous; not on behalf of the people of Asia, even
though they are the most predominant. No; we have
come before the Council to present a clear, unequivocal, global consensus.
72. And what has been the response? The predominant members of the Council have seen the consensus.They have responded in the only way that is
right: they have agreed with the verdict of the international community that peaceful pressure be applied
against South Africa because of its oppression of the
people of Namibia and its continued illegal occupation.

68. We have told the Council and the peoples of the
world that there exists today in Namibia and the area
surrounding it a breach of international peace and
security. We have come to the Council and presented
evidence that there have been constant acts of aggression againstneighbouring Territories launched from the
Territory of Namibia by the illegal occupying Power.
We have told of the atrocities, of the bombardment,
of the destruction; in short, we have told ofthe suffering
of the people of Angola, the people of Botswana, the
people of Lesotho, the people of Mozambique, under
the fire of the messengersof death sent by South Africa
and launched from the Territory of Namibia.

73. That has been the concurring verdict. of the
majority of the Council. However, in 1945 there was
put into the Charter an element introducing the notion
of weighted voting. It was thought then that some
members of the international community had greater
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security and therefore ought to be given a weighted
vote, a heavier vote.

69. We have done more than that. We have indicated
to the Council that it has a responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations, which is the highest law
on this earth-and maybe even in heaven. We have
indicated that the Council has a responsibility under

74. What have we witnessed today? The weight of
those votes has been cast not to reinforce the global
consensus, not to facilitate the independence of the
7

people of Namibia but, instead, to strengthen the hand
of the illegal occupying Power, to rebuff the peaceful
plea of the people of Namibia.

the negative votes that have shattered the unity of the
Council, The Council can unite-but
it can unite on
principles,
the principles contained in the Charter,
If the Council must unite, it must unite in the maintenance of international peace and security. It must unite,
as the Preamble to the Charter says, to avoid thle
possibility
of war; it must unite to attain self-determination.

75. What is the impact of that negative vote? What is
the impact of the negative vote cast by three permanent members of the Council? I have said before in
the Council that there are only two sides to the Namibian situation-objectively
only two sides. On the
one hand, there is the people of Namibia yearning for
freedom, yearning for independence and appealing to
the world to help them to achieve that end. That is one
side. The other side of the situation is the occupying
Power-the
illegal occupying Power-which
now is
being assisted in the process of illegal occupation by
certain elements within the international
community.

82. We have come to seek unity on that basis, and wle
have been rebuffed this evening.
83. It has been said that certain documents have
been imposed on the Council. It is common knowledge
that since the debacle of Geneva we have sat waiting:
we have sat discussing; we have discussed for months;
we were discussing even a few minutes before thi’s
meeting of the Council started. We have left the door
open at every stage to listen to every person who had
anything positive to contribute to the independence
of Namibia.
We have not imposed anything on the
Council. Measures have been taken by the Council
on shorter notice than the notice we have given. We
gave notice in January in New York; we continued
to give notice in January at Arusha; we gave notice
in February at New Delhi; we gave notice at the end of
February at Addis Ababa. We came back to the General Assembly and the Assembly with a collective
voice gave notice [resolutiwz
3512271. Earlier this
month at Algiers we gave notice; and again on 21 April
we gave notice when my delegation opened the debate [2267th meeting]. We have given notice; we have
given plenty of time to all concerned about our intentions, about our concern and, above all, about our
grievance. We have not imposed anything on thie
Council.

76. Therefore, a negative vote in the face of the plea
of the people of Namibia means one thing and one
thing only: it is to strengthen the hand of the occupying
Power. That is the signal. It is to give comfort to the
forces that have been intransigent
and that have
flouted every decision of the Council. A negative vote
today does not strengthen international
peace and
security, A negative vote today does not speak for
independence, for freedom and for self-determination.
77. Those are the objective
consequences
and
implications of the negative vote cast here this evening.
78. When we made our plea, when we presented
our evidence, it was said that we were seeking confrontation. When a victim has been violated: when
somebody has been raped, as the people of Namibia
have been raped; when a people has been robbed, as
the people of Namibia have been robbed; when such
a victim goes before the court asking for redress, asking
for a remedy, does the court turn around and say:
“You the victim of this crime are seeking confrontation: you are seeking to disturb the peace”? When the
victims have come here with the Charter in their
hands-with peaceful means- quoting, the prdv’isions
of the Charter, does the Council turn around and say:
“You are seeking confrontation”?

84. It has been said that sanctions do not,work. Well,
if sanctions do not work, why would three permanent
Powers on this Council cast the heavy weight of their
vote against measures which would not work anyway?
Why? Why have those Powers since 1966 been fighting
tooth and nail to prevent discussions of these measures in the Council? If the measures do not work
anyway, why have we been consulting even, at one-half
second to the twelfth hour? Why have we been consulting if those measures do not work?

79. It has been said that we are impatient. I should
like to be told in the Council what other people has
waited 100 years to have a grave wrong redressed‘?
What other peop&has remained calm for 100 years,
without fighting to&t.its independence?

85. Those are inconceivable
notions both in logic
and in political terms and, above all, in terms of the
independence and ,freedom of the people of Namibia!.

80. We have waited, we have waited to a fault, we
have waited to the point of absurdity.

86. On behalf of the people of Africa, on behalf of
the global consensus, to which ,I referred earlier, and,
above all, on behalf of the aggrieved people of Namibia,
we reiterate that Namibia continues to be the responsibility of the United Nations. It continues to be the
unique responsibility
of the United Nations, and no
amount of words, no amount of vetoes can shake awa.y
that responsibility.

81. It has been said that when we come to the Council
asking for redress, we are disturbing the unity of the
Council. But we came to reinforce the unity of the
Councif. We did not choose unilateral methods outside
of the Council. We came to the Council asking for
collective action. Collective action means unity of the
Council. It is the negative votes that have rebuffed
the possibility of collective action this evening. It is

87. In that connection, I reiterate to the Counc:il
-in the name of that global consensus-that
we view
8

resolution 435 (1978) as the only basis, the non-negotiable basis, for transition to independence in Namibia.

Council I would first wish to make a statement
own capacity as representative of IRELAND.

88. Our commitment
to resolution 435 (1978) even
though it did not emerge from our side arises because
of our commitment
to democracy, because that resolution seeks a democratic process to independence.
Our commitment
to resolution 435 (1978) arises because of our commitment
to free and fair elections,
because that resolution calls for free and fair elections.

94. In my statement in the debate on this item [2275t/j
~neerir?g] I said that if the efforts which had been made
to avert division in the Council should fail, my delegation- the delegation of Ireland-would
address
itself carefully to every aspect of the draft resolutiorls
put before us.

in mY

95. This evening, to my regret, we reached the stage
where it was necessary to cast our votes on those draft
resolutions, and I want to make a statement on the
positions we have taken.

89. It was Prime Minister Botha-the
racist Prime
Minister
of South Africa, whose hand has been
strengthened this evening-who
said yesterday, in the
open and in public, that under no circumstances would
they sit back and watch SWAP0 take over government
in Namibia. The message is clear. It is clear to everybody, including the scientific researchers of South
African intelligence,
that if free and fair elections
were held today in Namibia, and tomorrow, and the
day after, SWAP0 would sweep the slates. SWAPO,
the representative
of the Namibian
people would
lead them to independence,

96. Ireland believes that South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia and the consequences that flow
from that occupation do indeed constitute a threat to
international
peace and security, We believe that
South Africa must be obliged to respect the decisions
of the Council and to carry out what are clearly its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and its obligations in general in international law.

90. We are committed to any party leading the people
of Namibia through the democratic process. For that
reason we are committed
to the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978). And that is the reason why
we have come before the Council. We shall continue
to use every possible method to ensure that South
Africa is compelled to comply with the provisions of
that resolution.

97. My delegation has no doubts about the points
I have just stated. Nevertheless, we thought it right to
make a sustained effort to avoid division in the Council. At this, my last meeting as President for this month,
I make no apology for this effort, I felt it to be my duty
to do so as representative of Ireland and also-although
I do not now speak in that capacity-as President of
the Council for this month. In our effort we were
motivated solely by the desire that the Council send
a clear signal to South Africa of a continuing unity
of purpose here and a common determination to see
Namibia independent in accordance with .the previous
decisions of the Council.

91. May I finally say on behalf of the people of Africa
and the international
global consensus, and in the
name of the people of Namibia,
that we are most
grateful for the remarkable
work which has been
done by the United Nations Council for Namibia.
We are grateful for the high contribution
which has
been made by the Secretary-General
in a continuous
attempt to speed the process of independence for the
people of Namibia.

98. In working, over several days, to see how division
in the Council might be avoided, my delegation tried
to establish whether we would arrive at a common position, whether there were certain principles and elements on which all delegations could, even with
difficulty, agree, so that a common position might be
established. The ideas we put forward in discussion
did not necessarily represent what Ireland itself would
have put forward as its own preferred national position,
but rather what we hoped might be a focus of agreement
for the Council as a whole. Since it did not prove
possible to reach such a general agreement, we have
proceeded to the vote on the draft resolutions before
us, and my delegation has expressed its national
position in voting on those draft resolutions. That
position is based on the belief that when it comes to a
vote each, member of the Council should by its vote
send South Africa a signal of firmness of purpose here
and of the will of the Council that its past resolutions
should be implemented.
Accordingly, we voted for
two of the draft resolutions before us-draft resolution S/14461, which if adopted would have imposed
an oil embargo, and draft resolution S/14462, which
would have strengthened the arms embargo already

92, Above all, we pay a tribute this day-even in the
face of the negative vote-to
SWAPO, the sole and
legitimate leader of the Namibian
people. I say on
behalf of this global consensus to the people of Namibia and to SWAPO, “Do not fear. History is on
your side. The same momentum
that,defeated
the
Nazi Powers, the same momentum
that removed
occupying Powers from Europe in the 1940s-that
same historic momentum is on your side, It will remove
the occupying Power which is today boasting in the
Territory of Namibia.
Justice is on your side. Your
cause is right.” And because it is right we must pursue
it relentlessly, all of us, and I invite my distinguished
friends, those with the wei,ghted vote, those with the
heavy hands, to join us in the global consensus.
93. The PRESIDENT:
I have received requests
to speak from three delegations that have been invited
under rules 37 and 39. However, as a member of the
9

Council,
which we consider unfortunate,
Namibia
will achieve independence, on the basis of resoluti.on
435 (1978), within the year. The effort must continue
and, in our view, it must continue in the United Nations
framework. The effort must have a result: the independence of Namibia in accordance with the many decisions of the Council to that effect.

adopted by the Council [resolution 418 (1977)l. We
believe that these measures would have both been
practicable in bringing pressure to bear on South Africa
and would have been a signal and a statement of the
Council’s serious purpose.
99. However, because such measures, had they been
adopted, would have been binding on all member
States, I must say that my delegation would have
welcomed adequate consultations
in advance on
these important texts. In particular, we believe that the
Council could have indicated in advance its intention
to honour its obligations under Article 50 of the Charter
-that
is, its obligations to States which might be
confronted with special economic problems in carrying
out those measures.

105. That is the end of my statement as representative of Ireland. I shall now resume my role as PRESIDENT of the Council.
106. The Council has at this stage concluded the
voting procedure. There are, however, a number of
requests to make statements and I shall now call on
speakers in the order in which their names are inscribed.

100. Draft resolution S/14460/Rev.l,
if it had been
adopted, would have imposed comprehensive
economic sanctions as well as sanctions of a political
nature. My delegation abstained on that draft resolution, In doing so we took account of what we believe is
a widespread feeling among members of the Council
that further immediate efforts to bring about the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) are required. We do
not believe that the imposition of comprehensive sanctions at this time would necessarily advance those
hopes, We believe, rather, that it was appropriate for
the Council to indicate to South Africa the seriousness
with which it would view further delay but to retain
for possible later decision certain other measures under
Article 41 which might be used if South Africa should
remain wholly intransigent and unwilling to meet its
clear obligations in international law.’

107. The first speaker is the Acting President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia,
to which the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
108. Mr. BEDJAOUI
(Acting President,
United
Nations Council for Namibia) (interpretation
fion~
French): In making a statement in my capacity as
Acting President, I should like to express the gratitude
of the delegation of the United Nations Council for
Namibia for the opportunity which has been given us
to speak at the end of this debate on the question of
Namibia.
109. The participation in this debate of a large number
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs from African and nonaligned countries is a striking expression of the very
deep concern of those countries at the,refusal of South
Africa to comply with resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular its resolutions 385 (1976), 4.35
(1978) and 439 (1978).

101. Furthermoya, I must say that, while Ireland
itself does not have diplomatic relations with South
Africa, it is our view that proposals to terminate all
diplomatic relations at this stage do not seem to be
consistent with continuing
diplomatic
efforts to
implement resolution 435 (1978).

110. The tragedy of Namibia has been examined in
all its facets during this debate. A broad convergence
of views emerged in the analysis and the evaluation
of the situation. The same convergence of vie,ws
appeared in regard to the need for the Security Council
to adopt comprehensive
mandatory sanctions which /
would compel South Africa to put an end to its illegal
occupation of Namibia and to abide by international
/
law.

102. For those reasons we abstained on draft resolution S/14460/Rev.l. I would wish to emphasize, however, that our abstention does not necessarily mean that
we are opposed in principle to many of the measures
proposed.
Indeed, some of the provisions-for
example, operative paragraph 13, on investmentcorrespond closely to proposals which we ourselves
have advocated elsewhere.

111. The United Nations Council for Namibia deeply
regrets the fact that the Security Council today lost
the opportunity offered to it to carry out its mission of
maintaining
international peace and security because
of the negative votes cast by permanent members of
the Security Council. This fact has made it impossible
for the Security Council to take the measures dictated
by the persistently defiant attitude of South Africa,
measures through which the Security Council would
have given shape to the warning which it had already
given the Government of South Africa in 1978, in its
resolution 439 (1978).

103. In consequence of its decision to abstain on
draft resolution S/14460/Rev.l,
my delegation also
felt obliged to abstain on draft resolution S/ 14459, since
operative paragraph 5 of that draft resolution involved
a decision to adopt comprehensive
economic and
political sanctions at this time,
104. I must conclude this statement by expressing
the strong hope of my Government and my own hope as
representative of Ireland that despite the outcome of
the voting this evening and despite the division in the
10

112. Indeed, in paragraph 6 of that resolution, the
Security
Council-I
repeat, already in 1978-had
solemnly warned South Africa that if it refused to cooperate in the implementation
of Security Council
resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978) and 435 (1978), the
Council
would have to “meet forthwith to initiate
appropriate
actions under the Charter of the United
Nations, including Chapter VII thereof, so as to ensure
South Africa’s compliance with the aforementioned
resolutions”.

ically charged debates in the long and eventful history
of the Security Council. The importance and the special
nature of the debate has been due in large measure to
the participation of a large number of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs from Africa and other parts of the
non-aligned world. That no less than 20 Ministers came
to New York in spite of their other commitments
elsewhere is in itself a significant factor in the struggle
on the diplomatic front. But what is more significant
than their presence is the collective contribution
they
have made. Problems were identified, and it was shown
quite clearly who is the culprit and the obstacle to
Namibia’s
independence. Reasons were advanced
which further confirmed the ever deepening collusion
between racist South Africa and the major North
Atlantic Treaty Organization Powers which maintain
extensive military, political, economic and commercial
links with that racist, terrorist State.

113.
The adoption by the Council of comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions against South Africa would
have formed a natural and logical part of that warning.
It would also have been an expression of the strong
determination
of the Council to bring about the implementation
of the United Nations settlement plan for
Namibia,
which South Africa continues to defy.

12 1. Moreover, it was stressed and repeated time and
again that there is nothing wrong with the United
Nations plan for Namibia, and that consequently there
is absolutely no need to amend, modify, qualify or
dilute resolution 435 (1978). Africans, and the rest of
the representatives of the countries of the non-aligned
movement-as
well, indeed, as the representatives of
the other friendly countries-insisted
that the aforesaid resolution should be implemented
without any
further delay.

114.
All those who had expected those countries
to act in keeping with their special responsibilities,
in keeping with their influence over the Government
of South Africa and in keeping with the commitments
they had solemnly made vi&vis
the international
community,
are deeply disappointed by their attitude
today.
11.5. Likewise, all the members of the international
community
which have mobilized to bring about the
triumph
of the cause of the self-determination,
the
freedom and the independence of a united Namibia
have experienced deep disappointment
and express
their disapproval.

122. Nearly all the delegations which participated,
with the obvious exception of the veto-mongers, called
the attention of the international community,
and of
the Council in particular, to the gravity of the situation
in Namibia because of the persistent acts of aggression
and breaches of the peace being perpetrated in and
around the illegally occupied Namibia by terrorist
South Africa, and to the consequent serious threat
to international peace and security.

116. The Namibian people, embarked upon a legitimate struggle to regain its national rights, will use the
measures of the scope and the level of the debates to
judge the impact made by its cause on the international
community
and the determination of that international
community
to support its just struggle for the independence of its homeland.

123. An urgent call was issued urging the Security
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the defiant South African rCgime
in order to force it to vacate Namibia forthwith. It was
said that these special meetings of the Council were to
intensify political and economic pressures against
South Africa in a concerted international
effort, in
which States Members of the United Nations, the
specialized agencies, and the rest of the international
community would actively participate so as to bring
maximum pressure to bear on the racist apartheid
rCgime.

117.
Since permanent members of the Council have
cast their veto, it has not been possible to translate the
draft resolutions containing comprehensive mandatory
sanctions against South Africa into formal decisions
that would be binding upon the international
community as a whole. But that in no way diminishes their
moral
significance or even their political weight.
118.
The PRESIDENT:
Mr. Peter Mueshihange,
Secretary
for Foreign Relations of the South West
Africa
People’s Organization,
to which the Council
has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, has asked to make a
statement.
I now call on him.

124. In clear and categorical statements,
representatives underscored the obvious, but often distorted, fact that the problem of Namibia is a problem
of decolonization and illegal occupation, and that the
Namibian patriots, under the leadership of SWAPO,
their sole and authentic representative,
are waging
a heroic and legitimate struggle to liberate by all means
available, including in particular armed struggle, their
beloved fatherland, Namibia.

119.

Mr. MUESHIHANGE:
I thank the members of
Council for granting me the opportunity to speak
once again; I shall make a brief concluding statement.
the

120.
I should like to begin by saying that, in our view,
this has been one of the most substantive and polit11

charging it moreover with unprovoked military attacks
and massive acts of aggression against the indepeadent African States in southern Africa, and charging it
finally with the defiant rejection of resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978).

125. We are fully aware of the high price we have to
pay for our freedom. Our forefathers paid that price
during the period of the patriotic wars against colonial
occupation by the forces of imperial Germany. Today
it is our turn, the turn of the present generations of
Namibians, to make similar sacrifices.

130. We have listened most attentively to all the
speeches, including, Mr. President, your own most
inspiring and courageous speech. The weight is unmistakably in favour of those who called for punitive
measures against the Pretoria racist rkgime. Four years
have passed, and we have heard the same sterile
reasoning and empty promises repeated by South
Africa’s friends. Four years have passed, and we have
just witnessed another round of the triple veto. Again,
the arrogance of power of a minority has undermined
the actions of the majority of the Security Council
and-it must be said-has again rendered it impotent,

126. The South West Africa People’s Organization
itself would not have been necessary had it not been
for South Africa’s policies of colonial oppression,
political repression and military aggression in our
country. The armed struggle being waged today in
Namibia by the gallant combatants of the People’s
Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN) has been necessitated by the victimization, terrorism and intimidation to which our people are daily subjected by the
Fascist army and police serving the combined interests
of racism and imperialism. Our people die daily to
make Namibia safe for ruthless exploitation of its
human and natural resources by South Africa and by
the major Western Powers whose representatives are
sitting around this table.

131. In 1975and 1976, SWAP0 spokesmen declared
and reiterated in the Council that vetoes can only
delay our final victory but cannot, and will not, forever
defer that victory. We said that vetoes cannot, and will
not, destroy the will and determination of our patriots
and combatants to carry on with the struggle. We shall
continue to intensify the armed struggle, and we know
that support and assistance to SWAP0 from our
friends will be continued and increased. How can
they veto our will to fight for freedom and liberation?
They cannot, and they will not.

127. I should like to say that this is not the first time
we have been treated to vetoes by the Western permanent members of the Council. There have been other
vetoes in the past. Routinely, the major Western
Powers which are involved in business, military and
nuclear collaboration with racist South Africa have
always opposed, in the Council and in other United
Nations bodies, all serious efforts to isolate and punish
South Africa. Their actions speak louder than their
deceptive a,nd hollow words, and their actions are
always intended to protect their imperialist treasures
in southern Africa.

132. Before I conclude, may I, in complete loyalty to
my own convictions, and with an acute sense of satisfaction, thank all our African brothers and non-aligned 1
friends and the other delegations on the Council for
their total devotion to the cause of Namibia and its ’
independence. I feel a.strong sense of pride in extending,
congratulations and good wishes to Ambassador
Otunnu of Uganda for the exceptional skill and leadership which he brought to bear in the public and private
a.ctivities during this debate relating to Namibia; He is
my brother, the tallest and the biggest tree among us,

128. It is not,,my inten$ion to try to summarize the
excellent stat&~fits:,m~de by various’ speakers in this
debate by,$0hthiit.. matter, to restate SWAPO’s position, which is well known. Suffice it to say that on
6 June 1975 [1829fh /neeri/zg], the delegations of
Guyana, Iraq,’ Mauritania, the United Republic of
Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania submitted a draft resolution in document S/11713. For the
first time on the question of Namibia, the three Western permanent members cast a triple veto, killing the
wish of the democratic majority in the Council. Sixteen
months later, on 15 October 1976, the delegations of
Benin, Guyana, the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania and the United Republic of Tanzania
submitted another draft resolution, in document
S/12211. Again, the United States, the United Kingdom
and France ganged up to cast a triple veto [/963rd
meeting].

129. Now we have come back to the same Council,
again charging the occupationist rbgime with continued
illegal occupation and other illegal acts of aggression,
terrorism and brutality, charging it also with wanton
acts of repression and intimidation, charging it further
with an open challenge to the United Nations, which
has assumed a direct legal responsibility over Namibia,
12

133. We owe a debt of gratitude to all the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and other high officials who have ’
come here to make their outstanding contributions. To 1
South Africa’s friends, some of whom, without knowing us, or without exchanging as much as a hollow 1
“How are you?“, call us either “terrorists”
or “a
mixed bag”-whatever
that means-we
say once I;
again: the onus is on you to demonstrate the courage of
your convictions if you want to see a genuinely inde- i
pendent, stable and democratic Namibia-which
is !
certainly to be, with or without you. Now, as always
in the past, your actions speak for themselves. YOUI F
steadfastly remain in cahoots with South Afriqa; pou I
have, by your actions, omissions and commissions;
turned us into your adversaries, We know you are very I.
powerful, but we assure you that one thing that you or 1
racist Boers cannot take away from us is the love for
our fatherland and the commitment to our people. For /r
these ends we are ready, prepared and willing to
I

continue the struggle for as long as it takes to regain
our liberty and national sovereignty. We came here
with a mandate from our Central Committee. We shall
go back and report to the oppressed people of Namibia
and to the militants of PLAN. We shall then together
draw the appropriate conclusions.

enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations has
already been said by the majority of the members of the
Council and by the Ministers who took part in the
debate in fulfilment of a special mandate of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
and of the extraordinary ministerial meeting of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries,
held recently at Algiers,

134. When Namibia achieves liberation,
then we
shall differentiate between those who stood with us
during the days of the bitter struggle and those who
actively participated in the depletion of our mineral
resources, armed and supported our enemy and
belittled our sacred cause.

143. The indisputable truth of the facts stated by
them in the Council should have given us reason to
hope for a result different from that of the voting
which took place earlier here. We should have thought
that the political and moral weight of the grave criminal,
terrorist and aggressive acts perpetrated by the Pretoria
racists against the Namibian people and the frontline States, as well as the barbaric oppression of the
black people of South Africa, would be sufficient to
dispel any doubt, should any reason for doubt still have
remained. Regrettably,
the veto was once again
resorted to against the freedom, self-determination
and independence of the people of Namibia. And it is
those very Governments which, because of their close
links with the South African regime, can use their
influence on that regime to compel it to comply with
United Nations decisions and resolutions that have
used their veto to give validity to the illegal occupation of Namibia, the acts of aggression against Angola,
Mozambique,
Botswana and Zambia and the very
survival of the South African regime’s monstrous
system of apartheid.

135. We-and,
if not we, then future generations
of Namibia-will
live to record the attitude and behaviour of the major NATO Powers towards the cause
of the oppressed people of Namibia. SWAP0 strongly
denounces and rejects this hostility against our legitimate struggle by the imperialist Powers.
136. In conclusion, Mr. President, we want you to
know that your presidency as it related to the debate
on the question of Namibia was exemplary and imaginative, I thank you personally for your kind consideration and co-operation in this regard.
137. From here we proceed to the combat zones,
fortified in the knowledge that the majority of humankind supports our cause and that it is indeed the cause
of the international community. In this context, I wish
to renew SWAPO’s commitment
to continue to cooperate with the ‘Secretary-General
of the United
Nations in iris tireless efforts to hasten Namibia’s
independence.
138,

144. Thus, the Security Council-the supreme organ
charged with the maintenance of international peace
and security-far
from putting an end to the reprehensible acts of the Pretoria regime, which have been
condemned by the overwhelming majority of mankind,
encourages that regime’s policy of aggression and
terrorism by fanning the flames of war in southern
Africa. It is indeed a heavy responsibility for this
principal organ in the United Nations to have its hands
tied even when it comes to implementing the tenets of
the Charter.

Victory is certain.

139. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
140.

Mr. ROA KOURf (Cuba) (irrfer’pretntion
from
Mr. President, I should like to thank you and
the members of the Security Council for allowing me to
speak at the end of this historic day.

Spanish):

141. I speak in my capacity as Chairman of the
Group of Non-Aligned States at the United Nations in
order to state clearly their position in the face of the
veto cast by the representatives of the United States
of America, the United Kingdom and France regarding
the call for sanctions against the racist, terrorist
regime of South Africa because of its defiance of the
majority will of the international
community
by its
refusal to put an end to its illegal occupation of the
Territory of Namibia and to abide by the decisions and
resolutions of the Council and of the General Assembly.

145. There should be no hesitation in the minds of the
members of the Council about the scope of what has
happened to human rights and to principles that are the
very basis for the existence of the United Nations.
This is not, nor could it be, the way to establish peace
and security in the southern part of Africa, nor to bring
about justice in international relations, nor to guarantee
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the States of the region; and even less to ensure that
they live together in peace and friendship. On the
contrary, the use of the veto pushes further away the
time when an end will be put to the causes of instability, insecurity, war and oppression in southern
Africa.

142. All that is relevant with regard to the delinquent
conduct of the Pretoria racist regime which makes it
an international outlaw and a violator of the principles

146. In fact, the only universally respected course
that can be taken in this case is strict compliance with
Security Council resolution 435 (1978): the United
13

Nations plan for Namibia-or, rather, the Western plan
for Namibia-which
has been accepted by all the
African States. That is the course that could bring us to
a true solution of the problem of Namibia.
147. The non-aligned movement-which,
from its
very first summit conference held at Belgrade in
1961, has expressed complete solidarity with the
struggle of the African peoples to achieve national
independence and to rid themselves of colonialism
and which in every international body has repeatedly
stated its firm support for the peoples of Namibia and
South Africa-cannot fail to repeat once again on this
occasion its resolute support for SWAPO, the sole
and legitimate representative of the Namibian people,
in its struggle to obtain national independence, and to
the liberation movement of South Africa, in its just
struggle against the apartheid regime.
148. But at the same time, I feel in duty bound to
reject most energetically-because of its injustice
and because of the serious consequences that it might
have-the veto exercised today against the legitimate
demands not only of the majority of Member States,
not only against the Security Council, but also against
the United Nations. These sanctions should have
been applied to the racist, aggressive and terrorist
rCgime of South Africa, but the voice of the people
will never be silenced, and the people of Namibia can
rest assured that it will take its proper place in the
concert of free, independent and sovereign nations.
149. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

present stage of its consideration of the item “The
situation in Namibia”.
150. However, since this is my last meeting as President for this month, I should like before adjourning
the meeting to thank all delegations for the co-operation and courtesy which they have shown to me and
to my delegation throughout the month of Ireland’s
presidency of the Council. I should like particularly to
thank them for the tolerance, the forbearance and the
co-operation they have continued to extend to me in
public and in private, even in the difficult last stagesof
our discussions.
151. In my capacity as President I had hoped to
preside fairly and courteously over the decisions and
work of this Council. I confess freely that I had a
second hope: to maintain unity in the Council on this
issue. I regret that we have not been able to achieve
that second aim and I hope that the members of the
Council will understand and extend tolerance and
forbearance to my efforts to achieve it. I should like
to thank all of them for their co-operation during our
presidency.

NOTE

I See Offiinl
Sessiotr, A~wxes,

Records
of t/w Cctwrtrl
A.ssc~tddy,
Tworry-forrrfh
agenda item 106, document
A/7754.

86-611034une

1988-2,050
