A/57/PV.86

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

86

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 22 May 2003, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy to the Governments and
peoples of Sri Lanka and Algeria in connection with
the recent flooding and earthquake
The Acting President: Before turning to the
items on our agenda, I should like, on behalf of all the
members of the General Assembly, to extend our
deepest sympathy to the Governments and peoples of
Sri Lanka and Algeria for the tragic loss of life and the
extensive material damage that have resulted from the
recent flooding in Sri Lanka and from the earthquake in
Algeria. May I also express the hope that the
international community will show its solidarity and
respond promptly and generously to any requests from
Sri Lanka and Algeria for assistance in their present
plights and to any appeal for aid.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Election of judges of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994

(Czech Republic)

Letter from the Secretary-General (A/57/790)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/57/814)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now resume its consideration of agenda item 18. In
this connection, I wish to refer to the letter from the
Secretary-General dated 16 April 2003, contained in
document A/57/790 and to which is annexed a letter
dated 26 March 2003 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In her
letter, the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal requests that the terms of office of both Judge
Pavel Dolenc and Judge Yakov Arkadyevich Ostrovsky
be extended so that they might finish the Cyangugu
case, that is, for an additional nine months. She also
requests that the term of office of Judge Winston
Churchill Matanzima Maqutu be extended so that he
might finish the Kajelijeli, Kamuhanda and Butare
cases, that is, for a total of two years and seven
months. She further requests that her own term of
office be extended so that she might finish the Media
case, that is, for an additional seven months.
In a letter dated 19 May 2003 addressed to the
President of the General Assembly and contained in
document A/57/814, the President of the Security
Council transmits the text of Council resolution 1482
(2003) of 19 May 2003, whereby the Council, inter
alia:
“1. Decides in response to the request by
the Secretary-General that:

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-36776 (E)

*0336776*

A/57/PV.86

“(a) Judge Dolenc, once replaced as a
member of the Tribunal, finish the Cyangugu case
which he has begun before expiry of his term of
office;
“(b) Judge Maqutu, once replaced as a
member of the Tribunal, finish the Kajelijeli and
Kamuhanda cases which he has begun before
expiry of his term of office;
“(c) Notwithstanding Article 11, paragraph 1,
of the Statute of the Tribunal and on an
exceptional basis, Judge Ostrovsky, once replaced
as a member of the Tribunal, finish the Cyangugu
case which he has begun before the expiry of his
term of office;
“(d) Judge Pillay, once replaced as a
member of the Tribunal, finish the Media case
which she has begun before expiry of her term of
office;
“2. Takes note in this regard of the
intention of the Tribunal to finish the Cyangugu
case before the end of February 2004 and the
Kajelijeli, Kamuhanda and Media cases before
the end of December 2003”.
I now call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley: I would like to inform members that,
should the General Assembly decide to extend the term
of office of Judges Pillay and Maqutu to 31 December
2003 and Judges Dolenc and Ostrovsky to 29 February
2004, as endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1482 (2003), additional costs provisionally
estimated at $1,281,500 would arise. It is anticipated
that of that amount the cost pertaining to the year 2003,
estimated at $975,470, could be met within the
appropriations for 2002-2003, as adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 56/248 B. The
remainder for the year 2004, in the amount of
$306,030, would be reported to the General Assembly
at its fifty-eighth session in the context of the proposed
budget for the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda for 2004-2005.
The Acting President: If there is no objection, I
propose that the Assembly decide to endorse those
recommendations of the Secretary-General that were
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1482
(2003) of 19 May 2003.
It was so decided.

2

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 18.
Agenda item 42 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special
session: implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS
Draft resolution (A/57/L.78)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/57/L.78. The Assembly will
now take a decision on the draft resolution contained in
document A/57/L.78, entitled “High-level plenary
meetings devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of
the twenty-sixth special session: implementation of the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.78?
Draft resolution A/57/L.78
(resolution 57/308).

was

adopted

The Acting President: On behalf of the General
Assembly and its President, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Manalo of the
Philippines for having so ably conducted the
negotiations on the resolution just adopted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 42.
Agenda item 169
Global road safety crisis
Draft resolution (A/57/L.77)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Oman to introduce draft resolution
A/57/L.77.
Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman): At the outset, my
delegation would like to join the Acting President in
expressing sincere condolences to the Governments
and the peoples of Algeria and Sri Lanka for the tragic
loss of life in the flooding in Sri Lanka and the
earthquake in Algeria.
As I stand before the Assembly, somewhere in the
world, in countries represented here, road accidents are

A/57/PV.86

taking place. A number of people are getting killed,
and an even greater number of people are getting
injured, some of whom will go on to have life-long
disabilities. Globally, road traffic accidents cause 1.2
million deaths and injure 10 to 15 million people every
year. It is projected that by 2020 road traffic injuries
will account for about 2.3 million deaths worldwide,
with more than 90 per cent of those deaths occurring in
low- and middle-income countries.
According to the World Health Organization
(WHO), in 1998 road traffic crashes accounted for 2.8
per cent of all global deaths, and ranked ninth among
the leading causes of disease burden. By the year 2020,
road traffic injuries could take third place in the
ranking of disease burden. The annual cost of road
traffic accidents is a staggering $500 billion, with
Africa alone bearing one fifth of that cost, funds badly
needed for development projects.
Yet, the issue of road traffic safety is not
significantly on the international public policy agenda
at all. The leadership of the international community
largely ignores road safety. Take, for example, the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, which was
held at Johannesburg last September. The Plan of
Implementation adopted at the Summit included a
number of specific goals and targets related to the
environmental impact of transport. But the Plan does
not specifically mention road safety even once. The
thousands of deaths occurring daily around the world
do not receive the same media attention as, say, a
single aircraft crash with a loss of about 200 lives.
Given the expected increase in the level of motor
vehicle use and the resulting growth in road traffic
deaths and injuries, action to reduce this dramatic rise
in casualties should now be a significant priority for
the international community.
An excellent start has been made with the
decision of the General Assembly to include an item on
road safety on the agenda of the fifty-seventh session.
The General Assembly will, for the very first time,
discuss road safety. Another welcome development is
the decision of the World Health Organization to
dedicate World Health Day in 2004 to the theme of
safer roads. There is still much more that needs to be
done to raise awareness of the issue of road safety and
to develop prevention strategies based on effective
approaches to road safety management.

Valuable work on road safety is being undertaken
by WHO, the World Bank, the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, the Global Road Safety
Partnership, the Bone and Joint Decade and the Task
Force for Child Survival and Development, just to
name a few. What is lacking, unfortunately, is
coordination between them. Work undertaken by
United Nations agencies lacks defined goals set at the
political level by the international community. That
lack of a clearly established mandate prevents the
development of a coherent strategy for road safety
management. The sponsors of the draft resolution
before the Assembly this morning therefore believe
that there is an urgent need for a new initiative that can
pull together the various efforts of different agencies
and provide a single focal point for global road safety.
I have the honour to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document A/57/L.77, entitled “Global
road safety crisis”, on behalf of the following other
sponsors: Algeria, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Cambodia, China,
Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Ethiopia,
Fiji, France, Gabon, Greece, Iceland, Indonesia, Israel,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Malta, Mauritius, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles,
Singapore, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen and Zambia.
The preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution
recognize the magnitude of the problem and its
contributing factors. In its operative part, paragraph 4
will request the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing the views expressed by Member States and
United Nations agencies that will form the basis for
discussion during the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
I commend to the General Assembly the adoption
of draft resolution A/57/L.77. By adopting it, we would
be starting, in small way, to move towards making our
roads safe for ourselves and for generations to come.

3

A/57/PV.86

The Acting President: I have the honour to
inform the General Assembly that Australia and Costa
Rica have become sponsors of draft resolution
A/57/L.77.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/57/L.77. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/57/L.77 without a
vote?

4

Draft resolution A/57/L.77
(resolution 57/309).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 169?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.
