tJNITED NATIONS / NA'nONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFfiCIAL RECORDS
, FOURTH YEAR

436th, 4J,7th and 438th MEET.1NGS: 10,11 and 15 AUGUST 1949

436emc.1 43nme et 438eme SEANCES: 10.1 11 et 15 AOUT 1949

CONSEILDE SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS, NEW YORK

18 :p.)

No 3·8
•

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

FoUr hundred and. thirty-sixth meeting

Quatre cent trente-sixieme se~ce

PaglJ

1. Official communi~ue •••.••...••..••..

1

Four htmdredand thirty-seventh meeting
1. Provisional agenda ••..••••....•.••••
2. Adoption of the agenda
3. The Palestine question
,.........

Pages

1. Communique officie1

Quatre ceV.t trente-septieme' s~.ance

2
2
2

1. Ordre du jour provisoire •...••...•...
2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour •..•.. ,....
3. La question palestinienne '. • • •• •• • . • • • •

Four hundred and thirty-eighth meeting

Quatre .cent trente-huitieme seance

1. Official communique ••••••• . '~..... .••

14

1

1. Communique officiel

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings of the
Security Council are published in 'movilhly supplements to the Official Records.
All United Nations doc'uments are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures..M ention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Les docum~t§.p~rtitl~Bts<iui.ne sC'.ht pas reproduits in extenso- tl~U1s le texte
des seances du Conseil de securlfe-s'ont l,Oublies dans des supplements me.usuels <lUX
Proces-verbaux officiels.
.
Lesdocuments des Nations t}nies portent tous une cote, qui se com-pose de
·Zettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte ,signifie
qu'il s'agit d'U'lt document des Nations Unies.

2
2
2

14

14

merely to take this final opportunity of expressing my very deep appreciation to the members
of the Security Council for the courtesy which
has been extended to me in permitting me to sit
in on these meetings, and for the invaluable
support and assistance which has been rendered
to our Palestine mission throughout its effort in
the Near East.

je VNIX simplement saisir la derniere occasion
qui m'est offerte d'exprimer aux membres du .
Conseil de securite combien vivement j'apprecie
la faveur qui m'a ete faite d'assister a. ces seances, i
ainsi que l'appui et l'aide sans prix apportes
notre mission en Palestine pendant toute la periode au ('ours de laquelle celle-ci a. poursuivi ses
efforts dans le Proche-Orient.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

La seance est levee cl 12 h. 45.

FOUR HUNDRED AND TIDRTY·
EIGHTH MEETING

QUATRE CENT TRENTE.HUITIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Monday, 15 August 1949, at 3 p.m.

Temee cl Lake Success,New-York,
le lundi 15 aout 1949 cl 15 heures.

President: Mr. S. TSARAPKIN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Repttblics).

President: M. S. TSARAPKINE
(Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants.
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, France,
Norvege, Republique
socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagneet
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Official communique

1. Communique officiel

In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional
rules o~ procedure·· of the Security Council, the
following comm'zmique was issued by the Security
Council through the Secretary-General and L
circulated in place of a verbatim record:

Conformement a. l'Article 55 de- son reglement
interieur pruvisoire, le Conseil de securite a fait
publier par les soins du Secretaire general le
communique suivant, qui tiendra lieu de compte
rendu stenographique:

a.

"Le Const::il de securite a tenu une seance
"The Security Council held a closed meeting'
today and considered its draft report to. the privee aujourd'hui·· et a examine son projet de
General Assembly, covering the period f10m rapport, relatif a la periode s'etendant du 16 juil16 July 1948 to 15 July 1949. Observations were let 1948 au 15 juillet 1949, a. l'Assemblee generale.
made on the amendments submitted by various , Des observations ont ete faites sur les amendedelegations and the revisions prepared by the ments presentes par diverses delegations et sur
Secretariat pursuant to the requests' of several les textes reVises prepares par le Secretariat
representatives. Afte! some discussion, the comrne suite auxfdemandes de plusieurs represe.nCouncil unanimously approved its report for tants. Apres un" echange de vues, le Conseil a
transmission to the General Assembly."
approuve a I'unanimite son rapport qui sera
transmis a ItAssemblee generale".
~
