S/PRST/2019/10

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 September 2019
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8618th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 September 2019, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Central African
region”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions 2349 (2017) and 2448 (2018),
as well as its presidential statements S/PRST/2018/17, S/PRST/2018/14 and
S/PRST/2015/12.
“The Security Council expresses full support for the United Nations Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the Special Representative of the Secretary General, in carrying out the mandate of the mission. In particular, the Security
Council welcomes UNOCA’s role in promoting inclusive political dialogue in
non-mission settings such as Cameroon, Chad, Gabon, the Republic of the
Congo, Equatorial Guinea, and Sao Tome and Principe, in encouraging stability
in the region, and in assisting the countries of the sub -region in consolidating
peace, resolving tensions, and preventing or mitigating political crises.
“The Security Council welcomes the letter of the Secretary-General on the
conclusions of the strategic review of UNOCA and the briefing on 14 August
2019 by Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Ms. Bintou Keita.
“The Security Council notes the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic review regarding the scope of UNOCA’s mandate and
activities. In particular, the Council acknowledges that the mandate of UNOCA
remains valid and welcomes the recommendation that UNOCA should enhance
its work on: early warning and analysis with a gender perspective; good offices
in non-mission settings, particularly in the lead up to the upcoming electoral
cycle in the region; support for and strengthening the capacity of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS); and building partnerships with
civil society and supporting sub-regional civil society networks. The Council
reaffirms these as the key priorities for the remainder of UNOCA ’s mandate.
“The Security Council welcomes the cooperation between UNOCA and
other regional entities. The Council encourages further enhanced cooperation
between UNOCA and the United Nations Regional Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS), ECCAS, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and United Nations country teams, to address cross -border
threats and inter-regional issues, such as the Lake Chad Basin crisis,
transhumance, forced displacement, and maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea. The Council further encourages UNOCA to take into consideration

19-15664 (E)

120919

*1915664*

S/PRST/2019/10

climate change, ecological changes and natural disasters among other factors
affecting the stability of the Central African Region, including through drought,
desertification, land degradation and food insecurity, continues to stress the
need for long-term strategies by governments and the United Nations, based on
risk assessments, to support stabilisation and build resilience, and further
requests that such information be taken into consideration by UNOCA in its
activities.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of a clear division of
labour between UNOCA and other United Nations entities. In particular, the
Council welcomes the recommendation that UNOCA should continue to rally
regional support for the peace process in the Central African Republic, in close
consultation with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilisation
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). The Council further
welcomes the recommendation that there be a clear division of la bour between
UNOCA and other United Nations entities operating in the region, such as the
United Nations Organisation Stabilisation Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
and the Office of the Special Envoy on the situation in Burundi.
“The Security Council encourages UNOCA to build on its partnership with
United Nations Resident Coordinators and country teams, and with relevant
regional directors of the United Nations Development Coordination Office to
further support cross-border initiatives.”

2/2

19-15664
