VII.

Resoludou adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories, and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Anguilla; 23
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Anguilla to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Anguilla;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in Anguilla
as will enable its people to exercise freely and without
interference, from a well-informed standpoint as to the
available options, their inalienable right to self-determination and independence in accordance with resolution 1514
(XV), as well as all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of
Anguilla themselves to determine their future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration, and, in that
connection, reaffirms the importance of fostering an
awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to selfdetermination and independence;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to continue, in
co-operation with the territorial Government, to
strengthen the economy of Anguilla and to increase its
assistance to programmes of diversification;
1. Notes that, although the Territory was no longer in
need of a grant from the administering Power to balance
its recurrent budget for 1984, the Government of the
United Kingdom agreed to provide a special grant to clear
the deficit accumulated between 1977 and 1983;
8. Urges the administering Power to take effective
measures, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to safeguard, guarantee and ensure the rights of the
people of Anguilla to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future development;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue, in cooperation with the territorial Government, the assistance
necessary for the increased employment of the local population in the civil service, particularly at senior levels;
10. Reiterates its request to the administering Power,
in the light of the observations, conclusions and recommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Anguilla, 1984, 24 to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as other regional and international
bodies, in the development and strengthening of the economy of Anguilla;
l l. Calls upon the administering Power to continue to
facilitate the participation of Anguilla in the Economic
23 Ibid., chap. XXIV.

24AJAC.109/799, sect. IV.

267

Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and its
subsidiary body, the Caribbean Development and Cooperation Committee, and in other organizations of the
United Nations system, including the Caribbean Group
for Co-operation in Economic Development;
12. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Anguilla at an appropriate time should
be kept under review;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to
Anguilla at an appropriate time and in consultation with
the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985
40/49. Question of the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembl}',
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 25
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the United States Virgin Islands, including in particular its
resolution 39/38 of 5 December 1984,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participation of the administering Power and the representative of
the territorial Government in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the United States Virgin Islands,
thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory with a
view to accelerating the process of decolonization for the
purpose of the full implementation of the Declaration.
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power that the Territory of the
United States Virgin Islands enjoys a large measure of selfgovernment through its elected representatives, namely,
the Governor, members of the Legislature and the Territory's non-voting delegate to the United States House of
Representatives, and noting the recent general elections in
the Territory,
Noting with concern that the economy of the Territory
was, as described by the Governor, "temporarily
depressed", particularly in the tourist, construction and
industrial sectors, as well as in the delivery of government
services, and noting that the Territory's industrial development programme would suffer a setback as a result of
the announced plan of Martin Marietta Alumina, Inc. for
the closure of its aluminium plant in the Territory in 1985,
Welcoming the continued participation of the United
States Virgin Islands, as an associate member, in the work
of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean and its subsidiary bodies, including the Caribbean Development and Co-operation Committee, and
noting the participation ofa representative of the Territory
as a member of the delegation of the administering Power
at annual meetings of the Caribbean Group for Co-operation in Economic Development since 1982,
25 Offu:ial Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session. SupplemRnt

No. 2.f(A/40/23), chaps. II, IV-VI and XXV.

268

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

Noting with satisfaction the statement of the administering Power that it endorsed the policy that representatives
of the Territory should participate in forums in which the
Territory was the subject of discussion,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the United States
Virgin Islands, and bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter
of priority in order to promote economic stability,
Recalling the dispatch in 1977 of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories, and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United
States Virgin Islands; 26

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to the United
States Virgin Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to create such conditions in the United States
Virgin Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to
exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in conformity with resolution 1514 (XV), as well as all other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
United States Virgin Islands themselves to determine their
future political status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration, and, in that connection, reaffirms the importance
of fostering an awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them in the exercise of
their right to self-determination;
6. Notes that the Select Committee, established by the
Legislature of the United States Virgin Islands in 1983 to
ascertain the views of the people of the Territory on their
future status and to make recommendations in that regard,
conducted public hearings from March to August 1984
and submitted its report to the Sixteenth Legislature in
January 1985; 27
7. Also notes that the Legislature endorsed the report,
which included, inter alia, a recommendation that a referendum on the status issue should be held on 4 November
1986, in conjunction with the next general election, for
people of the United States Virgin Islands to choose
between a variety of status options including independence, statehood, free association, incorporated territory,
status quo or a compact of federal relations; 27
8. Further notes that the Legislature decided to appoint
a new committee to continue the process of public hear26 Ibid., chap. XXV
27 Ibid., para. I 0.

ings in order to ensure that the people of the United States

Virgin Islands were fully aware of the implications of the
various status options by the time of the referendum; 27
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to strengthen the economy of
the Territory by taking additional measures of diversification in all fields and developing an adequate infrastructure
with a view to reducing the economic dependence of the
Territory on the administering Power;
10. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power under the Charter to promote the economic and
social development of the United States Virgin Islands;
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Government of the United States Virgin Islands,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures to guarantee their right to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and maintain control of their future development;
12. Urges the administering Power to seek in the Caribbean Group for Co-operation in Economic Development a status for the territorial Government similar to that
of other dependent Territories within the Group;
13. Calls upon the administering Power to facilitate
further the participation of the United States Virgin
Islands in various regional intergovernmental bodies and
organizations, particularly in their central organs, and in
other organizations of the United Nations system;
14. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures to comply fully with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, the Declaration and the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly
relating to military activities and arrangements by colonial
Powers in Territories under their administration;
15. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
2 December 1985

40/50. Question of Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 39/40 of 5 December 1984 on
the question of Western Sahara,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 28
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of Western Sahara, 29
28 Ibid., Supp/emenl No l3 (A/40/23). chap. X.
29 A/40/692 and Corr I
