United Nations

S/PV.4305

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4305th meeting
Tuesday, 27 March 2001, 11 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yel’chenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Cooney
Miss Durrant
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Jerandi
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-30793 (E)

*0130793*

S/PV.4305

The meeting was called to order at 11 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian Question
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Israel, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 27 March
2001 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2001/282, and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Tuesday, 27 March 2001, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem.”

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/270, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Bangladesh, Colombia,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Singapore and Tunisia. I
should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to photocopies of letters dated 26 and 27
March 2001 from Israel addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, which will be issued as documents of the
Security Council under the symbols S/2001/278 and
S/2001/280, respectively.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before giving the floor to members of the
Council wishing to make statements before the voting,
I should like to state the following in my capacity as
the representative of Ukraine.
From the very beginning of the outbreak of the
current crisis in the Middle East, Ukraine has been
among the delegations that stood for appropriate and
effective actions by the United Nations Security
Council with a view to putting an end to the increasing
Israeli-Palestinian confrontation. Proceeding from that,
my delegation has been consistently in favour of the
idea of establishing a United Nations observer presence
in the Palestinian territory to protect Palestinian
civilians. While being supportive of that idea, we have
always recognized that its practical implementation is
impossible without the cooperation of Israel.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

Our position on this matter was clearly
manifested during the voting on a draft resolution that
took place on 18 December 2000, and was reconfirmed
at the recent emergency meeting held by the Council at
the request of the Arab Group and Palestine. This
position has not changed since then. However, my
delegation is worried about the current stage of the
Council’s consideration of this issue, and about the
likely outcome of the action. The different approaches
of the members of the Council to this sensitive issue
are well known but, in our view, they are not
insurmountable.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

We commend the enormous efforts exerted by all
members of the Council — in particular by the
members of the non-aligned caucus, the four Western
European members and the United States delegation, as

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

S/PV.4305

well as the delegations of Palestine and the Arab
troika — to find common ground for the agreed text of
the draft resolution. As the delegation holding the
presidency of the Council, we did our utmost to
contribute to reaching that goal.
As the current President and as a member of the
Council, my delegation bears its share of responsibility
for this unfortunate situation. Without the necessary
unanimity of the members of the Council, we do not
believe that today’s vote on the draft resolution before
us will either achieve its original goal as regards the
protection of Palestinian civilians or send any positive
signal to the peoples in the region.
Therefore, while supporting the contents of the
draft resolution and being well aware of the outcome of
this voting exercise we are about to embark upon, my
delegation will not take part in today’s vote. We hope
that there is still a chance to reach consensus on the
draft resolution contained in document S/2001/281,
which we hope will ultimately have the support of the
members of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
deciding to organize it in order to take action on the
proposal submitted by the non-aligned caucus of the
Security Council. It is my distinct honour to submit the
draft resolution on this subject contained in document
S/2001/270 on behalf of the members of the NonAligned Movement caucus — Colombia, Jamaica,
Mali, Mauritius, Singapore and Tunisia — and on
behalf of my own delegation, Bangladesh.
The subject being taken up for action today has
been before us for quite some time. Members of the
Council will recall that on 7 October 2000 we in the
Council adopted resolution 1322 (2000), which called
for the cessation of violence and condemned the
excessive use of force against Palestinian civilians.
From then on, this issue has been of primary
importance to the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Arab Group, and in the minds of the general
membership of the United Nations.
In December, the non-aligned caucus made a
proposal to send a United Nations observer force to the
region so that the ongoing violence there, which still

continues, could be contained. That force was meant to
ensure the safety and security of Palestinian civilians.
It was, however, not possible for the Council to adopt
that proposal or a draft resolution to that effect.
Subsequently, the Arab League and the Non-Aligned
Movement made a request to hold an urgent meeting of
the Security Council to consider establishing a United
Nations force for the protection of Palestinian civilians,
which was in line with what the Non-Aligned
Movement caucus had proposed earlier, in December.
After the open debate held by the Council, in
which not only the members of the Security Council
but also a large number of the Members of the United
Nations not members of the Council participated, and
at which the issue of establishing a United Nations
observer force for the protection of Palestinian
civilians emerged as the single most important point
made by delegations in their statements, the nonaligned caucus of the Security Council decided to
revive its own draft resolution and submitted, on
20 March, a text containing appropriate adjustments for
the establishment of a United Nations observer force
for the protection of Palestinian civilians. That
proposal was ultimately “put in blue” and was made
available to the members of the Council on 23 March.
We in the Non-Aligned Movement caucus have
been anxious to work on that text with the support of
the other members of the Council. In that context, we
received with an open mind a draft resolution
submitted by the four European countries members of
the Council. That text attempted to broaden the scope
for support of the idea of a protection force for
Palestinian civilians. As I said, with an open mind and
in good faith, the Non-Aligned Movement caucus
engaged in the negotiations on the European text,
providing our own ideas and suggestions. Our objective
was to prepare and articulate a draft that would have
the broadest possible support of the Council. We
believed that if an observer force were to be
established, it had to have the broadest support of the
Council. During that exercise we also had in mind the
Arab Summit scheduled to take place in Amman on
27 and 28 March. We emphasized time and again that it
was necessary for the Security Council to act on the
proposal for an observer force before the
commencement of the Summit.
This subject — the protection of Palestinian
civilians — is one of the items on the agenda of the
Arab summit; the Arab leaders were looking forward to

3

S/PV.4305

our action. The draft resolution had contained a
mandate for the Secretary-General to undertake
consultations with the parties on the issues appearing
in the draft resolution, and we had thought that while
he was in Amman to attend the Arab summit it would
be appropriate for him to receive the Council’s
mandate to start his consultations with the parties
concerned. That is why the timeframe of the Arab
summit for action on the draft text was absolutely
essential. Time and again the Non-Aligned Movement
had made that point very clear to our colleagues with
whom we were engaged in negotiations on a draft text.
Intensive negotiations had been taking place for
the past five days. The non-aligned caucus and our
European colleagues, subsequently joined by the
United States, had engaged in long hours of
consultations and negotiations on the text. And, to
show our good faith, we set aside our own text, and
worked on the European text, hoping that broad-based
positive support for that agreed text would be possible.
That was one of the main objectives of our work. We
thought this exercise would articulate broad support in
the Council for the role of the United Nations, and that
of the Secretary-General, on the Middle East question
and on the question of Palestine. We thought it would
also send an appropriate message from the Council to
the Arab summit so that the Arab leaders who are
directly involved in the issues could be engaged in the
matter. Also, of course, our objective was to take action
on the draft resolution by Sunday so that the Arab
summit, which started today, could benefit from the
action of the Council.
The Non-Aligned Movement caucus was hopeful
from the beginning that it would be possible to work
out a text which would command the broad support of
the Council. Such a text was drawn up this afternoon,
and the Non-Aligned Movement caucus was ready for
action. We thought the text which had emerged after all
those hours of negotiations had the possibility of
broad-based support. We worked until five o’clock this
morning, and we have been working since then. When
the text, which had seemed to have such a broad base
of support, was ready, we were hopeful that action
would be taken this evening, so that, even if the
summit had started in Amman, the leaders would
benefit from the text for the final day of the summit,
tomorrow. Late in the evening, we were advised that it
was not possible for us to agree on action on the text
which we had worked out. In that situation, in order to

4

be able to take a Council decision in time for the
conclusion of the Arab summit, the Non-Aligned
Movement caucus requested of the presidency of the
Council that a vote be taken on the draft resolution
originally proposed by the non-aligned caucus. That is
the draft resolution which I referred to, and which is
contained in document S/2001/270.
Members of the Non-Aligned Movement caucus
fully cooperated with other members of the Council to
reach agreement on the text, which was negotiated over
long hours. We had approached those negotiations in
good faith and in total transparency. We had shown
flexibility time and again to accommodate the views of
all sides, the basic intention being that this observer
force proposal would have the broadest possible
support in the Council.
So we come to the Council requesting action on
our text, feeling frustrated that it was not possible for
us to take action on the broad-based draft resolution
which was negotiated and which emerged this evening.
We hope that the proposal contained in our text,
for the establishment of a mechanism for the protection
of Palestinian civilians, will receive the broadest
support from the Council, and we hope that the Council
will be able to act in such a manner that the safety,
security and protection of the Palestinian civilians are
ensured.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
To date, this new round of violent conflict between
Palestine and Israel has lasted for more than half a
year. It has caused casualties among civilians,
especially among a large number of Palestinian
civilians. It has complicated the Palestinian question. It
poses a direct threat to the Middle East peace process.
If this violent confrontation is not checked in time, it
will surely exacerbate the hatred and animosity
between Palestine and Israel and will cause and
perpetuate more serious confrontation and conflict.
That would be most inauspicious for the security of
Palestine, Israel and the region as a whole.
As soon as possible, Palestine and Israel should
put an end to violent conflict and resume peace talks,
so that the Middle East peace process can return to its
proper course.
As the principal organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council can and should continue to play an

S/PV.4305

important role in resolving the question of Palestine, in
promoting the Middle East peace process and in
safeguarding the peace and security of that region. That
is in the interest of both Palestine and Israel, and it is
also the wish of the vast majority of States Members of
the United Nations.
We are of the view that sending a needed
international presence to the region would help both
sides to put an end to violence, to establish mutual trust
and to ensure the safety of civilians on both sides. It
would also help create favourable conditions for the
two sides to resume peace talks.
The draft resolution submitted by the NonAligned Movement caucus reflects the concern of the
international community with respect to the question of
Palestine. Demands and proposals set out in the draft
resolution are reasonable and constructive. We
therefore support the draft resolution proposed by the
Non-Aligned Movement. The Chinese delegation
encourages the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to
continue his contacts with Palestine and with Israel and
to seek solutions that will be acceptable to both sides.
We appeal to the parties concerned to implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions on the question
of the Middle East — in particular resolution 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), adopted unanimously by the
Security Council — as well as the principle of land for
peace, which has been accepted by the international
community, in order to move forward towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of the Middle East.
The President: I now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/2001/270.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, Jamaica, Mali,
Mauritius, Russian Federation, Singapore,
Tunisia.
Against:
United States of America.
Abstaining:
France, Ireland, Norway, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 9 votes in favour, 1 against and 4 abstentions.
One Council member did not participate in the voting.

The draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Security
Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
The United States cast this vote with great regret. It
should not have been necessary, and this draft should
not have been put to the vote. We wanted to support an
action in the Council that advanced the cause of peace.
For us, this is a matter of deeply held principle. But
sadly, that is not what was offered.
We would ask, why was the decision to force a
vote taken now, when it was clear to all that our
deliberations had yet to produce a consensus, a
consensus that we collectively, as members of the
Council, repeatedly supported over the past week. The
cause of peace would have been better served by
additional deliberations, no matter how difficult or
protracted.
The Secretary-General is in Amman to attend the
Arab summit and to continue his mission of good
offices in a troubled region. We support him, but this
draft resolution sought to prescribe to the SecretaryGeneral, and through him to the parties themselves, the
way forward in the search for peace in the Middle East.
The draft has, in doing so, demonstrated an unrealistic
approach to this complex conflict by ignoring the most
basic precept of peacemaking: the need to encourage
the parties to find and implement their own lasting
solutions and then to stand ready to help in their
implementation. Sadly, the opportunity to play such a
constructive and encouraging role was missed today.
The United States opposed this draft resolution
because it is unbalanced and unworkable and hence
unwise. It is more responsive to political theatre than
political reality. In this draft resolution, some
pretended that the Council could impose a solution,
including a protection mechanism for civilians, in the
absence of an agreement between the parties. Instead,
the Security Council, acting on behalf of the
international community, should have called on the
parties to end all violence, to protect civilians and to
resume negotiations, so that all civilians on both sides
would be safe. The United States wanted, and would
have supported, a draft resolution making such a call.

5

S/PV.4305

The Council could have, and should have, called
on both parties to take the steps necessary to restore
confidence, such as ending incitement and violence and
resuming contacts at all levels to implement their
reciprocal commitments, including the understandings
reached at the summit at Sharm el-Sheikh. The United
States wanted, and would have supported, a draft
resolution making such a call.
Regrettably, the Palestinian Authority has never
fulfilled its commitment, made at Sharm el-Sheikh, to
speak out unequivocally, in Arabic, against violence.
Most important, the Council should have
expressed its readiness to assist the parties in the
implementation of any agreements they reach. The
United States would have supported, and indeed
promoted, such a call.
Last December, a similar draft resolution failed to
receive the nine affirmative votes required for
adoption, sending a message that the road to the just
and lasting peace we all seek in the Middle East does
not begin in this Council. That road begins in the
region, and the parties themselves must make the
difficult choices required. The Council can and should
support them in that effort.
The seven Council members that abstained last
December, including the United States, were able to
defer a premature and impractical call to establish a
United Nations observer force. By acting together,
however, we were able to preserve the concept of an
international presence for reconsideration at a future
time.
We acted out of similar motives tonight. We
support much of the substance we have been discussing
in the past week, but, as we repeatedly made clear to
other Council members, we cannot allow the Council
to adopt a draft resolution that simultaneously risks
damage both to the prospects for peace and to the
Council’s own credibility. Casting this vote gives us no
pleasure at all. However, abstaining and allowing the
Council to adopt such an ill-conceived and unworkable
draft resolution would have been irresponsible.
Frankly, we are troubled that other members,
which we know recognized the glaring weaknesses and
clear danger of this draft resolution, did not join us in
opposing it. The Council was engaged in very serious,
at times intense deliberations, seeking a way forward
that recognized the legitimate roles and responsibilities

6

of both the Council and the parties. We worked hard
for consensus and a common approach. That process
was cut short by this vote, for reasons that have
nothing whatever to do with the search for peace.
Now that this draft resolution is behind us, we
should turn our attention to ways in which the Council
can genuinely support and encourage the search for
peace. We ask other members to join us and continue
our discussions in that very difficult but necessary
effort. This should begin today. The blessings of peace
have been denied to the people of the Middle East for
far too long.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): For
several very long days, the 15 members of the Security
Council have worked in a particularly constructive
spirit on the most difficult issue on its agenda: the
conflict in the Middle East. They have done so by
maintaining a positive and constant contact with the
parties concerned.
All of the members of our Council share two
convictions. Because today there is no mediation,
because peace negotiations are at a standstill and
because the cycle of violence is increasingly spiralling
out of control, the United Nations must act. It is doing
so through the actions of its Secretary-General, who is
currently taking part in the Amman summit. However,
Mr. Kofi Annan cannot act under optimal conditions
unless he receives a very clear mandate from the
Council.
Our second conviction is that the Security
Council cannot, on an issue as difficult as this one,
make its voice heard and assist the Secretary-General
in influencing the course of events unless it is united. It
is in this spirit that the four European members of the
Council worked with all of their partners. The result is
here tonight, in the shape of a draft resolution which
we are submitting officially. This draft is substantial
and balanced. If it were to be adopted, it would give
Kofi Annan and the parties to the conflict a clear
perspective of the path to be followed in order to put an
end to the violence and to end all of the measures that
are keeping the Palestinian people under unbearable
constraints, with a view to the resumption of the peace
negotiations.
Despite almost unanimous support, our draft
resolution does not yet have all the backing necessary
for effective action on the part of the Council. That is
why we decided not to submit it to a vote, and to

S/PV.4305

continue to try to muster the support that we are
lacking this evening. With respect to the text presented
by our partners from the non-aligned countries, the
four European members decided to abstain, despite the
great merits of the draft. We abstained primarily
because of the alternative approach that we chose
together. This evening’s vote does not in any way
change France’s policy in the Middle East — its
commitment to all those who are suffering today and
who want to build their nation and their State in peace.
In conclusion, I would like once again to pay
tribute to all of our partners and to the representatives
of the parties to the conflict, as well as to those of the
Arab countries. Over the past few days, we have done a
remarkable job together. Let us continue together, so
that the United Nations can play its full role in the
service of a just peace.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Together with our European partners on the Council,
the United Kingdom put forward a number of ideas and
proposals over the past week in a serious attempt to
find a consensus in the Council on this most difficult of
issues. We did so because we believed that the Council,
putting its collective spirit first, could have a positive
influence on the peace process, on both the parties and,
therefore, on the promotion of peace and security in the
region, which desperately needs and deserves it. We are
very grateful to our Council and other colleagues who
worked with us so patiently and imaginatively in the
same spirit. We had not abandoned hope that the
textual proposals we sponsored could have produced
the right result with further work. We therefore regret
that the draft resolution that we have just considered
should have been put to the vote now, especially in the
knowledge that one permanent member could not
concur. The deadline imposed on us, while
understandable in the short term, carries less validity
when considered in a broader perspective.
We believe that the failure of the Council’s efforts
in this way cannot contribute to the most important
objective: the lessening of tension in the Middle East
and assistance to the parties in ending the violence,
securing a normal life for the civilian population —
particularly in the occupied territories — and the
resumption of negotiations. We disagreed with the act
of seeking a vote this evening and, with our European
partners, therefore abstained. We remain ready to work
for the realization of the ideas expressed in the failed
draft resolution, not least progress towards the setting

up of a protection or observer mechanism, with the
agreement of the parties to cooperate with it. We
condemn the continuing violence and incitement, and
the excessive use of force in reacting to unrest. We
hope that the concept of observers will not now be lost,
and we have work in hand to pursue it when the
circumstances are right.
Our work on this subject will continue, and
United Kingdom policy remains unchanged. We
strongly support the part played already by the
Secretary-General, and expect that he will remain
engaged in an important role. The Council’s experience
of working together on this issue — although
unsuccessful so far — should not be disregarded; we
were very close to something effective and valuable.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has noted with some
regret that the situation in the territory of Palestine is
gradually deteriorating. The conflict is growing, and
every day the cost in human lives increases. The
negotiating process has been deadlocked; the parties
are unable to resume their contacts, which are
particularly necessary today in the area of security in
order to overcome the violence and resume the peace
process. The situation has further deteriorated as a
result of the isolation of the West Bank and Gaza and
the virtual economic blockade of that territory.
We note that very serious efforts have been made
in the Security Council in recent days to elaborate an
agreed response to the situation in the occupied
territories. On many important aspects of the draft
resolution under discussion, members of the Security
Council were very close to agreement, and it appeared
that the achievement of consensus was possible.
Unfortunately, however, we cannot fail to draw the
conclusion that it was impossible to arrive at a text that
was acceptable to all. At the same time, we are
convinced that at this critical period the Security
Council is not entitled to remain on the sidelines and to
divorce itself from the tragic events in the West Bank
and Gaza. We believe that it is now necessary to focus
on finding a way to resolve the situation through the
combined efforts of all the parties concerned. For that
reason, we voted in favour of the draft resolution that
was presented by the Non-Aligned Movement caucus.
We believe that it is important to put an end to the
violence — that is the why we voted in favour — as
well as to normalize the situation around the

7

S/PV.4305

Palestinian territories and to remove the blockades,
including the economic one. At the same time, it is
important to ensure that the negotiation process is
resumed in a context in which the legitimate interests
of the parties can be satisfied. We believe that the draft
resolution of the Non-Aligned Movement would not
have imposed precepts on either the Palestinians or the
Israelis, but would have instructed the SecretaryGeneral to establish contacts with the parties for the
purpose of producing a mutually acceptable formula
for creating a mechanism to protect the civilian
population.
On a broader scale, the Russian Federation will
continue to make every possible effort to reach a
speedy resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict on the
basis of the agreements between the parties directly
involved in the conflict, and to facilitate the optimum
format for international assistance for such
negotiations.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): the situation in the Middle
East is tense and gives us reason to fear a further
deterioration. At this critical time it is important that
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, behave with caution and in a constructive
manner.
Norway therefore felt it to be of crucial
importance for a unified Security Council to make a
statement with a call for an end to violence, for a return
to normal economic activity and daily life, for a
resumption of peace talks with the aim of reaching a
final agreement and to provide strong support for the
role of the Secretary-General in the quest for peace. It
was this need for the Council to speak with one voice
that made Norway engage with our European
colleagues in a serious effort that we hoped would
receive the support of the full Council.
The situation in the Middle East is an issue of the
utmost importance to Norway, and we were therefore
particularly glad to see that the caucus of the NonAligned Movement and other members of the Council
were willing to participate in a serious discussion with
us. We appreciate the commitment made by everyone
to strive for a result that could find the support of all
members.
The result of these negotiations up to this point is
not what we had hoped for. Our wish was to give the
Secretary-General a strong mandate for his further
efforts, both for his discussions at the Summit in

8

Amman and for the difficult times in the coming weeks
and months, and to give the Security Council an
important and active role in this issue, which has been
with us since the early days of this Organization.
We were not able to have such unity in the
Council at this time. Norway regrets this, and I am
convinced that all members of the Council share our
feelings. Norway abstained tonight because we do not
believe this resolution would be helpful to the efforts to
get the peace process back on track at this time. The
Security Council must not be a forum only for an
exchange of views, but a constructive actor for peace
and security.
We did not manage to reach our common goal on
making a statement by a unified Council on this
important issue at this time. However, we must not
give up hope for reaching such a result at a later stage.
I would appeal to all members of the Council to not let
our lack of common approach today make us give up
on this noble goal. I would urge all members to keep
alive the spirit of cooperation demonstrated during our
many hours of negotiations and to return to this issue
when we all feel that our efforts can have a positive
impact on the situation in the Middle East.
Mr. Cooney (Ireland): Ireland is deeply
concerned at the apparently worsening conflict in the
occupied Palestinian territories and the resultant loss of
life, including the deaths of innocent children.
We have been working over the past week with
other members of the Council, in particular our fellow
Europeans, members of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the United States, to prepare a draft resolution that
could be adopted by the Council. This draft resolution
would invite the Secretary-General to consult with the
parties on taking early steps in a number of areas,
including an ending of violence, the resumption of
negotiations and the implementation of the
understandings reached at Sharm el-Sheikh in October
2000, as well as a range of confidence-building
measures.
We have also been seeking to provide Council
endorsement for the setting up, with the accord of the
responsible authorities, of a mechanism for the
protection of Palestinian citizens, a matter of particular
concern. We have made significant progress, and the
draft resolution has been submitted in the name of
France, Ireland, Norway, Ukraine and the United
Kingdom. We intend to continue consultations on this

S/PV.4305

draft with the remaining members of the Council and
other interested parties with a view to securing its early
adoption, if possible by consensus.
My delegation abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution before us tonight for two important reasons.
First, we have consistently stated that for the United
Nations to dispatch an observer force or an observer
mission, the agreement of the parties is necessary. I
know that this is not a view shared by all at this table,
but it is necessary for the essential guarantee of safety
and cooperation, without which no Member State could
be expected to provide the required personnel.
But there is a further and ultimately more
important consideration. The Middle East peace
process at the current critical juncture needs the full
support of the international community. The Security
Council has an overriding responsibility to channel this
support and in particular to give the Secretary-General
a strong mandate to engage the parties on the way
forward. The alternative draft resolution sponsored by
four European members of the Council and Ukraine
could provide a broader base of support for such
progress. We hope that work can continue on this draft
text. The sponsors would be very happy to accept
amendments that would help secure its passage.
Ireland intends to continue to use its position as a
member of the Security Council to work constructively
with fellow members to contribute to real progress in
the Middle East and to ending the long suffering of the
people of that region.
The President: I call on the representative of
Israel.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to address the Council.
The draft resolution just voted on and not adopted
reflects, unfortunately, a one-sided view of the nature
of the last six months of violence. The reality, as the
last 24 hours have gruesomely reminded us, is that the
double-edged sword of this conflict cuts both ways. In
Hebron yesterday a 10-month-old baby girl, Shalhevet
Pass, was shot and killed by a Palestinian sniper armed
with a telescopic rifle, which, I hasten to add, is a
weapon generally available only to official Palestinian
security personnel. Today the city of Jerusalem fell
under the dark cloud of terrorism. Two separate
terrorist bombings, one of them on a public city bus,

killed at least one person and wounded nearly 40
others.
These tragic incidents perpetrated by those with
no regard for the noble principles we seek to uphold in
this Council must not go unmentioned. We do a great
disservice to the mandate of this Organization, as well
as to the memory of the innocent civilians whose lives
were taken by the enemies of peace, by failing to
loudly condemn such atrocities.
We are therefore disheartened that this draft
resolution employs terms that reflect a purely
Palestinian viewpoint. There is no mention of Israeli
casualties — of the 70 Israelis who have been killed by
terrorists since September. There is no clear call upon
the Palestinian side to refrain from unilateral actions.
There is no condemnation of Palestinian terrorism, or
specifically of Chairman Yasser Arafat’s departure
from his signed commitments to renounce violence and
terrorism as a tool to achieve political objectives.
To our dismay, it appears that there is nothing the
Palestinians have done in six months of murder,
abduction, bombing and mortar attacks, let alone in the
last 24 hours, that is worthy of reproach. Is it possible
that, after all the debate in the Council and after three
separate terrorist attacks in a single day, Israel must
continue to shoulder all the blame and all the
responsibility?
As we have stated before, Israel remains opposed
to the establishment of a United Nations force in the
region. Chairman Arafat has the ability to protect the
lives of his people himself. I wish to emphasize yet
again that the moment Chairman Arafat issues a public
call to end the terrorist campaign, once he returns in
earnest to the negotiating table, and when both in word
and in deed he acts to reinvigorate the spirit of peace,
Israel will take whatever steps possible in order to
accelerate the return to normal relations between us
and the Palestinians. Indeed, we have already taken
steps to that end, as the situation allows. More
comprehensive measures could be implemented once
the Palestinians demonstrate a firm commitment to
control the situation.
More importantly, the current Palestinian
initiative represents a blatant attempt to obscure their
strategic choice to engage in violence and terrorism.
Thus, the Security Council must not endorse such a
choice by coming to the aid of those who initiate
hostile confrontations. Moreover, such a step, while the

9

S/PV.4305

intifada continues, has the potential to actually escalate
the violence and further destabilize the region by
solidifying the Palestinian refusal to put down their
weapons and compromise for peace. If the international
community wishes to see a return to dialogue and
negotiation and the ultimate realization of the
legitimate aspirations and needs of both parties through
a peaceful process, it must insist that the Palestinians
stop the violence that they have initiated and refrain
from actions that may be construed as endorsing the
violence. We therefore take positive note of the fact
that the Council has not taken such an action.
We look forward to a time when we can return to
the process of negotiations with the Palestinians as
partners and not as adversaries, to a time when
dialogue has once again replaced weapons as a means
of addressing the outstanding issues in this conflict.
For in this way, and only in this way, will we arrive at a
just and lasting solution to the conflict that will spare
future generations the pain and misery we have both
experienced over the past six months.
The President: I call on the Permanent Observer
of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council arrived at a negative result today
because one of its permanent members used the right of
the veto. This means that the Council was prevented
from carrying out its duties to preserve international
peace and security in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. This is truly regrettable.
As far as we, the Palestinian people, are
concerned, we believe that this failure also means a
failure to contribute to ending the tragedy that has been
taking place in the occupied Palestinian territories
because of the bloody and oppressive campaign waged
against our people by Israel — the occupying Power —
and by the leaders in charge and the current and
previous Israeli Prime Ministers — Messrs. Sharon and
Barak — through all their declared and expressed
statements and positions that run counter to
international law and that call for escalation and
confrontation. This also means a failure to provide the
support necessary to revive what is left of the Middle
East peace process, as well as the necessary assistance
to the parties to overcome the difficulties they face by
simply assuming the presence of good intentions
among the parties. This regrettable result came about

10

despite the constant work done recently to which we all
contributed.
I would first like to express, on behalf of the
Palestinian people, our heartfelt thanks to the NonAligned caucus in the Security Council, which
sponsored today’s draft resolution — Bangladesh,
Colombia, Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius and Singapore.
Those friendly States undertook this marvellous action
in support of the just demands of the Palestinians and
in support of the peace process in the Middle East on
the basis of the principles of the Non-Aligned
Movement and on the basis of positions of principle
regarding the question of Palestine. Likewise, we
would like to thank the members of the Council who
voted in favour of the draft resolution and those that
expressed their readiness to support us even if the
current circumstances were more difficult. In that
regard, I would like to mention China and the Russian
Federation. We would also like to express our deep
gratitude to our brothers in the Arab Group and the
Group’s Chairman this month — the United Arab
Emirates — as well as to Chairman of the Arab
Summit, the Arab Republic of Egypt.
Since November 2000 we have made efforts to
establish a United Nations observer force to provide
protection to the Palestinian people.
As members know, the result was the unfortunate
outcome which the Council reached for reasons known
to all. Subsequently, we resumed our efforts towards
the same objective. Later, when it had become clear
that it would be impossible to attain our objective now,
owing to the negative United States position, European
members of the Council took an initiative that would
have responded to the situation on the ground and to
the situation relating to the Middle East peace process,
with a view to moving the peace process forward.
There was a move to accept a limited step in the
direction of the possibility of setting up a force to help
protect Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories; this came to be known as the two-stage
approach.
To be frank, we were not very happy, because, as
is only normal, we feel that protection for our
Palestinian people should be expedited in order to put
an end to the current bloodshed. But, in the hope that
we could take a positive step that might open the way
to better prospects for greater Security Council
participation in the Middle East situation and that

S/PV.4305

might improve the situation on the ground and promote
the peace process, we agreed to respond to that
initiative; we cooperated sincerely with European
countries and with the United States of America —
and, naturally, with non-aligned and other members of
the Security Council. More than once during that time,
we thought we were close to agreement. Indeed, on
Tuesday afternoon we achieved an agreement
conditional only upon acceptance by our officials.
Despite all of that, it became clear to us late this
evening that everything related to timing had
evaporated. There seems to have been an attempt to
delay action without setting any definite date or time.
And as for content, it was suggested that what had been
decided was in fact very far removed from what could
actually be agreed upon at this time. For our part, in the
light of our duty towards our people, it would have
been impossible for us to pursue action that would
result in something falling far short of what is
acceptable in the light of the situation on the ground, in
the light of past Security Council resolutions, and in
the light of the provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law. Moreover, it would be
unreasonable for us to pursue action that seems to drag
on indefinitely in the face of a situation that is daily
deteriorating and given the need for an international
response to the issue of timing.
To all of that we must add the convening of the
Arab summit at Amman, an important political
development that cannot be ignored. We wanted the
Council’s action to send the right message to that
summit, one that would promote interdependence and
harmony between Arab action and international
legitimacy in addressing the deteriorating situation in
the region.
We made every possible effort to reach such a
positive conclusion, even at the expense of the
substance of the draft resolution — even, more than
once, at the expense of our own positions. Clearly, we
are sorely disappointed at the position we are in today,
including all the surprises and unexpected
developments, some of which were rather unusual in
terms of the Council’s procedures and working
methods. It was out of the question to take a step
backward by sacrificing the legitimate needs and
demands of our people, including their need for

international protection, especially since no other
concrete proposal was put forward in terms of either
timing or substance.
From our perspective, this stage of our effort with
the Security Council has come to an end. We shall
certainly return at a later date to see what can be done,
in cooperation with Council members who are willing,
in the service of the principles of peace, justice and
legitimacy. We are confident that this will ultimately be
possible; under no circumstances will we cease to call
upon the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. At the same time, we shall continue to
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan; we call upon him to continue those efforts,
especially as the Council has been prevented from
doing its duty.
When we think of what has happened, we truly
think it strange: After hearing just a while ago the
unbalanced — at least from our point of view —
statement by the representative of the United States of
America, we have to admit that our astonishment is no
longer. Indeed, we would have liked not to be surprised
any longer, but for totally different reasons and in a
totally different way.
The Palestinian party will work sincerely to
resume traditional cooperation here at the United
Nations and in capitals with the friends who chose to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution today. We
are confident that this is possible, particularly in the
light of the traditional Middle East policies of those
States.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute once
again and express our thanks to all of those who stood
by our side. I am especially thankful to the non-aligned
caucus — primarily its coordinator for this month and
the Arab member, Tunisia — for their positions of
principle in support of our people’s struggle.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.15 a.m.

11
