S/PV.7614

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7614th meeting

Thursday, 28 January 2016, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bermúdez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Uruguay)

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2016/27)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-02099 (E)
*1602099*

S/PV.7614

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on
Somalia (S/2016/27)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia; and Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Keating
and Mr. Madeira, who are joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2016/27, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: I am delighted to speak to the Security
Council so early in my tenure. It is a pleasure to brief
the Council alongside Ambassador Madeira, who has
been in-post since December 2015 and therefore is an
old hand already as compared to me.
Before I start, allow me to pay tribute to my
predecessor, Nicholas Kay, who handed over a
Mission that is in good shape. All my interlocutors in
Mogadishu — Somali and international, African Union
and United Nations — have stressed the critical role he
and his team played in the past two and a half years.
I would also like to pay tribute to the international
community and to the Council, which has played a
pivotal role on Somalia for several years. The unity of
2/6

28/01/2016

the Council is a fundamental requirement for progress
in Somalia. I look forward to working closely with it.
Let me begin with some first impressions. I was
lucky enough to have spent some time in Somalia in
my youth, when Mogadishu was thriving, and again in
the 1990s, when it was in turmoil. My two weeks as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General have
not been Somalia’s easiest, marked as they have been by
tough political negotiations and marred by two horrific
terrorist attacks. Yet the Somalia I see today is closer
to that of my childhood memory than to that of the
nightmare of the civil war. It is a country of enormous
potential, of determined people of entrepreneurial
spirit, with extraordinary natural resources, a privileged
geographic location and a natural gateway. Somalis
know their potential, and they will not be deterred from
realizing it. In the wake of the terrible attacks at El Aade
and Lido beach, their spirit is doubly impressive.
I pay tribute to the bravery and dedication of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
its troops and to the courage of the Somali people.
Kenya has vowed not to be deterred by the attack
against its soldiers. Equally, Somalis are neither
cowed nor deflected from their goals by Al-Shabaab
atrocities. That is not to underestimate the challenges
ahead. But, as we enter a critical year for the country’s
transformation, Somalia’s steady progress will continue.
That will require Somali leadership and the sustained
support of the Council. Success in Somalia in 2016 will
depend upon managing threats, notably those posed by
Al-Shabaab, as well as seizing the opportunities that
political progress will bring about.
The security situation remains very challenging.
The Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission will say more on that.
We owe a great debt to the courage and dedication of
AMISOM soldiers.
Somalia’s security requires a comprehensive
approach — a full-spectrum approach, as the SecretaryGeneral indicated in his plan of action for preventing
violent extremism. Our political, security, development
and human rights efforts must proceed together and
reinforce each other.
Military and counter-terrorism efforts need to be
accompanied by stronger policing and the rule of law.
A priority must be to strengthen federal institutions
and regional capabilities within Somalia as the basis
for a longer-term transition plan for AMISOM. That
16-02099

28/01/2016

The situation in Somalia

needs to be complemented by work to strengthen
institutions, generate jobs in the private sector and
reduce dependence upon humanitarian aid.
Security remains a paramount concern. Too
many civilians and too many soldiers are dying.
Al-Shabaab remains a present threat. I am encouraged
by the commitments made on security-sector reform by
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud in September 2015,
including a comprehensive review of the sector, timely
and adequate pay by electronic means and transfer to
a unified biometric registration system. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and
its partners stand ready to support those important
initiatives.
The Federal Government is currently developing
a national security policy, which is urgently required.
The establishment of a national security architecture
must be complemented by the establishment of clear
police, justice and corrections models for Somalia in
the context of federalism, not least as the basis for
coordinated support by international partners. I hope
we see progress on that set of issues before the Highlevel Partnership Forum, to be held next month in
Istanbul.
The humanitarian situation remains worrisome.
The underlying causes of Somalia’s protracted crisis
remain unresolved. Millions of children, women and
elderly people are acutely vulnerable. In total, some
4.9 million people, representing 40 per cent of the total
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Over 1.1 million people remain internally displaced.
Some 300,000 children under the age of five are acutely
malnourished. Millions lack access to basic health care,
water and sanitation.
The Somalia humanitarian country team recently
launched the humanitarian response plan for 2016
with a total requirement of $885 million to save
lives, strengthen livelihoods, improve access to basic
services and protect vulnerable groups, including by
seeking durable solutions for the internally displaced.
The overarching objective is both to meet pressing
need, build resilience and reduce dependence on
humanitarian aid. It needs to be generously supported.
All our efforts will be conditional upon political
progress. Last November, thousands of Somalis across
the country, from all walks of life, took part in a national
consultative forum. That signalled a decisive step
forward towards democracy: transparent and inclusive

S/PV.7614

consultations on an electoral model for 2016, with the
active participation of women, youth and minorities.
The Mogadishu Declaration of 16 December 2015
outlined key principles, including on term limits, the
quality of the electoral process and the participation
and representation of women and youth.
It therefore gives me particular pleasure to share
some breaking news with the Council. This morning, a
decision was taken by the Somali Cabinet on the electoral
model to be used later this year. That is the culmination
of almost six months of intense consultations. It may
be a watershed moment, marking the growing political
maturity of a federal Somalia. The Federal Government
has taken a bold decision. Leaders of the Somali
regions, while many differences and concerns remain,
recognize its importance. As I speak, they are engaged
in discussions around its implementation.
Reaching a decision on the electoral model was
not easy. Following repeated rounds of consultations
among Somali leaders, in Kismayo and Mogadishu,
and prolonged deadlock, the leaders of the Federal
Government recognized that the national interest
demands forward momentum. The model envisages
that a lower house of 275 members, based on
maintenance of the 4.5 power-sharing formula between
the clans, and an upper house of 54 members, based
on equal representation of the existing, emerging and
prospective federal member states and the allocation of
additional seats to the pre-existing entities of Puntland
and Somaliland. This is a Somali-devised model.
It is Somali-led and Somali-owned. Unity among
international partners in support of the process leading
to that decision has been exemplary. International
partners will need to work with Somali stakeholders
to ensure its timely implementation. I hope I have the
support of the Security Council in that endeavour.
The decision marks an important milestone for
Somalia, the Federal Government and the leaders of
the federal member states. There are many more ahead.
The journey is going to be long and bumpy. Much
work remains to be done on the details related to the
implementation of the electoral model and to ensure
agreement of a political road map for the period from
2016 to 2020, to deliver universal elections by that date.
We must navigate around potential obstacles and will
face obstructions along the way. Spoiler behaviour will
need to be contained. And we must be ready to provide
assistance to federal and regional leaders.

16-020993/6

S/PV.7614

The situation in Somalia

Real momentum could and should result from
the breakthrough that has been achieved today. That
could spur other critical political processes. I welcome
the launch of the state formation process in Hiraan
and Shabelle Dhexe on 12 January. Once that process
is finished and the status of Mogadishu Banadir is
clarified, the map of the new, federal Somalia will
be complete. Progress has also been made in recent
months on the review of the Provisional Federal
Constitution. A technical review of 10 of its 15 chapters
has been completed, and the major political issues to be
addressed are now much clearer.
The federalization process must not just be a topdown, mechanical exercise; to succeed in the long
term, it must be an endeavour in which all the people
of Somalia have a real stake. There is much left to do to
ensure reconciliation and unity. Freedom of expression
and opinion has been challenged in recent months,
and I call upon the Somali authorities to respect that
freedom.
Ambassador Madeira and I are looking forward to
strengthening and deepening the working relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union on
the ground. In line with resolution 2245 (2015), we
will convene a senior leadership coordination forum
among UNSOM, AMISOM and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) to discuss our
strategic and operational priorities. We are committed
to taking full advantage of the creation of UNSOS, and
the opportunities that affords for greater coherence and
effectiveness.
We share a commitment to implementation of the
United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy
with respect to United Nations support to non-United
Nations security forces, which remains an important
tool to promote respect for human rights and ensure
accountability in a volatile military context. If its are
objectives to be met, a strong working partnership
with AMISOM, as well as with the individual troopcontributing countries is essential, including to follow
up on allegations and ensure accountability. That is in
all our interests. Human rights violations will erode the
population’s support for AMISOM and for the Somali
Federal Government.
As I have outlined here, the challenges are manifold.
In the coming months I will work with Somali leaders,
civil society and the international community to
support a comprehensive approach embracing political,
4/6

28/01/2016

security, development and human rights priorities. The
exciting thing is that increasingly politics is displacing
violence as a means of resolving differences among
Somalis. There is an eager desire to advance and leave
the suffering and divisions of the past behind.
Let me conclude by saying that the unity of the
Security Council and the coherence of the broader
international community provides a powerful basis for
the United Nations and our African Union partners to
make a decisive contribution to Somalia’s future. The
Council has my commitment and that of the entire
United Nations team that we will support the leaders
and people of Somalia to realize their goal of a peaceful,
prosperous and democratic future.
I hope to achieve more before the high-level
partnership forum in Istanbul and look forward to
seeing members there in February.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, most
sincerely for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council alongside the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, my colleague and brother
Mr. Michael Keating. I welcome him to Somalia since
he has admitted that I am his senior, having arrived
there one week earlier than he did. It is my belief that
we shall continue to build together on the good working
relations already established by our predecessors in the
delivery of our shared mandates.
I am briefing the Council barely two weeks after the
deadly attack on the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) El-Ade base in the Gedo region and the
Lido attack. The attack in Gedo and previous attacks
on AMISOM forward operating bases illustrate the
continuing threats that we all face in the fight against
Al-Shabaab. I pay tribute to all the AMISOM uniformed
personnel who continue to exhibit professionalism,
tenacity and courage in the campaign to degrade
Al-Shabaab’s capacity. I would also like to make
special mention of the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Once again, I would like to express my grief
and condolences to the families of all our fallen heroes
who have paid the ultimate price not only in the service
of Africa but also in the preservation of global peace
and security.
16-02099

28/01/2016

The situation in Somalia

My briefing today will focus on the recent security
and political developments in Somalia. Since my
predecessor last briefed the Council in May 2015 (see
S/PV.7445), we have continued to make considerable
security gains. AMISOM and the Somali National
Army commenced renewed offensive operations,
code-named Operation Juba Corridor, in July 2015.
These joint operations are currently in their third phase
and are expected to be completed by March. The overall
strategic objective of the current operations remains to
considerably degrade the capabilities of Al-Shabaab
in each remaining stronghold. That would provide
the enabling environment for the advancement of the
much-needed political process.
The dislodging of Al-Shabaab from towns and
villages under its control has overstretched AMISOM
capacity, with the attendant security implications,
which Al-Shabaab is trying to exploit, as the attacks
in El-Ade and similar attacks in Lego and Janale
suggest. Al-Shabaab has changed tactics by launching
a combination of asymmetrical and direct attacks
on AMISOM bases. In that regard, we have seen an
incremental growth of guerrilla warfare as well as the
use of improvised explosive devices in their attacks.
Overall, the security situation in Somalia has remained
somewhat fluid, volatile and unpredictable in some
aspects, despite the territorial gains that we have
achieved so far.
On the political front, I am encouraged by the
progress that the people and the Government of Somalia
continue to make in the state formation process, the
revision of their Constitution, and the preparation for
the holding of elections later this year. With regard
to state formation, earlier this month the Government
embarked on the process for the formation of the final
regional administration for Hiraan and Shabelle Dhexe,
to which my colleague alluded earlier. We welcome that
initiative and continue to ask the Federal Government of
Somalia to take the necessary steps towards achieving
a positive outcome that would lead to the establishment
of this last regional administration.
In the area of elections, as expressed jointly with
Mr. Keating, we are very pleased that an electoral
model was unanimously agreed by the Government
just yesterday, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General just mentioned. That model is
based on a unique balance of representation between
clan and constituency and offers a hopeful outlook
for an inclusive electoral process. I continue to urge

S/PV.7614

the Council and other partners to support the Federal
Government of Somalia in the effective implementation
of this electoral model.
Based on the declared principles and time frame
of the election, I would like to commend the Federal
Government of Somalia for reaffirming its commitment
to respecting the constitutionally mandated terms
of the legislature and the executive, which expire in
August and September, respectively. This is consistent
with the African Union Charter on Democracy,
Elections and Governance. While the political progress
made is laudable, much more needs to be done in
the consolidation of this process, as well as in the
rejuvenation of the constitutional review process, which
remains a critical pillar of political stability in Somalia.
I would like to reassure the Council that the African
Union (AU) remains committed to supporting peace
and stability in Somalia amid the immense sacrifices
made and challenges that the Mission continues to
face. In that regard, I should like to urge the Council to
consider strengthening our partnership in the following
areas in order to further enhance the implementation of
the AMISOM mandate.
First, I would like to emphasize that the Somali
National Army is central to the conduct of joint
operations with AMISOM, as well as to taking over
security functions in the recovered areas in order to
facilitate continued offensive operations. It is also of
note that the only viable process that will lead to the
achievement of the AMISOM mandate in Somalia
and its subsequent exit strategy is the standing-up of
a capable, legitimate and inclusive Somali National
Army. In the same vein, I urge the Council to ensure
that the pledges made towards the Guulwade Plan are
fulfilled. The international community also needs to
be better coordinated in its support for Somali security
forces and otherwise.
Secondly, I would like to stress that better coordination
between the multiplicity of partners — and specifically
among AMISOM, the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia (UNSOS) and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) — remains vital now
more than ever before. The Council will recall that
resolution 2245 (2015), adopted on 9 November 2015,
underscored the need to ensure operational effort
and cooperation between UNSOM and AMISOM so
that they are aligned with a common set of strategic
priorities. Under the new leadership of Mr. Keating and

16-020995/6

S/PV.7614

The situation in Somalia

myself, we are hopeful that there will be progress in
the strengthening and revitalization of the joint senior
leadership decision-making framework, and we are
already working on that. I also look forward to the
joint development of the quantitative compact between
the Head of UNSOS and myself, which is expected to
enhance the provision of support to AMISOM. Our
recent interactions with the Under-Secretary-General
for Field Support on the provision of timely and
flexible support to AMISOM has been very positive
and encouraging.
Thirdly, the provision of additional enablers
remains central to AMISOM operations. It will be
recalled that the Governments of Ethiopia, Kenya
and Uganda have pledged helicopters to AMISOM.
However, the tripartite letters of assist between those
troop-contributing countries, the AU and the United
Nations remain outstanding. We would like to urge the
Council to request the Secretary-General to facilitate
an expedited negotiation process that takes into account
the unique nature of AMISOM’s offensive mandate.
That would allow for the deployment of those assets,
which are urgently required to boost the operational
tempo of AMISOM and to dislodge Al-Shabab from
some places throughout Mogadishu.
Fourthly, the AU is committed to improving
AMISOM’s strategy in Somalia. I am pleased to report
to the Council that the AU is currently organizing a
summit for troop-contributing countries, which is
expected to lead to a political commitment by the

6/6

28/01/2016

various stakeholders on how to address, among
other issues, command and control, the provision of
additional enablers and enhanced overall coordination.
The summit will take place in due course later this year.
Finally, the decision of the European Union (EU)
to cut the allowances to the uniformed personnel of
the Mission by 20 per cent, starting this January, has
caused great concern. The African Union Commission
is making every effort to fill the gap created by the
EU decision. In that regard, the AU recently appointed
Mr. Donald Kaberuka as the High Representative for
the African Union Peace Fund, responsible for the
mobilization of additional resources for AU peace
support operations. Immediate steps are also being
taken to generate additional funds for AMISOM.
However, that is occurring in the context of an
economic downturn owing to the drastic decrease in
commodity prices. Hence, I would like to urge the
Council to consider various funding mechanisms
that would sustain the current support for AMISOM,
including through increased financial support by the
United Nations, individual Council members and other
relevant stakeholders, in the interest of global peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

16-02099
