S/PV.8849

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8849th meeting

Thursday, 2 September 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 August 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2021/764)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-24118 (E)
*2124118*

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

to this matter. Also per established practice, I held a
monthly call with the OPCW Director-General on
31 August to receive an update and ascertain his views.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I would like to take this opportunity,
on behalf of the Council, to pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. T. S. Tirumurti, Permanent Representative of India
to the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of August. I am sure I
speak for all the members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Tirumurti and his
team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 August 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/764)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/764, which contains the text of a
letter dated 30 August 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for the opportunity to brief them again on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Consistent with established practice, the Office of
Disarmament Affairs has been in regular contact with
its counterparts at the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related
2/18

02/09/2021

The OPCW’s Technical Secretariat’s ability to
deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic remained subject
to the evolution of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. Nevertheless, the Technical Secretariat
maintains its readiness for deployments. Despite
continued travel restrictions, the OPCW’s Technical
Secretariat has been able to pursue its mandated
activities related to the elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme and its engagement with
the Syrian Arab Republic in that regard.
The OPCW Declaration Assessment Team is
pursuing its ongoing efforts to clarify all the outstanding
issues regarding the initial declaration by the Syrian
Arab Republic to the OPCW. In that context, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat remains of the position that the
Syrian Arab Republic must declare all chemical warfare
agents produced and/or weaponized at the former
chemical weapons production facility that was declared
by the Syrian Arab Republic as never having been used
to produce and/or weaponize chemical weapons.
I have been advised that, on 9 August, the Syrian
National Authority was informed by the OPCW
Director-General of his intention to deploy a Declaration
Assessment Team to Damascus from 2 to 17 September
to conduct the twenty-fifth round of consultations.
However, on 16 August, the Syrian National Authority
requested that the upcoming round of consultations be
held in October 2021, after the high-level week of the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly.
Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to closing
the outstanding issues. As has been stressed on numerous
occasions, owing to the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies that remain unresolved, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
As previously reported, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat still plans to conduct two rounds of
inspections of the Barzah and Jamraya facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC)
in 2021. The inspections of those facilities remain
subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

With regard to the Schedule 2 chemical detected
at the Barzah facility of the SSRC in 2018, I have been
advised that the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide
sufficient technical information or explanations that
would enable the OPCW Technical Secretariat to close
that issue.
I am informed that the OPCW Director-General
has nominated a representative to initiate preparations
for the proposed in-person meeting between the
Director-General and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic. I have
also been advised that the new Deputy Head of Mission
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the OPCW has been
appointed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs as the
contact point for organizing the possible meeting.
The objective of the meeting between the DirectorGeneral and the Minister is to hold a comprehensive
and results-orientated substantive exchange on relevant
developments and on the way forward regarding the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s mandated activities
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I hope that the meeting
will be an opportunity to strengthen the dialogue and
cooperation between the Syrian Arab Republic and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat.
As reported during the Security Council meeting
held on 4 August (see S/PV.8830), the Syrian National
Authority informed the OPCW Technical Secretariat
about an attack that took place on 8 June, targeting a
military facility that housed a declared former chemical
weapons production facility. The Syrian National
Authority also reported the destruction of two chlorine
cylinders that were related to the chemical weapons
incident that took place in Douma on 7 April 2018.
In its reply to the Syrian National Authority,
the OPCW Technical Secretariat requested further
information regarding the damage caused to the declared
site, as it was related to one outstanding issue, recently
opened by the Declaration Assessment Team. The
OPCW Technical Secretariat also recalled that, during
its previous inspection of those cylinders, in November
2020, the cylinders were stored and inspected at another
declared site, approximately 60 kilometres from the
location at which they were reportedly destroyed on
8 June. The OPCW Technical Secretariat also recalled
that it had previously advised the Syrian Arab Republic
that it was not to open, move or alter the containers or
their contents, in any way, without seeking the prior
written consent of the Technical Secretariat.

S/PV. 8849

I understand that the Syrian National Authority
did not notify the OPCW Technical Secretariat that
the cylinders had been moved to a new location until
the report of their destruction. Accordingly, in a note
verbale dated 15 July, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
requested Syria to provide all relevant information
regarding the movement of the two cylinders and any
remains following their destruction.
I note that the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
(FFM) remains in the process of studying all available
information related to allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and continues
to engage with the Syrian Arab Republic and other
States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
with regard to “a variety of incidents”. Further FFM
deployments will be subject to the evolution of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Following the issuance of its second report, in April,
I understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues with its investigations into
incidents in which the FFM has determined that
chemical weapons were used or likely used in the Syrian
Arab Republic. The IIT will issue further reports in
due course, subject to the evolution of the COVID-19
pandemic. I take this opportunity to reiterate once
again my full support for the integrity, professionalism,
impartiality, objectivity and independence of the work
of the OPCW.
With regard to the decision entitled “Addressing the
possession and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic”, C-25/Dec. 9, adopted on 21 April, I
have been advised that the Syrian Arab Republic has not
completed any of the measures stipulated in paragraph
5 of decision EC-94/Dec. 2. I therefore reiterate my call
on the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat in that regard.
Any use of chemical weapons is totally
unacceptable and a serious violation of international
law. Those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
must be held accountable, no matter who they are. If we
cannot do so, we allow the use of chemical weapons to
take place with impunity — something that must not
be tolerated. It is my sincere hope that the members of
the Council will unite on the issue and reinforce the
essential norm against the use of such horrific weapons.
The vitality and credibility of a broader disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture depends upon it. The

21-241183/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

Office for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide
whatever support and assistance it can.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Given that today’s meeting of the Security
Council is the first open-format meeting in September,
I would like to start by thanking the delegation of India
for presiding over the Security Council in August and
by wishing Ireland every success as President of the
Council this month.
September — this month — will mark a year since
the Council started discussions on the issue of the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) in open format.
Over that time, it has proved effective to discuss the
Syrian chemical dossier in that format. Transparency
is particularly important when discussing the Syrian
chemical issue, in the light of the course of action
taken by the Technical Secretariat of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We
would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing
on the 95th monthly report of the Director-General of
the OPCW on the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013) (S/2021/764, annex). Regrettably, that document
is unbalanced, as was the case in the past.
We are particularly dismayed about the fact that,
as was also the case in the past, the report intentionally
shifts the emphasis as it describes the air strike that
took place on 8 June on the declared chemical weapons
facility in Syria. During that air strike, two cylinders
were destroyed. Those cylinders are related to the
incident that occurred in Douma in April 2018. Still no
assessment of the egregious air strike itself — an air
strike that was carried out on the territory of a sovereign
State — can be found in the report, and neither is there
any reaction to it by the Secretary-General or the Office
for Disarmament Affairs.
As we saw at the previous meeting (see S/PV.8830),
our Western colleagues are also very careful to sidestep
the issue of the air strike itself, while highlighting the
relocation of the cylinders by Syrians. Even if that were
true — and the Syrian delegation provided exhaustive
clarifications on the issue at that meeting — does it
justify the use of armed force against a sovereign State?
We would like to request that the Council reflect on who
4/18

02/09/2021

stood to benefit from the air strike and from getting
rid of important material evidence in the context of
investigating the incident in Douma.
Logic dictates that it was certainly not the Syrians
who stood to gain from it — because Syria, just like
Russia, is calling upon the Technical Secretariat to
conduct an objective investigation. However, those
who are not interested in such an investigation and
are inconvenienced by the proof of manipulation in
preparing the infamous Fact-Finding Mission report
certainly stood to benefit from destroying the cylinders.
What is striking is the overabundance of details in
the report on purely technical issues, such as the visa
issue. We are left with the impression that there is a
lack of real evidence of any violation by Damascus of
the Chemical Weapons Convention. The Technical
Secretariat is clinging to routine nuances of bilateral
interactions and attempting to present Syrians as
difficult negotiating partners. At the same time, there
is a time lag with developing events, and steps taken
by the Syrian side are overlooked. That gives the
impression that delays are taking place because of the
Syrians. For example, nothing is being said about the
fact that it was the Director-General of the OPCW who
suggested a later date for the next round of consultations
with the initial Declaration Assessment Team, when he
publicly stated that summer in Syria is uncomfortable
for inspectors deployed in the field.
I would like to underscore that the Syrian side,
despite the unprecedented pressure and the double
standards employed by the Technical Secretariat,
continues to scrupulously discharge its obligations
under the Convention. The Syrian side does not refuse
to cooperate and demonstrates the political will to
continue dialogue with the leadership of the Technical
Secretariat, and to do so at a high level. Even today, our
Syrian colleagues stand ready to provide the Council
with the most recent information on these issues.
Lastly, at the very least, we are surprised about the
fact that, as a justification for a number of anti-Syria
conclusions, the report again refers to remarks made by
the Director-General of the OPCW, Mr. Fernando Arias,
at the Security Council in June (see S/PV.8785). We
have drawn the Council’s attention several times to the
many inconsistencies and direct distortions, including
through the dissemination of documents S/2021/641
and S/2021/588 to the Council in that regard. We call
upon the Council to study those documents carefully.
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We also expect that the leadership of the OPCW will
provide us with detailed explanations in the course of
its next briefing to the Security Council, which we hope
will take place soon.
We believe that the root of all of the current
problems regarding the Syrian chemical dossier is
that our Western colleagues have long turned into an
instrument to punish the authorities in Damascus,
which they find undesirable. It is therefore pointless
to try to find in it anything connected to the use or
non-use of chemical weapons in Syria, or to the issues
of chemical weapons proliferation.
Unfortunately, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has become the conduit for that unscrupulous policy
and has turned the organization from the independent
and impartial guardian of the Convention into a tool
to punish those who are not to the liking of individual
States or who do not let them pursue their geopolitical
goals. This is a dangerous trend towards politicizing
the OPCW, and it is becoming increasingly obvious
with each passing month.
There is more evidence of egregious and intentional
violations of the Convention by the Technical
Secretariat. The best example of that are the instances
of manipulation during the preparation of the notorious
2018 Douma report. Despite the urging of Member
States and the international community, correcting them
is not something that the leadership of the Technical
Secretariat is going to do, as far as we can see.
The activities of the illegitimate Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT), whose creation was crudely
pushed through the OPCW’s Executive Council, in
violation of the principle of consensus and article
XV of the Convention, run in the same vein. Its
outcomes cannot withstand scrutiny because they are
politically biased, factually inaccurate and technically
incomprehensible, and the methodology used there
and by the Fact-Finding Mission is in violation of the
Convention as it relates to the principles for conducting
an investigation, particularly with regard to issues of
collection of evidence and chain of custody. The goal
of the IIT is not to recreate a real picture of events,
but rather to fit their narrative to the conclusion that
Damascus is at fault — in other words, to execute a
political directive. We therefore reject the conclusions
in the reports issued by the Team on Ltamenah and
Saraqib, as well as its future reports. It is the biased
conclusions by the IIT that were at the basis of the

S/PV. 8849

punitive decision to incapacitate Syria — the first
such step taken against a sovereign State that has
scrupulously abided by the Convention.
I would like to underscore that the April decision
reached by the Conference of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention is not an expression
of the collective will of the States parties to the
Convention, as our Western colleagues claim. It was
crudely rammed through by Western delegations, in
violation of the norms of the Convention, because it
was introduced directly at the Conference without
first being considered by the Executive Council and in
violation of the principle of consensus.
In fact, fewer than half of the OPCW member
States and only six Western States from the current
membership of the Security Council supported it. The
rest of the members were either against it or abstained.
This was also the position taken by a number of former
members of the Security Council. The policy of double
standards by the Technical Secretariat is also evident
in the outstanding issues on Syria’s initial declaration.
Damascus, which joined the Convention in very
difficult and unusual circumstances, amid political
and military instability and a terrorist threat fuelled
from without — and in spite of that implemented
all its commitments in good faith — is subjected to
unreasonably strict requirements. And a great deal of
commotion is being generated around this issue.
At the same time, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
soft-pedalled the situation with Libya, where in 2012
about 500 undeclared munitions were found. The same
is true with Iraq, whose initial declaration was not
confirmed by any third party, but rather made solely on
the basis of existing United Nations documents.
The stance of the current leadership of the
Technical Secretariat is a serious threat to the authority
of the OPCW, as it casts a shadow on its status as
one of the pillars of the non-proliferation regime on
weapons of mass destruction. It also calls into question
the effectiveness of the organization’s implementation
of its mandate. As a responsible State present at the
organization’s inception, we are extremely worried
about the situation. Unfortunately, we see no signs of
it improving.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start today by congratulating India
on a successful presidency of the Security Council in
August. I wish you, Madam President, and your team

21-241185/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

all the best during Ireland’s Council presidency in
September. We look forward to working with you. I also
wish to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
very thorough and factual briefing today, and I would
like to acknowledge the presence of representatives
from Turkey, Iran and Syria.
The United States condemns in the strongest
possible terms the use of chemical weapons anywhere,
by anyone, under any circumstances. There can be
no impunity for those who use such weapons. The
use of chemical weapons by any State constitutes
an unacceptable threat to the peace and security of
every State. The Al-Assad regime has repeatedly used
chemical weapons and has tried to avoid accountability
by obstructing independent investigations and failing
to cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The Al-Assad regime’s
goal is clear — to undermine the organization’s work
as the implementing body of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. As we have noted on previous occasions,
the OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team has
attributed four separate chemical-weapons attacks in
Syria to the Al-Assad regime. Those incidents are in
addition to the four chemical-weapons attacks attributed
to the Al-Assad regime by the United Nations-OPCW
Joint Investigative Mechanism.
The United States firmly supports the impartial
and independent work of the OPCW and all of its
investigative bodies. We welcome the intention of the
OPCW’s Director-General to deploy the Declaration
Assessment Team to Syria to conduct the twenty-fifth
round of consultations in Damascus later this fall. The
Syrian Government has a clear obligation to cooperate
with the OPCW. This month marks eight years since
Syria acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention. I
reiterate that, despite the OPCW’s efforts to assist the
Al-Assad regime with complying with its obligations
under the Convention, the regime continues to ignore
calls from the international community, including
the Security Council, to fully disclose and verifiably
eliminate its chemical-weapons programmes. The
OPCW’s assessment matches ours — that the
declaration submitted by the Al-Assad regime still
cannot be considered accurate and complete.
Sadly, the Al-Assad regime continues to
deliberately delay and obstruct the work of the OPCW.
Syria once again demonstrated its lack of candour with
the OPCW when it recently reported the destruction
of two containers that had previously been inspected
6/18

02/09/2021

by the Declaration Assessment Team. Despite
instructions to the regime to not open, move or alter the
containers and their contents in any way, the Al-Assad
regime — without seeking the prior written consent
of the OPCW — reported that the cylinders were
destroyed at a different location during the attack on
8 June 2021. The regime did not even notify the OPCW
that the cylinders had been moved to a new location
until it reported their destruction.
The Al-Assad regime’s allies, including Russia,
have also actively sought to block all efforts to
promote accountability. Russia continues to defend
the Al-Assad regime for its failures to adhere to its
obligations, including by spreading disinformation,
attacking the integrity and professional work of the
OPCW and impeding ongoing efforts by responsible
nations to hold the Al-Assad regime accountable. That
pattern of enablement is dangerous. The Al-Assad
regime’s repeated and continued failures to comply
with its obligations under international law must not
be tolerated.
We therefore welcome the decision of the OPCW
Conference of the States Parties to condemn Syria’s
use of chemical weapons and suspend its rights and
privileges under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
That decision sends a clear and unequivocal message
that the use of chemical weapons has consequences. It
is time for the Al-Assad regime to uphold its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013).
The Security Council decided, in the event
of non-compliance with resolution 2118 (2013), to
impose measures under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. We now have overwhelming
evidence of numerous incidents of non-compliance by
the Al-Assad regime. Now is the time to uphold and
enforce the Council’s decision. Without accountability
for the atrocities committed against the Syrian people,
lasting peace in Syria will remain out of reach.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate India on the positive
outcome achieved under its presidency of the Security
Council in August. I would also like to congratulate
Ireland as it assumes the presidency for September. I
believe that under your leadership, Madam President,
the Council will achieve great success this month. The
Chinese delegation assures you and your colleagues
of its full cooperation. I also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her
briefing. I welcome the representatives of Syria, Turkey
and Iran to today’s meeting.
The Security Council considers the Syrian chemical
weapons file monthly. China has comprehensively and
clearly stated its position many times, stressing that the
investigation of issues related to the Syrian chemical
weapons should be based on facts and guided by
science. It should be conducted objectively and fairly.
Today I do not want to speak at length. I would like to
highlight two points.
First, it is imperative to maintain dialogue and
cooperation to resolve the Syrian chemical weapons
issue. China has noted the most recent monthly report
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) (S/2021/764, annex). We encourage
the Technical Secretariat to strengthen dialogue with
Syria in order to jointly resolve outstanding issues,
including those related to Syria’s initial declaration.
We hope that both sides can reach an early consensus
on the schedule for the twenty-fifth round of technical
consultations, steadily advance the preparations for
the in-person meetings between the Syrian Foreign
Minister and the OPCW Director-General, make proper
arrangements for the Technical Secretariat’s inspection
of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre
and start talks regarding the attack of a declared
chemical-weapons production facility in Syria. The
international community should create favourable
conditions for dialogue and cooperation between the
two sides, respect Syria’s legitimate concerns and avoid
exerting political pressure.
Secondly, we must return to the framework of the
Chemical Weapons Convention to resolve the issue
of the Syrian chemical weapons. All States parties
should safeguard the authority and integrity of the
investigation. The handling of the incidents of the
alleged use of chemical weapons must be in strict
compliance with the provisions of the Convention and
the verification annex and follow the principles of
objectivity, impartiality and professionalism. Based on
that position, China maintains that the establishment
of the Investigation and Identification Team is beyond
the authorization provided by the Convention. We
have always had concerns about its working methods,
procedures and staff composition. China urges all States
parties to observe the principle of multilateralism,
strengthen dialogue and consultation, reduce political
confrontation and work together to create favourable

S/PV. 8849

conditions and a good atmosphere for the OPCW to
resume its normal functioning.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
the Republic of Ireland’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to wish you and
your team every success. I also reiterate my thanks and
appreciation to India for its successful and competent
stewardship of the Security Council’s work during the
past month. I also thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing
and welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey in this meeting.
Tunisia stresses its firm condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and
under any circumstances, regardless of the motives or
justifications. The use of chemicals as weapons is a
threat to international peace and security and a grave
violation of international law. The perpetrators of such
heinous crimes should be held accountable.
In that context, Tunisia supports the vital mandate
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), which is responsible for the
independent and impartial verification, including in
the Syrian Arab Republic. The OPCW provides the
platform for consultation and cooperation among States
on relevant issues.
We value the initial agreement between the OPCW
Director-General and the Syrian Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates to hold an in-person meeting
in the upcoming period. We hope that the meeting
will be the start of restoring engagement, dialogue,
confidence-building and mutual understanding,
thereby contributing to advancing the Syrian chemical
file. We look forward to the parties starting to make the
necessary arrangements to hold that meeting as soon
as possible.
We also urge that the Technical Secretariat teams
resume their activities in the Syrian Arab Republic,
in coordination with the Syrian Government, taking
into account the restrictions still imposed due to the
security and the pandemic situations in the country.
We stress the importance of conducting comprehensive
and transparent independent investigations into the
allegations of the use of chemical weapons by any party,
while striving to achieve rapid progress in resolving
outstanding issues to ensure that Syria fully fulfils
its commitments.

21-241187/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate that the efforts of the OPCW will be
more effective if they are based on the collective and
coordinated action and constructive cooperation of the
Security Council and the international community at
large in carrying out the mandate of monitoring the
implementation of both resolution 2118 (2013) and the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
We are convinced that finding collective and
consensus-based solutions to close the Syrian chemical
file is vital and feasible, similar to what was achieved
upon the adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) to renew
the cross-border mechanism for the delivery of aid to
Syria this summer, thereby contributing to ensuring
the rule of law, accountability and establishing trust in
the effectiveness of the chemical weapons prohibition
and non-proliferation regime for the sake of enhancing
international peace and security.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I join other speakers in
thanking India for its successful presidency of the
Security Council during the month of August. I wish
Ireland all the best for its presidency for the month ahead.
I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
Last month, on 21 August, we marked the eighth
anniversary of the chemical-weapons attack that took
place in the Damascus suburb of Ghouta. The attack
remains one of the most horrendous, large-scale
atrocities conducted during the Syrian conflict by the
Al-Assad regime against its own people. Thousands of
individuals were killed or injured. The vast majority
of them were civilians, including hundreds of women
and children. It was an act in clear violation of
international law.
Estonia strongly condemns the attacks in Ghouta,
but also those in Khan Shaykhun, Douma, Ltamenah
and Saraqib, as well as the numerous other instances
that have taken place in Syria since the start of the
conflict. Impunity for these atrocity crimes cannot be
tolerated. Estonia continues to support accountability
mechanisms that have been put in place by a wide
United Nations membership to combat impunity,
such as the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism and the Commission of Inquiry. The
opening of criminal inquiries by judicial authorities in
France, Germany and Sweden are encouraging steps
towards ensuring justice for the victims of the Ghouta
sarin attacks.
8/18

02/09/2021

Turning to the monthly report of the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2021/764, annex),
the outstanding issues with the initial declaration
unfortunately persist, and Syrian cooperation with
the OPCW is deteriorating. We note with concern that
despite the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s efforts, the
next round of consultations has still not taken place.
The tripartite agreement that facilitates the Technical
Secretariat’s mandated activities in Syria was, at the
request of Syria, extended for only three months,
hampering the OPCW’s ability to plan and conduct its
activities in the country. Failure to grant a visa in a timely
manner for an OPCW staff member to be deployed in
Damascus is not acceptable, nor is the unauthorized
movement of the two chlorine cylinders that were part
of the evidentiary material of the Douma incident.
In resolution 2118 (2013), the Security Council
decided that Syria shall cooperate fully with the
OPCW, including by complying with their relevant
recommendations and providing the respective
personnel access to — and the right to inspect — sites
in order to fulfil their mandate. The implementation
of this provision — paragraph 7 of the resolution — is
clearly inadequate.
We positively note the prospect of a meeting
between Director-General Arias and Mr. Mekdad and
hope this meeting can take place soon to instigate much
needed progress in this file.
In conclusion, we commend the dedication and
integrity of the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat in
fulfilling their task of upholding the norm against the
use of chemical weapons. We call on the Syrian regime
to cooperate fully with the OPCW and comply with the
Security Council resolutions and with international law.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Like others, let me
begin by thanking the delegation of India for its very
able and successful presidency in August, and we wish
Team Ireland all the best for this coming month. I also
thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing
on the progress towards full elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme.
Two weeks ago, we marked the eighth anniversary
of the incident that took place in Ghouta in 2013. This
grim reminder of the heinous impact of chemical
weapons causes us to redouble our commitment to not
allowing the global norm against the use of chemical
weapons to erode.
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

There have unfortunately been few positive
developments in the Syrian dossier since we met last
month (see S/PV.8830). We regret that the Declaration
Assessment Team has yet to deploy to Syria and could
potentially be delayed further to October. Every month
that these consultations are postponed undermines the
priority of ensuring consistent cooperation, exchanges
of information and technical assistance to Syria. It is
urgent that this issue be resolved. Regular inspections,
including of the Barzah and Jamraya facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre, must
remain a priority and should not be further delayed.
In addition, Norway will continue to urge Syria
to fully cooperate with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and provide
sufficient technical information or explanations to
bring closure to the 20 outstanding issues. It is essential
that identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
be resolved. The Syrian Arab Republic must fulfil its
obligations in accordance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). It is also critical
that Syria complete the necessary measures to lift the
suspension of its rights and privileges as a State party
to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We are pleased to see that the issue of the OPCW
staff member’s visa has been resolved. Continuing
situations with no team leader deployed to the OPCW
mission in Syria are not sustainable. We strongly urge
the Syrian authorities to return to the previous practice
of issuing visas to OPCW team members in a timely
and efficient manner.
The tripartite agreement among the OPCW, the
United Nations Office for Project Services and Syria is
another vital component of the Secretariat’s activities.
While we are pleased that the tripartite agreement was
extended, we are concerned that an extension for only
three months, instead of the nine months proposed,
could have an adverse impact on the Secretariat’s
ability to plan and conduct its mandated activities.
Let me conclude by reiterating that Norway
remains steadfast in its confidence in the work of
Director-General Arias and the Technical Secretariat
of the OPCW, and in their commitment to ensuring that
the international prohibition against the use of chemical
weapons is upheld.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to join others in appreciating India’s
presidency of the Security Council, and wishing you,

S/PV. 8849

Madam President, and your team, the very best for
your presidency.
I would like to start by thanking High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing, but I have little to add to
what I said one month ago (see S/PV.8830). Syria has
an obligation under the Charter of the United Nations
to abide by the decisions of the Security Council
in resolution 2118 (2013), and, as a member of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), it has an obligation to meet its commitments
under the Chemical Weapons Convention. It has
breached these obligations by using chemical weapons
throughout the conflict in Syria.
In this month’s report of the Director-General of
the OPCW (S/2021/764, annex) there are further signs
of Syria’s failure to cooperate fully with the OPCW and
its personnel. We note with concern, for instance, that
Syria has agreed to only a three-month extension of the
tripartite agreement with the United Nations Office for
Project Services and the OPCW, rather than the nine
months requested, which will significantly affect its
ability to conduct its mandated activity. The tripartite
agreement is often held up by Council members as
evidence of Syria’s alleged cooperation. This is actually
evidence of Syria’s failure to cooperate fully.
Furthermore, there continue to be unjustified delays
in agreeing on the next round of consultations with the
OPCW Declaration Assessment Team and in granting
visas to Technical Secretariat staff, which has led to
a period, for the second time this year, where there is
no Technical Secretariat presence at the command post.
As we said last month, we hope the proposed
meeting between the Director-General and Mr. Fayssal
Mekdad will open the door to resolving these compliance
issues. We also hope that it will contribute to progress
on the increasing list of declaration issues and that
it will provide clarity on other open questions for
the Syrian regime, such as on the unauthorized
movement of cylinders relating to the high-profile
Douma chlorine attack and those cylinders’ subsequent
alleged destruction.
I would like to conclude by expressing my regret at
the ongoing use of these meetings to call into question the
OPCW’s scientific, technical and independent findings.
Those who do so claim to be protecting the OPCW and
the Chemical Weapons Convention. The reality is that
they are seeking to divert attention from the Al-Assad
regime’s well-evidenced use of chemical weapons, and

21-241189/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

in doing so they themselves continue to undermine the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the long-held norms
against chemical-weapons use and the role and unity
of the Council on such an important issue. There are
questions to answer, but those questions are for the
Syrian regime, not the OPCW. The Council should leave
Syria in no doubt that we expect it to take expeditious
action to resolve those questions and comply fully with
its obligations.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
congratulating the delegation of Ireland on its
assumption of the presidency for September and extend
to it our best wishes. I also thank you, Madam President,
and others for the kind words towards my delegation for
our August presidency.
I join others in thanking the Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her update. We
have taken note of the contents of the latest, ninetyfifth monthly report by the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). We note the recent announcement by the
Director-General to deploy the Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) to resolve the outstanding issues regarding
Syria’s initial declaration and subsequent submissions,
and the response from the Syrian National Authority
proposing to receive the DAT team in October. We
encourage the two sides to work out mutually acceptable
dates at the earliest.
Our views on the Chemical Weapons Convention
have been consistent. The Convention is a unique,
non-discriminatory disarmament instrument. It is
a model for the elimination of an entire category
of weapons of mass destruction. We attach high
importance to the Convention and stand for its full,
effective and non-discriminatory implementation.
We support the collective efforts by all to ensure that
the credibility and integrity of the Convention are
maintained to the fullest.
India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time, under any
circumstances. India has consistently maintained
that any investigation into the use of chemical
weapons must be impartial, credible and objective,
following scrupulously the provisions and procedures
embedded in the Convention and in conformity with
the delicate balance of power and responsibility
10/18

02/09/2021

enshrined in the Convention to establish facts and reach
evidence-based conclusions.
Since we joined the Council in January, India
has been repeatedly cautioning against the possibility
of terrorist entities and individuals gaining access to
chemical weapons. We are concerned at the frequent
reports of the resurgence of terrorist groups in Syria
and in the region. As we have learned from the
consequences of complacency against terrorism in
the past, the international community cannot afford to
ignore terrorist activities in Syria and beyond.
The Council came together in July this year by
unanimously adopting resolution 2585 (2021). We
showed the world that progress on the Syria file, after a
decade of conflict and impasse, is possible provided we
are willing to take that extra step and work in tandem
while taking cognizance of one another’s concerns.
Let us continue to advance the same constructive spirit
with regard to the chemical-weapons discussions.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me, Madam President, to add my
congratulations to those of my colleagues upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
You have the support of the delegation of Mexico.
I wish also to acknowledge the good work done by
India last month. I also thank the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her briefing, and I welcome the presence of the
representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey.
We took note with interest of the fact that the
twenty-fifth round of inspections of the Declaration
Assessment Team, which had been repeatedly
postponed, is planned for October. We hope that light
can be shed on the pending issues concerning Syria’s
initial declaration and that the discrepancies that have
been repeatedly pointed out can be resolved.
We note with concern that for the second time this
year, the post of the head of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Declaration
Assessment Team is vacant, which is not an encouraging
sign. We also note that the tripartite agreement between
the OPCW, the United Nations Office for Project
Services and Syria, which is to expire on 30 September
of this year, was extended only until 31 December 2021,
at Syria’s suggestion, which contrasts with the OPCW’s
proposal to extend that agreement for a further nine
months. What is the purpose of this? We think that this
will hardly contribute to better cooperation between
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8849

Syria and the OPCW, even though such cooperation
would be highly desirable.

Syrian Arab Republic will make it possible to address
them head on.

I would like to ask the High Representative about
the impact of the foregoing on the planned activities
or investigations in the field. Cooperation with the
OPCW and with the various mechanisms established
to shed light on the use of chemical weapons means
complying with the obligations that the States parties
to the Convention have undertaken.

We further reiterate our concern about the
unauthorized movement and destruction of two
cylinders related to the Douma attacks. The Syrian
regime must provide all the information requested by
the OPCW Technical Secretariat to shed light on that
matter. The OPCW, for its part, stands ready, but is
awaiting an operational response.

We also reiterate our proposal that the OPCW
investigation teams working on this issue be able
to provide periodic reports to the Security Council,
which would make it possible for us to have first-hand
information on their investigations and break the cycle
of inertia that has taken over the monthly review of
the chemical issue in Syria. It is a question of making
progress on ongoing issues and not of just engaging in
a circular and repetitive dialogue.

The postponement of the deployment of the initial
Declaration Assessment Team is also worrisome. The
OPCW liaison officer was unable to obtain a visa to
replace his predecessor, who left Damascus in August,
which means that the position is vacant for the second
time this year. We call on the Syrian regime to quickly
resolve that situation.

In that light, the upcoming meeting between the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria, Fayssal Mekdad,
and the Director-General of the OPCW is a positive sign.
We hope that that dialogue will build trust between the
parties and make it possible to dispel doubts such as
those concerning the presence of the chemicals detected
during the third round of inspections in Barzah, in
2018, and the recent destruction of the cylinders related
to the Douma incident, among others.
Finally, Mexico reiterates its firm rejection of
the use of chemical weapons by any actor and under
any circumstances, as well as its support for the
professional work of the OPCW and its international
verification standards.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, at the outset, I to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of India and his team for a very
successful presidency in August and to wish you,
Madam President, good luck and every success during
your presidency in September. I would also like to
thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Once again, it is clear that the Syrian regime
continues to evade its international obligations. The
list of blocked issues is long. No responses have been
provided to the 20 outstanding questions related to
Syria’s initial declaration. We hope that the meeting
between the Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the

The regime’s non-cooperation with the OPCW
is blatant and leading it to an impasse. However, we
recall once again that the decision taken in April by
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention is not irreversible. The rights
and privileges that were suspended in April can be
restored. For that to happen, the regime must cooperate
decisively and in good faith with the OPCW, which
continues its work in full transparency and with a great
deal of professionalism.
It is of course up to the Security Council to ensure
that. The Syrian chemical issue is far from being
resolved. Those who try to make us believe that that is
not the case are fooling no one.
I encourage the members of the Security Council to
return to the full and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). The security of all of us depends
on it.
France will continue to work with its partners,
including in the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons, to bring
the perpetrators of chemical attacks to justice.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We join others in congratulating Ireland on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. We wish you,
Madam President, the very best. You can count on
our support. We also commend India for a very wellorganized and successful presidency last month.
I begin by restating Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines’ well-established position that the use of

21-2411811/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstances constitutes a reprehensible violation of
international law. Perpetrators of chemical weapons
atrocities should not be allowed to operate with
impunity and must be held accountable. For this reason,
we continue to support the mandate of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Furthermore, we support all efforts to strengthen the
organization’s capacity to ensure that the quality of its
work remains of the highest standard.
We are cognizant that the coronavirus disease
pandemic has created various impediments to the
work. However, we remain concerned by the overall
lack of progress on this file. The issue of the unresolved
gaps, discrepancies and inconsistencies in the original
declaration remains, and we are hopeful that continued
dialogue between the parties will assist in making
meaningful progress. In that regard, we take note of the
forthcoming round of consultations. It is our hope that
those consultations will yield tangible results. We also
look forward to the convening of the in-person meeting
between the OPCW and Syria to discuss relevant
developments and the way forward.
We welcome the agreement on a three-month
extension of the tripartite agreement among the OPCW,
the United Nations Office for Project Services and
Syria. The agreement remains relevant and, although
short, the extension still demonstrates the spirit of
cooperation, which is very much needed in every aspect
of this file.
As the implementing body of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the OPCW plays a critical role
in safeguarding international peace and security.
The importance of the organization’s efforts aimed
at eliminating and preventing the re-emergence of
chemical weapons, as well as the promotion of the
peaceful uses of chemistry, can never be overstated.
The successful implementation of both the
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013) requires
sustained international cooperation. However, that
becomes severely strained where trust deficits exist. As
such, the OPCW must continuously strive to ensure that
its internal structure and all activities are characterized
by integrity, transparency and non-politicization.
Furthermore, States parties to the Convention should
engage constructively and pursue consensus-based
decisions to thwart polarization and divisiveness. In
all discussions political quarrels ought to be set aside
12/18

02/09/2021

and the collective vision of achieving a world free of
chemical weapons must remain at the forefront.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): Like others before me,
I would like to warmly congratulate India for its
successful presidency in August and wish Ireland a
fruitful month ahead. I assure you, Madam President,
of our delegation’s full cooperation.
I thank Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing. I also welcome the
participation of the representatives of Syria, Turkey
and Iran in our meeting today.
Let me reiterate Viet Nam’s consistent policy
of strongly supporting non-proliferation and the
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical weapons.
The use of chemical weapons is inhumane and
clearly prohibited under international law, especially
under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).
The obligations under CWC therefore must be fully
respected. The full implementation of the Convention
helps prevent immediate and long-term effects of those
weapons on human life and the environment.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our support
for the role of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) — a multilateral body in
charge of coordinating international efforts towards
ridding the world of chemical weapons. At the same
time, it is our belief that the organization’s work,
including investigations of alleged uses of chemical
weapons, must be carried out in a most comprehensive,
objective and impartial manner. It should strictly abide
by the Convention in order to ensure intended outcomes.
My delegation shares the concerns over the alleged
uses of chemical weapons in Syria, as well as the
current impasse in finding a lasting solution to this
issue. We take note of the ninety-fifth monthly report
of the OPCW Director-General (S/2021/764, annex), in
which we note that the Declaration Assessment Team
and the Syrian National Authority will soon conduct the
twenty-fifth round of consultations in Damascus. In that
regard, we call on the two sides to deepen their technical
cooperation in a most constructive and non-politicized
manner to finally settle the remaining outstanding
issues relating to the initial declaration — the first
obligation for the national implementation of the CWC.
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

My delegation also looks forward to the holding of
the meeting between the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
OPCW Director-General. That should serve as a
confidence-building measure aimed at reviewing the
current state of affairs and discussing the enhancement
of future cooperation between the two sides. We look
forward to a positive outcome to the meeting.
At the same time, given the protracted length of time
in finding a solution to the issue, it is imperative that the
engagement between the OPCW and Syria be supported
by effective international cooperation. Good-faith and
non-politicized cooperation need to be promoted in the
international community. It is undeniable that the unity
of the Security Council as well as that of all CWC State
parties is the key to the full implementation of the CWC
and resolution 2118 (2013).
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to congratulate India on its presidency last month
and to wish Ireland every success in its presidency this
month. I also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The Niger takes note of the report of the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2021/764, annex) and
reaffirms its support for efforts to eliminate the threat
of the use of chemical weapons. We hope to see a full
resumption of the deployment of the OPCW mission
in Syria once coronavirus disease-related restrictions
are lifted.
Resolving the Syrian chemical weapons issue calls
for the Security Council to demonstrate unity on the
way forward and on the objectives of the work of the
OPCW in Syria. Only open ongoing dialogue between
the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and the Syrian
Government will help resolve the issue regarding
Syria’s initial declaration and allow for progress in
the work of the Declaration Assessment Team, in line
with resolution 2118 (2013). My delegation notes the
ongoing efforts of the Syrian Government to shed light
on the use of those weapons on its territory, through
its communications via the OPCW and the Security
Council, and its readiness to continue cooperating
with the Technical Secretariat by guaranteeing better
access to reported sites throughout Syria to facilitate
investigations. We welcome the fact that Syria and the
OPCW have agreed to hold rounds of consultations
in October. We hope that those consultations will
be productive.

S/PV. 8849

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that all
incidents of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
should be accorded the same attention and be addressed
with the same rigour to allow for general findings and
to determine who is responsible. The diverging views
of the members of the Council should give way to a
thorough and technical analysis of the findings of the
investigations conducted to ensure the integrity of
the OPCW.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): We join others in
congratulating you, Madam President, and your team
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. We assure you of our cooperation
and support. We also wish to commend India for its
successful presidency. I also thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Kenya takes note of the monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2021/764, annex) as
well as the submission of the report by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The purpose of our monthly meetings is to review
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and the
OPCW Executive Council decision of 27 September
2013. It is unfortunate that, eight years on and despite
the monthly meetings taking place on the matter,
there is hardly any significant progress to speak of.
Nonetheless, resolution 2118 (2013) remains clear. The
use of chemical weapons anywhere constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. Kenya reaffirms its
firm conviction and belief that the use of such weapons
anywhere and by anyone constitutes an unacceptable
violation of international law.
Kenya supports the mandate of the OPCW as the
technical body overseeing the implementation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention. However, if it is to
make good progress, its mandated activities pertaining
to the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme should be supported by all and must
be depoliticized.
As we have said before, an expeditious closure of
investigations into the use of chemical weapons in Syria
will allow the Council to support the Syrian people
more meaningfully in their quest for lasting peace.
Consequently, we encourage enhanced cooperation
and engagement between the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Technical Secretariat, particularly regarding
the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies

21-2411813/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

that remain unresolved. In that regard, we note the
expressed intention of the Director-General to deploy
the Declaration Assessment Team to conduct the twentyfifth round of consultations in Damascus, as well as the
fact that the Syrian Arab Republic has indicated that
the consultations can take place in October.
In conclusion, Kenya reiterates its solidarity and
support with the people of Syria as they continue to seek
a sustainable solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue aimed at a political resolution that genuinely
responds to the will and needs of the millions of Syrian
people who have endured suffering for far too long.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her briefing today and for
her important work on this file. I would like to make
three points.
First and foremost, I would like to reiterate that
the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, at
any time is abhorrent and unacceptable. The Security
Council should be united and firm in upholding the
international prohibition against such terrible weapons.
The role of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) as the impartial
and technical body mandated by the international
community to address these weapons remains essential.
The OPCW’s strong professionalism, impartiality and
integrity in handling the Syrian file has been clear
throughout. In turn, the Council should be clear in its
strong support of the OPCW and in rejecting efforts to
undermine it.
Secondly, the lack of progress by Syria in addressing
the serious and growing list of issues under its initial
declaration remains a matter of serious concern. We
welcome the ongoing efforts by the OPCW to work with
Syria to address those issues. We note that Minister
Mekdad has accepted the proposal by Director-General
Arias to meet to look at ways to break the impasse. We
note that Syria has now appointed a representative to
engage on the details of the meeting. We encourage
early engagement and hope that such a meeting can
contribute to much-needed progress.
Unfortunately, the most recent OPCW report
(S/2021/764, annex) points to a growing number of
areas where Syrian actions threaten to affect the
OPCW’s work on the ground. They include the ongoing
14/18

02/09/2021

substantial delays in issuing visas to OPCW staff;
the further delay, until October, in the deployment of
the Declaration Assessment Team to Syria, originally
planned for May; and limiting the extension of the
tripartite agreement to just three months.
The reported destruction of chlorine cylinders
from the incident at Douma raises serious questions.
Their removal to a new location, without informing the
OPCW, is disturbing and symptomatic of the difficulties
the OPCW faces. We strongly encourage Syria to
provide the OPCW with the requested information and
materials, including any remains of the cylinders.
Finally, it is only through Syria’s real and
meaningful cooperation with the OPCW that we can
resolve these outstanding issues and be assured that
its entire stocks of chemical weapons are declared and
verifiably destroyed, in line with its commitments under
the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013). That is in all of our interests, including Syria’s.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I believe the representative of
Mexico posed a question regarding the extension of
the current tripartite agreement. I will gladly address
that issue. As the Security Council knows, the current
tripartite agreement is valid through the end of this
month, until 30 September 2021. Towards the end of July,
the three parties — the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical Secretariat,
the United Nations Office for Project Services and the
Syrian Government — held a video-teleconference to
discuss the further extension of the agreement.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat proposed a
nine-month extension, whereas the Syrian Arab
Republic proposed a three-month extension. In the
end, the OPCW Technical Secretariat agreed to the
three-month extension, which means that the agreement
will be valid through 31 December 2021. The Technical
Secretariat also conveyed to the Syrian Arab Republic
that an extension of such a limited duration will have
an impact on the OPCW’s ability to plan and conduct
the activities mandated by the OPCW’s policymaking
organs, especially those that have to be conducted on
the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic.
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
India on presiding over the Security Council last month
and to express to you, Madam President, our wishes for
every success in conducting the business of the Council
this month.
The purpose of holding this monthly meeting is to
brief the Council on the developments pertaining to the
current work between the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Technical Secretariat. Unfortunately, some
Western States have derailed these monthly meetings
and twisted them into a means of defamation against
Syria through the politicization of technical issues.
They have turned the meetings into a platform for
questioning and misrepresenting our cooperation,
as well as levelling false accusations and promoting
lies against my country. The irony is that one of the
States spearheading this approach — the United
States of America — is the only State party to the
Chemical Weapons Convention that has not met yet
its Convention obligations on the destruction of its
chemical-weapons arsenal.
The Syrian Arab Republic has repeatedly expressed
its strong condemnation of the use of chemical weapons
by whomever, wherever and under any circumstances.
We once again reiterate that we no longer have any
chemical weapons, yet we face baseless accusations of
the alleged use of chemical weapons. Those accusations
are, without a shred of doubt, a means of distracting
the attention of the international community away from
the use of such weapons by terrorist organizations that
continue to be protected and sponsored.
The misleading United States statements against
my country in that regard are clear evidence that the
United States Administration continues the aggressive
approach it took more than 10 years ago by using its
various agents to wage a fierce war against the Syrian
people at all levels. The use by the United States
representative of the words “Syrian regime” instead of
“Syrian Government” more than 10 times in a single
statement today is another affirmation that the United
States Administration insists on maintaining that
aggressive approach.

S/PV. 8849

I would like to remind the members of the Security
Council that the Syrian Arab Republic voluntarily joined
the Chemical Weapons Convention and destroyed, in
record time, its entire chemical-weapons programme.
In addition, we are keen to continue our cooperation
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
Some exaggerate certain routine technical and
procedural matters and exploit them to create false
impressions. I would therefore like to highlight
recent developments that Mrs. Nakamitsu did not
report — developments that confirm that my country is
engaged with the OPCW and is keen to cooperate with
it in order to achieve the final closing of this dossier as
soon as possible.
First, on 15 August, Syria submitted its ninety-third
report on its activities with regard to the destruction of
chemical weapons and the facilities for their production.
Secondly, the Syrian National Authority welcomes
the twenty-fifth round of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team, to be held in October in
accordance with the commitments of both parties. In
that regard, I would like to remind the Security Council
that the OPCW Director-General is the one who did not
wish to dispatch the Team in the summer, an issue he
mentioned before the Council in his June briefing (see
S/PV.8785).
Thirdly, the tripartite agreement among the Syrian
National Authority, the United Nations Office for
Project Services and the OPCW has been extended.
Syria has emphasized working expeditiously on such
activities in order to ensure that the mission can be
completed as soon as possible.
Fourthly, an entry visa was granted to the chief of
the OPCW office in Damascus through an accelerated
procedure — the standard procedure to grant a foreign
national entry to Syria for the first time usually takes
longer. We would like to note that, throughout its years
of working with the OPCW, Syria has not denied a
single entry visa to the organization’s staff.
Fifthly, in line with Syria’s welcoming of a meeting
between the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates and the OPCW Director-General
in Damascus on a date convenient for the DirectorGeneral, we have notified the Technical Secretariat of
the focal point who would be in charge of preparing for
such a meeting.

21-2411815/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

02/09/2021

After all those actions undertaken by the
Syrian Government to cooperate with the OPCW,
it is unfortunate that some question in the Council
our cooperation with the Technical Secretariat, or
misrepresent that cooperation through a politicized
exploitation of technical and procedural matters that
are not out of the ordinary.

cylinders and that it would not transfer them outside
the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, as they are
material and legal evidence, while taking into account
the fact that the organization had previously caused
damage to a number of samples that served as physical
evidence because they were not handled with the
required professionalism.

It is evident that the Fact-Finding Mission’s
investigations into the alleged Douma incident have
used erroneous methods of work, as the Mission has
not adhered to the standard procedures pursuant to
the Convention. That includes, for example, overlooking
the methodology provided for in the verification annex,
as well as the means for collecting evidence and
samples and the rules for ensuring the chain of custody,
as the Mission relies on open sources and information
provided by terrorist organizations and their affiliates,
such as the White Helmets.

In conclusion, all the unprecedented measures
in addressing the Syrian chemical file, resorting to
manipulating the provisions of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and establishing illegal mechanisms that
go beyond the obligations of the States parties to the
Convention and imposing their funding from the regular
budget, in addition to ignoring all the cooperation of
Syria and progress made to date, as well as setting
unworkable conditions to achieve the suspension of
Syria’s rights and privileges in the organization, clearly
prove the flagrant politicization of this file. This also
proves the lack of credibility of the organization’s
reports and the lack of objectivity and professionalism
of its work.

How can we be asked to believe that there is
credibility and professionalism by the Fact-Finding
Mission team while, to date, it has not issued reports
on five investigations into incidents reported by the
Syrian Arab Republic five years ago? For five years, the
Fact-Finding Mission has not issued reports on those
incidents, whereas it issued reports on alleged incidents
by the armed terrorist group that took place years after
the incidents to which I just referred.
The destruction of the two cylinders related to that
alleged incident as a result of a brutal Israeli attack
on the site where they were stored on 8 June, which
should clearly be condemned by the Security Council,
has been used by some countries as a means to focus
on only procedural matters, in complete disregard for
the condemnation of that perfidious aggression. That
is a continuation of the approach by those countries
to turn a blind eye to the State terrorism practised by
the Israeli occupation authorities, which, as Council
members all know, still refuse to join the Chemical
Weapons Convention and still possess a huge arsenal
of other weapons of mass destruction that threatens
peace and security in the Middle East. We hoped that
Mrs. Nakamitsu would have been honest in her briefing
and speak in full about what Syria reported, namely, the
aggression by Israel. She should not have been selective
and said that Syria had reported an attack only.
My delegation previously made clear that the Syrian
National Authority is fully committed to implementing
the Technical Secretariat’s request regarding those two
16/18

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Madam President,
on presiding over the Security Council this month.
We reiterate our full support for the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the promotion of its authority.
As an advocate party to the Convention, Iran will spare
no efforts for the realization of the objectives of that
vital instrument. To that end, we also attach great
importance to, and call for, the full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of, the Convention.
We also strongly call for the Convention’s
universality. To achieve that noble objective, the Israeli
regime must be compelled to join the Convention
without any precondition or further delay.
As a major victim in contemporary history of the
most systematic use of chemical weapons, Iran strongly
condemns the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and under any circumstances.
As an active member of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the Islamic
Republic of Iran also underlines the fundamental
importance of ensuring independent, impartial and
professional work by the OPCW. That is of the outmost
importance, especially with respect to the issues related
21-24118

02/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

to the implementation of the obligations by States
parties, including the Syrian Arab Republic.
Once again, we acknowledge the vital importance
of the efforts of the Syrian Government in implementing
its obligations under the Convention. The complete
destruction of its chemical weapons programme in
the least possible time and under severe conditions
proves the importance of such efforts by the Syrian
Government. We welcome the recent submission by
Syria of its ninety-third monthly report on its activities
related to the destruction of chemical weapons and
their production facilities. We also positively note the
ongoing preparations for the meeting of the OPCW
Director-General and the Syrian Foreign Minister, as
well as for the twenty-fifth round of consultations with
the Declaration Assessment Team.
It is extremely disappointing that the Syrian
chemical file has been politicized by a certain group
of countries. That trend, which has undermined the
Convention’s authority and the OPCW’s credibility,
must stop. That is in the interests of the Convention,
the OPCW, the rule of law and the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Supporting the new approach of the OPCW and
Syria to conducting high-level dialogue, we encourage
both sides to engage constructively in that process, and
we hope that such as initiative will yield positive results.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Madam President, on Ireland’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for September, and I wish you every success. I also
commend India for a successful presidency last month,
and I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
briefing.
As expected, the most recent monthly report
(S/2021/764, annex) of the Director-General of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) yet again points to the identified
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in the Syrian
regime’s chemical weapons declaration. The OPCW
therefore cannot confirm whether that declaration is
accurate and complete.
The increasing number of outstanding issues is
a matter of great concern to us. The presence of an
undeclared chemical weapons production facility is

S/PV. 8849

a case in point. The regime still fails to declare the
chemical warfare agents produced and/or weaponized
at that site, in violation of its obligations.
Equally worrisome is the revelation that the
Al-Assad regime had moved two chlorine cylinders
related to the Douma chemical attack. This happened
despite the warnings from the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and without its consent, let alone prior
knowledge.
That is another stark example of the Al-Assad
regime’s non-compliance with its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. The regime must be
urged to provide all relevant information with regard to
the movement of the two cylinders and any remains that
exist following their destruction. For that to happen, the
unity of the Security Council is indispensable.
Turkey has supported the efforts within the
OPCW aimed at bringing the regime to compliance by
co-sponsoring the OPCW Executive Council decision
of July 2020 and the decision adopted during the
second part of the twenty-fifth session of Conference
of State Parties in April. Such measures, supported by
the overwhelming majority of States parties, are vitally
important to ensuring accountability in Syria.
The use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad
regime against its own people is well documented,
with an ever-growing track record. Most recently, with
the two reports of the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT), it has now been proven that the regime is
responsible for at least eight chemical-weapons attacks.
We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons by
the regime.
The IIT plays a critical role in identifying the
perpetrators of chemical-weapons use. The regime
must be compelled to cooperate with the IIT for its
operations in Syria, including by issuing visas and
granting access to confidential information relating to
its military chemical programme. The regime must also
fulfil its obligations to issue a visa for the new OPCW
team leader to be deployed in Damascus.
Turkey regrets attempts that question the objectivity
of the work carried out by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and its investigative bodies. We reiterate
our support for the independence, professionalism and
impartiality of the Technical Secretariat.
The appropriate response to the regime’s brazen
violations of international law cannot and should not

21-2411817/18

S/PV.8849

The situation in the Middle East

be the ongoing inaction at the Security Council. The
regime’s war crimes and crimes against humanity
require immediate steps towards full accountability.
We owe this to the victims of the Ghouta attack, whose
eighth anniversary we marked last month. We have
to take action to honour the innocent victims of all
chemical attacks.

18/18

02/09/2021

We strongly condemn the repeated use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian regime in Ghouta and elsewhere.
Ending impunity is a pressing task for the international
community, especially for the Security Council, in
order to achieve peace in Syria.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

21-24118
