UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS
i, j,;

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2165th

MEETING:

NEW

Q6T 2 - i~~j~

30 AUGUST

1979

I” ;’

__ _

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2165)
of the agenda

. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

................................................

The situation in the Middle East:
Letters dated 24 August 1979 and 28 August 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13516 and S/13520) e.............................

WPV.2165

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohttions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2165th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 30 August 1979, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG

of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

(United States of America)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Keating (Ireland) and
Mr. Mansoun’ (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (SIAgendaI2165)
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like first to welcome the
Seretary-General back from his work abroad. I invite him
to address the Council.

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letters dated 24 August 1979 and 28 August 1979
from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13516 and S/13520)

4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Having just returned
to New York last evening, I wish to take this opportunity
to address the Council regarding the serious situation
with which we are confronted in Southern Lebanon.

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.

5. As members know from the information made available to them yesterday morning through the Council’s President, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL)
has suffered an increasing number of casualties
as a result of the escalation of hostilities in that area, including the tragic loss of the lives of several more members of
our Force.

Adoption of tbe agenda
i’%e agenda was adopted.
Tbe situation in the Middle East:
Letters dated 24 August 1979 and 28 August 1979 from
the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to &United
Nations addressed to tbe President of the Security
Council (S/13516 and S/13520)

6. While there have been continuous outbursts of violence
in this area over recent years, there has recently been an
increasing intensity which demands our deepest concern
and attention. As Ambassador Young rightly said yesterday:

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2164th meeting, I invite the representative of
Lebanon to take a place at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Israel and the Netherlands to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber
and I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to take a place at the side of the Council
chamber.

“In recent days alone, thousands of Lebanese and
Palestinian civilians have been forced to flee from their
homes, and many have been killed and maimed by often
indiscriminating shelling. This situation is intolerable.”
[2264th meeting, para. 68.1
7. I fully understand the preocupation of the Government
of Israel with problems concerning the security of its people,
especially in light of the series of violent incidents and the
tragic loss of innocent civilian life that have occurred in
recent times. I have not failed to speak out against such acts
in the past, and I shall continue to do so. That being aid, I do
not believe that the policy of preemptive strikes on targets
in Lebanon is acceptable or indeed justified by the circumstances now prevailing. The recent bombardments have
been on a scale that has caused widespread reaction in
world opinion, owing to the extensive loss of innocent
civilian lives, the creation of a new wave of refugees and the

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tu&ni(Lebanoir)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Blum (Israel) and
Mr. van Buuren (Netherlandr) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber and Mr. Abdel Rahman (Palestine Liberation Organization) took the place
reservedfor him at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of the
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Ireland and the Syrian Arab Republic in which they
request that they be invited to participate in the discussion
1

massive destruction of property and dislocation of normal
life.
8. I should like to add that I am most grateful for the
consideration given to the problem by the Council and for
the statement made by you, Mr. President, on Friday last
[2163rdmeering] supporting our efforts to obtain a ceasefire.

of Lebanon, but has increasingly perpetrated acts of aggression. It is precisely for that reason that the Council, at the -.
request of Lebanon, has had once again to return to the
consideration of this question.
15. Members are familiar with the letters which have been
sent by Lebanon. In the letters from Lebanon which have
been addressed to the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, attention is drawn to the escalation
of tension in Southern Lebanon which has been brought
about by new acts of armed provocation on the part of
Israel. The victims of Israel military acts in Lebanon have
once again been unprotected civilians, a subject which was
discussed so eloquently yesterday by the representatives of
Lebanon and of the Palesine Liberation Organization. The
armed forces of Israel have been systematically causing
tremendous material losses to the Lebanese people and are
depriving those people of any opportunity to live in peace.

9. While, as of the moment, the cease-tire continues to be
generally respected, given previous experience in the area
we have no reason to be confident that it will be maintained
indefinitely. I therefore earnestly appeal once again to all
parties concerned to exercise the maximum restraint and
to give the present cease-fire a chance to become permanently effective.
10. As members of the Council are aware, the Commander and personnel of UNIFIL have made unceasing
efforts to pacify their area of operation and to carry out the
mandate entrusted to them by the Council. In particular, in
recent days they have made continuous efforts to achieve a
cessation of the tiring as well as to prevent infiltrations,
incursions and encroachments upon their area of operation
from any quarter. I believe that the presence of UNIFIL in
the area is a vital element in maintaining the fragile balance of peace in the Middle East, and I appeal to all
concerned to give their co-operation and assistance to
UNIFIL
in its extremely difficult task.

16. The actions of Israel are directed not only against the
Lebanese people but also against the Palestinian people
who have sought refuge in Lebanese territory. The aggressive circles in Israel are trying by all means physically to
destroy the Palestinians living in Lebanon, to bring about
the complete destruction of the Palestinian resistance movement and to prevent the realization of the aspirations of the
Palestinians for a national renaissance and the establishment of their own State.
17. It is particularly noteworthy that the armed provocations of Israel against Lebanon increased significantly after
the separate treaty was signed between Israel and Egypt.
Not only has the scale of the criminal armed acts of Israel
increased, as a result of which the innocent population has
suffered, but also the newest types of armaments have been
more widely used, weapons which, as you know, are furnished to Israel not for attacks, but only for selfdefence:
they, in fact, are being used for attacks, for aggression,
rather than for self-defence.

Il. I wish, in this connexion, to note with deep regret the
casualties that UNIFIL
has suffered in recent weeks. In
particular I wish to convey my sympathy and condolences
to the Government and people of Fiji, and to the families of
the victims, on the deaths of three soldiers in an ambush by
armed elements.
12. The responsibility and the involvement of the United
Nations in this area is-well known to all members. But I am
acutely aware that we should leave no stone unturned to
make further efforts to pacify the situation and to secure the
progressive implementation of the Security Council’s resolutions. The Secretary-General has been given a particular
responsibility for the implementation of these resolutions.
In this context, I wish to inform the Council that I am at
present considering further means of discharging this obligation, and I shall of course keep the Council informed of
my conclusions.

18. It is evident that the attacks by Israel against Lebanon
could hardly have taken place if the Israeli Government, in
pursuing its policy in the Middle East, had not enjoyed the
political, military and material support of the United States
of America. If those countries that are in a position to exert
effeetive pressure on Israel had used the means open to
them and had not merely condemned Israel for certain
activities, then the Israeli aggressors would not have been in
a position to be so stubbornly provocative in their refusal to
bow to the decisions of the Security Council.

13. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (interpretation from Russian): The Security Council
has met previously to consider the question of the routine
aggressive actions of Israel. Israel’s policy has virtually
become a constant subject of deliberation in the Council;
that is no accident. The present foreign policy of Israel is
fraught with danger for its neighbours. It is aimed at depriving the Palestinian people of their duly recognized legal
rights. In this connexion, the Council has adopted a number
of resolutions that I shall not enumerate since they were
mentioned in some of the statements made yesterday.

19. In pursuing its so-called punitive expeditions against
the peaceful inhabitants of Lebanon, Israel is attempting to
justify its actions by stating that it has been obliged to act in
that manner because there are Palestinians on Lebanese
territory. But that argument will not hold water. Who did
Israel chase from the territory which it now occupies? They
were the Palestinians. Where did the Palestinians flee in
order to save their lives? They fled to the neighbouring
countries which could give them shelter. But they cannot
find peace even in those countries. It is clear to every
reasonable person that the Palestinians would not find
themselves in Lebanon if they had not been expelled from
their homes aud their land. Israel now quite probably is
aiming at destroying the Palestinians on Lebanese soil. For

14. Decisions have been taken specifically in connexion
with Israel’s aggressive activities against Lebanon. However, Israel not only has failed to display any intention to
fulfil the many decisions of the Security Council calling for
-.strict observance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
2

the work of this Council during the month of July. I should
like to ask the United Kingdom delegation kindly to convey
to him our best wishes upon his leaving us.

that reason, the Palestinians have been obliged to take steps
in order to protect themselves and to protect their inalienable rights. If any person has been deprived of his home, he is
- entitled to make every effort to return to that home. The
means that he uses can hardly be condemned by anyone if,
for example, peaceful means do not bring about this result.

26. The Norwegian
Government has followed with
increasing concern the deteriorating situation in Southern
Lebanon. We fully support the scrupulous implementation
of resolution 425 (1978) as the only means to restore peace
to that troubled area and its people. For that purpose
Norway has sent troops to Southern Lebanon to participate
in a joint United Nations effort to break the vicious circle of
violence and counter-violence. But this cannot be achieved
without the active co-operation of the parties themselves. It
is with deep regret we have to state that till now sufficient
co-operation has not been forthcoming. On the contrary,
the peace-keeping force finds itself caught in the middle ofa
cross-fire between parties which too easily resort to violent
means. This policy has led to immense costs in terms of lives
lost and human suffering among the civilian population in
Southern Lebanon and also in Israel. My Government finds
this situation intolerable and unacceptable.

20. The Soviet delegation would like to state that it is
resolutely against any attempts, which in fact took place at
yesterday’s meeting of the Council, to equate the victim of
the aggression with the aggressor, attempts to make equal
demands err both sides and, furthermore, attempts to lay
upon the victim of the aggression more severe requirements
than upon the aggressor.
il. The only question that remains is to put an end to the
aggressive actions of Israel against Lebanon. In this connexion, the question raised by the Lebanese side is perfectly
justified, namely, that the Council should take appropriate
steps in order to protect Lebanon and the entire Middle
East from the disasters which threaten them.
22. The events which are taking place at the present time
in the Middle East confirm the validity of the frequent
warnings issued by the Soviet Union to the effect that the
policy of separate deals not only never leads to a just and
durable peace-indeed it cannot-in
that area, but simply
constitutes a threat of further complicating the situation
and encouraging Israel to undertake new military adventures which will not bring about peace or tranquillity for
Israel itself: that is quite clear to everyone. That policy
simply leads to an attempt to consolidate Israeli occupation
of Arab land and to go on to further expansionist activities.
But that would be a hopeless attempt.

27. We thus strongly urge the parties to refrain from the
continuous use of violence. We urge them to assist UNIFIL
in fulfilling its mandate. The task of UNIFIL is to restore
peace and security to the area and assist in restoring Lebanese Government authority and control. My Government
fully supports the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.
28. As we are a troopcontributing
country, my Govemment is also concerned with the security of UNIFIL itself.
May I here, on behalf of the Norwegian Government, convey to the delegation of Fiji our deeply felt sympathy with
the families of the three Fijian soldiers who last week lost
their lives in the cause of peace.

23. The position of the Soviet Union on the question of a
peace settlement in the Middle East is well known. I should
like to remind the Council of that position. We are firmly
convinced that, sooner or later, all interested parties will
return to it. The Soviet Union, in accordance with the
decisions of the United Nations, has always emphasized the
fact that a just and durable peace in the Middle East can be
achieved only if there is a comprehensive settlement of the
Middle.East conflict on the basis of the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in
1967, by implementing the legitimate national rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, including their right to establish
an independent State, and by ensuring peace and security
for all countries in that area, including those that now talk
about peace but in fact, by their actions, are escalating their
armed aggressive attacks against neighbouring countries
and the Palestinians living in those countries.

29. My Government would be ready to consider ideas
which would enable UNIFIL to fulfil its task more effectively, inter aliu, the idea of raisingthe presentceilingsetfor
the strength of the Force. But we remainconvinced that it is
only through the full co-operation of the conflicting parties
with the Force that we can overcome the presentdifficulties
and make it possiblefor it to fulfil its mandate as agreed
upon by this Council.
30. If the parties remain as unto-operative as they have
been in the past, and if the situation in Southern Lebanon
continues to deteriorate, we may reach the point where
UNIFIL may be paralysed in its functions and the usefulnessof the entire UNIFIL operation questioned.
--~31. This Council, which has sent UNIFIL to the area,
must insist that such co-operation be forthcoming. The
indiscriminate and massive shelling of Lebanesetowns,
villages and refugeecamps must come to an end. And so
must the barbarous acts of violence againstinnocent civilians in Israel.

24. Mr. AASEN (Norway): Mr. President, as this is the
first intervention by my delegation during your presidency,
may I at the outset congratulate you on your assumption of
the offlce of President of the Security Council for the month
of August. May I also add that it is with deep regret that we
have learned that you are soon to leave us. I shall not repeat
the many well deserved kind words which have been
addressed to you by previous speakers. I can only subscribe
to them. I wish you all the best for your future.

32. We agree with the statement you made yesterday,
Mr. President, that:
“The people of Southern Lebanon, Lebaneseand
Palestinianalike, and the peopleof Israel aswell, deserve
relief from the almost daily violence and fear of attack

25. May I also express the appreciation of my delegation
to Ambassador Ivor Richard, who so skilfully presided over
3

ple, which is completely defenceless and subjected every day:.
to wanton aggression and brutalmurder?
Or 1s it selfdefence against UNIFIL, whose presence in Lebanon it has
turned into a mirage and shadowy existence?
.;
40. The Lebanese Government has already pledged, its
co-operation with UNIFIL, and so has the PLO. It is only
Israel which views UNIFIL as an obstacle to the fulfilment .
of its designs on Lebanon and against the Palestinian people. No wonder Israel has done everything it could to thwart
the Security Council’s efforts to enable Lebanon to recover
its territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence within its internationally recognized boundaries and
regain its effective authority in the south.
,

with which they have been forced to live for far too long.”
[2164th meeting, para. 68.1
Thus we join you in once more urging all parties to show
restraint and strictly to enforce a complete, immediate and
lasting halt to all shelling, terrorism and other acts of
violence.
33. Mr. EL-JEAAN (Kuwait): I should like first to welcome back the Secretary-General and thank him for his
report. I should also like to express our condolences to the
people and the Government of Fiji on the loss of the lives of
brave soldiers of peace, which has been added to the list of
thousands of victims killed by the Israeli policy of genocide.
34. The Security Council is meeting once more at the
request of Lebanon to consider consistent and repeated
violations by Israel of Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 450 (1979).

41. Israel has consistently shown contempt for the authority of the Council. It has been regularly violating the Charter of the United Nations and flouting its resolutions.
Action under Chapter VII of the Charter is needed to show
Israel that it has by its conduct placed itself outside the pale
of law. The Council must act and act now if its authority is
to be respected and if it is to fulfil its role as the primary,
organ for the maintenance of international peace and security. The indifference and non-action of some permanent
members of the Council, in particular the United States,
which is the author of resolution 425 (1978) and the one
instrumental in obstructing any action-oriented resolution
in the Council, cannot pass unnoticed by the Arab people.
The theatrical and technicolor presentation of the representative of Israel yesterday is not convincing and cannot
justify the preemptive, unprovoked and systematic genocide perpetrated by Israel.

35. All the facts are before the Council. The Israeli representative had the brazen impudence to assure the Council of
Israel’s respect for the territorial integrity, independence
and sovereignty of Lebanon while Israeli armed forces are
daily subjecting Lebanon to the most brutal attacks and
bombardment.
36. The conduct of Israel is ominous because it clearly has
certain fixed objectives which are on the way to fulfilment
regardless of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the weight of world public opinion and the magnitude of
the suffering which the policy of Mr. Begin entails.
37. Mr. Begin is conducting himself on the assumption
that the Camp David agreement has given him a free hand
in Lebanon and against the Palestinian people wherever
they may be. His primary objective is clearly to destroy the
national identity of the Palestinian people, put an end to
their hopes of establishing an independent State of their
own and prevent them from ever returning to their homes
and properties in Palestine. A secondary objective is to
destroy Lebanon, render its people homeless within its own
country, occupy by proxy a considerable part of the south
and impose his will throughout Lebanon. Even the traditional empire-builders never inflicted so much loss of
human life and so much damage to property. A casual tour
of Lebanon would show how a country that competed with
Switzerland as a pleasure resort has become the abode of
abject poverty, homelessness and destruction.

42. Our main concern at the moment should be to
compel Israel to stop all attacks on Lebanon. The people
of Lebanon have suffered too long. The hospitals can no
longer cope with the maimed and the wounded. The fields
are fertile and waiting to be tilled by the peasants who
were compelled to flee from their farms and cottages.
Normal conditions should be restored so that the people
who fled from their villages will be.able to return to their
homes and resume their daily lives in conditions of tranquillity and peace.
43. Mr. DE ZAVALA
(Bolivia) (interuretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, I will be very brief. At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month of August. You.
have once again demonstrated your ability, interest and
competence in the exercise of these functions. At the same
time, I wish to transmit to you my delegation’s regret on
your leaving United Nations activities as the representative of the United States of America. We have always
valued your ability as a statesman, and on this occasion
we extend our best wishes to you for the future.

38. However, much more is at stake than the survival of
the Palestinians or the future of Lebanon. It is the Security
Council which is being put to the test. The fabric of intemational society is already so weak that a little more turmoil
and lawlessness can drive the last nail into its coffin. How
can countries come to the Council and ask it to act to stop
aggression and restore international peace and security
when they see the Council incapable of ensuring the safety
and integrity of UNIFIL and obtaining the necessary guarantees for its freedom of movement and action?

44. I should also like to express our admiration and
appreciation of the skill of your predecessor,.- Mr. Richard
of the ‘United Kingdom.

39. The representative of Israel claims that his Govemment is exercising the right of self-defence. The question is:
selfdefence against whom? Is it against the people of Pales-’
tine, which it uprooted from its homes and drove into the
wilderness? Or is it self-defence against the Lebanese peo-

45. I also wish to join in your welcome to the SecretaryGeneral to this Council after his recent travels.
‘.
46. What has happened in Southern Lebanon justifies
the discouragement
of my delegation and its deepest
4

.

concern, which, as we have been able to note, is shared by
the representatives who spoke before me.
47. Bolivia, as one of the countries of America most
affected by a war that it never sought, as a result of which
it lost our coast, cannot fail to reiterate its very clear and
definite position, which is fully in accord with the basic
principles of our community of nations already enshrined
in the Charter which indicate that the members of the
Organization shall refrain from the use of force against
the integrity or political independence of any State. That
is why my delegation whole-heartedly supports the right
of ‘Lebanon to restore the authority of its Government
and to exist with sovereignty and in freedom.
.48. .?he decisions adopted in the past by the Council
opened up a perspective of hope. It was thought that with
the efforts and combined will of all sectors involved,
however antagonistic their interests, and with the reafftrmation of the will to peace of the international community, it would have been possible to restore the full
authority of the Government of Lebanon and that its
long-suffering people would be allowed to live in peace.
Unhappily, this has not been so. The fragility of the
cease-fire in the zone is obvious at this time, and this
endangers the capacity of UNIFIL to carry out its mandate and the very confidence that the peoples of the world
have placed in the Council.
49. In the light of this, my delegation wishes to urge the
parties concerned to co-operate actively and resolutely so
that UNIFIL
may comply with the mandate. it has
received from the Council.
50. We agree with and shall support any measure
designed to strengthen the effectiveness of the Force,and
once again we appeal to Member States that are able to
do so to exercise their influence on the parties to the
conflict so as to eliminate the obstacles barring the effective application of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978)
and thus achieve the desired peace in the.area. We are
convinced, however, that the latest events in Lebanon are
but the reflection and part of the complex problem of the
Middle East which, as my delegation has repeatedly
stated, requires an over-all and comprehensive solution.
,’

51. In conclusion, I wish to pay our tribute of admiration to General Erskine and to his staff, both military and
civilian, working with him for their selflessness and devotion, as well as’ to express our deepest condolences
because of the casualties suffered during the mission
entrusted to him.
Mr. CHJZN Chu (China) (inzerpretafionfrom Chinese):
Since the Security Council considered the question of the
Israeli invasion of Lebanon last June, the situation in
Southern Lebanon, far from being relaxed, has further
worsened. Israel’s armed incursions into Lebanon have
become more frequent and wider in scale. This development cannot but arouse grave concern. In these circumstances, we find it entirely necessary and justified for the
tibanese Government to request the Council to consider
this matter.
52.

53. Over a long period, the Israeli authorities have been
trying to split Lebanon and to create a State within a
State in Southern Lebanon, attempting thereby to stamp
out the liberation cause of the Palestinian people. In
recent months, the Israeli authorities, with super-Power
support and connivance, have become even more
unscrupulous and have repeatedly carried out savage
armed attacks on Southern Lebanon and its coastal
towns, causing tremendous losses to the lives and property of the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples.
54. What is more intolerable is that, when the Security
Council was in the process of considering the question of
the exercise of the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights,
the Israeli authorities should have once again wantonly
invaded Lebanon, ruthlessly bombarded Tyre and other
villages and slaughtered the innocent civilians there. The
Israeli authorities even truculently clamoured that they
would continue to strike no matter what might happen.
This is a fresh crime committed by the Israeli aggressors
against the entire Arab people and an open provocation
to the United Nations and the Security Council. Israel’s
continued obstinacy in pushing its policies of aggression
and expansion will be further strongly condemned and
opposed by all countries and peoples, as well as by public
opinion, that uphold justice and are concerned with
world peace.
55. As always, the Chinese Government and people
strongly condemn Israel for its aggressive atrocities and
firmly support the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in
their just struggle to recover their lost territories and to
retain their national rights, including the right to return
to their homeland and establish their own State. We
firmly support the Lebanese people in their just struggle
to safeguard their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We maintain that the Security Council
should stand for justice, uphold the principles of the
Charter, severely condemn Israel’s barbarous crimes,
adopt practical and effective measures to stop Israel’s
activities of aggression and expansion and give firm support to the Lebanese, Palestinian and other Arab peoples
in their just struggle against Israeli aggression, The independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of
Lebanon must be strictly respected and brook no
encroachment.
56. Mrs. MUTUKWA
(Zambia): The Zambian delegation is taking the floor in this debate to express its deep and
grave concern about the new escalation in the confhct in
Southern Lebanon. We are equally distressed by the
increasing carnage of human lives which is being inflicted by
intransigent forces. The situation in Lebanon is deteriorating faster than most of us are prepared to concede or
appreciate. There are new dimensions in this conflict which
the Security Council should address most seriously.
57. Even more ominous has been the esclation of violence
against the United Nations peace-keeping forces in the area.
In the last few days we have been informed that more
United Nations troops have been killed and several soldiers
wounded. The so-called armed elements, who are abetted
by Israel, also had the audacity to seize and abduct some

.

United Nations soldiers as hostages. What could be more
terroristic than such actions?

happening in Southern Lebanon today. If it were not for
Israeli policy, if Israeli rulers did not have their designs on
tapping the waters of the Litani river, if they were not
haunted even by Palestinian refugees, and if they wanted
peace in the region, there would be peace today, at least in
Southern Lebanon.

58. It should be borne in mind that the United Nations
forces are soldiers of peace; they are soldiers who should
have no enemies. Yet, in spite of this obvious fact, they
continue to be harassed almost daily and the casualty rate
keeps growing. Zambia believes that such a situation does
not argur well for the United Nations role, which we consider to be vital to the restoration of peace in Lebanon in
particular and in the troubled region of the Middle East in
general. The United Nations may have to adopt a new
approach in the circumstances to reinforce the role of
UNIFIL.

64. We call upon Israel to respect UNIFIL and to adhere
to United Nations resolutions. This Council in turn must do
everything possible to implement its resolutions on Lebanon.
Lebanon looks to the Council to stop the bleeding in that
country; this is why there have been at least ten meetings
of this Council to consider the situation in Lebanon. All
of us here, collectively, must act responsibly if Lebanon is
to survive in peace.

59. The massacre of United Nations forces has serious
implications not only for the role of UNIFIL, but also for
the future of the United Nations peace-keeping operations.
It further has grave implications for the contributing countries and for the families of men who are killed or maimed in
the service of peace. Zambians extend deep condolences to
the families of all those who have been lost in the service of
mankind. Zambia strongly abhors senselessloss of life anywhere on the globe.

65. Mr. MANSFIELD
(United Kingdom): Not for the
first time in recent months, the situation in Southern
Lebanon has deteriorated to the point where the Lebanese
Government has again felt obliged to ask for an urgent
meeting of the Security Council. Unfortunately, it cannot be
said that our previous efforts have led to any improvement.
The cycle of violence continues, with grave implications for
the peace and stability of the whole area. The casualty list,
including many innocent civilians, continues to mount inex-’
orably. The south of Lebanon is rapidly becoming a
wasteland.

60. The second principle which I wish to highlight in this
debate relates to the need to save the lives of refugees and
non-combatants, who should already be adequately protected under international law. In the context of the Lebanese situation, it should be clear to all men that Palestinians
have been forced by Israel to become refugees in Lebanon
and elsewhere. Refugees everywhere are victims of special
political circumstances. But once people have been forced
out of their homeland to become refugees, every State,
including Israel, must respect their divine right to life. The
States which host refugees on humanitarian grounds must
also be allowed to live in peace, even with the countries from
which these refugees had come.

66. Recent events, which are in large part due to the failure
of the parties in the area to co-operate with the United
Nations Force which has been given the task of maintaining
peace by the international community, are a matter of direct
and serious concern to the Council. We must not allow the
credibility of UNIFIL to be undermined. Hence our strong
disquiet that repeated requests for co-operation with
UNIFIL have been almost totally disregarded by armed
elements, by the &facto forces and by the Government of
Israel. In the last few days, we have seen reports of the
deaths of three more‘soldiers from the Fiji contingent at the
hands of Palestinians and the flight of many hundreds of
civilians from the main population centres in the south. We
strongly deplore the violence which has wrought such destruction in Southern Lebanon, and commend the efforts of
the UNIFIL Commander to secure a cease-fire between all
sides.

61. No country in this world is allowed or licensed to take
the law into its own hands and kill refugees under any
pretext. Today, Palestinians are being hunted like animals
in refugee’centres in Southern Lebanon and they are being
murdered in cold blood. Where does Israel want the
Palestinians to live? Does it want the Palestinians to disap
pear from the face of the earth. If not, why are innocent
refugees in the Arab world and southern Africa being
hunted down like game?

67. But the present cease-fire is fragile and my Govemment therefore fully endorses the Secretary-General’s call
for the strengthening of the cease-tire. I need not spell out
the risks if the fighting resumes at its previous levels. My
Government therefore urges the Palestinians to work
actively with the Lebanese authorities to bring peace to
Lebanon. My Government also urges the Government of
Israel to use its influence to restrain the de@20 forces. We
reiterate our belief that the Government of Israel should
cease to supply those forces with the military equipment
which enables them to continue to frustrate the efforts of
UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate.

62. Israel and the racist aggressors in southern Africa
always justify their barbaric and cowardly attacks on refugees as “preemptive”. How can genocide be equated with
defence? Can anyone argue that the holocaust during the
Second World War was preemptive? Please, let no one be
deceived by those who harbour hallucinations. Whatever
any member of this Council may say, let him not equate the
plight of the oppressors with that of the oppressed. Such an
approach would be a travesty of the rights of man everywhere to freedom and equality.

68. We also believe that the Government of Israel should
desist from taking action in Southern Lebanon. In this
connexion, my Government condemns recent preemptive
strikes by Israel-in particular, the air attacks up and down
the Lebanese coast on 22 July-with their inevitably heavy

63. The Zambian delegation calls upon this Council to use
its good offices to bring peace to war-tom Lebanon. The
Council should tell Israel in no uncertain terms to stop its
war of attrition in Lebanon. Israel is responsible for what is
.6

I

I

76. The facts speak for themselves. Despite numerous
decisions and resolutions of the Security Council, hundreds
of innocent civilians have been killed or wounded; hundreds
of thousands have been dispersed in terror and uprooted
from.their homes and shelters; the credibility of UNIFIL
has been eroded, its freedom of movement and action curtailed, the safety of its headquarters jeopardized, many of its
soldiers killed or wounded, and its mandate truncated. The
over-all objective of creating conditions to restore the sovereignty of Lebanon, to preserve its territorial integrity and
independence and to ensure the full exercise of the Government’s authority remains a distant dream, through no fault
of the Lebanese Government.

civilian losses. We are concerned at press reports suggesting
that the Government of Israel intends to continue with such
a policy of further pre-emptive strikes in Southern
Lebanon. Such a policy will only delay the achievement of
peace in the area.
69. My Government remains ready to support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to secure the full implementation
of the mandate given to UNIFIL and hopes that the Lebanese proposals on this matter will be considered carefully by
all concerned. Meanwhile, we cannot stress too highly our
admiration for the performance of the United Nations
troops, who have a difficult task made harder by wanton
opposition. Those parties who continue to undermine the
position of UNIFIL must bear a heavy responsibility for
any further increase in tension and danger in the area.

77. The options before the Council are well known. The
constraints for forthright action are also all too clearly
perceived. The situation, however, has become untenable.
Paper condemnations against Israel and the illegal forces
that it .sustains and fuels to buttress its buffer zone in
Southern Lebanon have had no visible impact. The exercise
of quiet diplomacy through persuasion and pressure upon
Israel by its friends has so far proved fruitless. Israel continues to scorn with impunity any move that threatens its
single-minded pursuit to decimate the Palestinian people,
even if Lebanon is destroyed.

70. Finally, my Government welcomes the offer made by
the Government of Ghana which will bring the force up to
its full operational strength. It is to be hoped that the troops
will be in position at an early date to enable the Force to
function at is optimum efficiency in achieving its objectives.
71. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): My delegation joins our
colleagues in welcoming the Secretary-General back to this
table, and we thank him for his very valuable report.

78. The Council cannot continue to evade its responsibilities at the cost of its credibility and the sacrifice of Lebanon.
Short-term measures cannot stave off the inevitable. It is
our belief that this Council must seriously consider renewing forthright action to implement its past resolutions with
the backing of all the pressure at its disposal. Meanwhile, all
measures must be taken to strengthen the position of
UNIFIL in Lebanon, the safety and security of its headquarters and offices, and its capacity to undertake the tasks
entrusted to it.

72. The people and Government of Bangladesh extend
their deeply-felt sympathy to the peopleand Government of
Fiji and to the families of those valiant soldiers who made
the supreme sacrifice in the cause of peace.
73. This meeting has been occasioned by practical realities
obtaining in Southern Lebanon and the compelling need in
the immediate instance for a clampdown on the cycle of
indiscriminate violence and destruction launched by Israel
and its surrogates to consolidate the minimum target of a
cease-fire effected through the efforts of the United Nations
Secretariat and the Commander of UNIFIL.
There is
scarcely a panacea for the deep-rooted malaise that has
affected Lebanon and threatens its very existence and wellbeing.

79. Mr. MATHIAS
(Portugal): Allow me also at the
outset to welcome back the Secretary-General and to thank
him for his report on the matter before us, which will help
and guide us in our task in this Council.
80. We have been following with the deepest concern the
deterioration of the situation in Southern Lebanon. We
believe the time has come to put an end to that intolerable
situation. The tragedy of Lebanon has lasted far too long;
we cannot accept that innocent Lebanese villagers, as well
as innocent Palestinian refugees, continue to die. Nor can
we go on witnessing the killing of those who are soldiers of
peace, members of a force created by this very organ, who
are generously contributing to the ideal of peace, far from
their homes, their families and their countries. The death of
innocent civilians, whatever their nationality, must be
brought to an end. Violence will only arouse more violence.
It must thus be strongly condemned, whatever its justification or its origin. Pre-emptive attacks in that context are
entirely unacceptable. We feel that the cycle of violence with
which we are confronted can only be stopped if we
approach with an open mind the problems that lie
beneath it.

74. Bangladesh’s position on this question is well-known
and has been explicitiy elaborated in this Council during the
adoption of resolutions 444 (1979) and 450 (1979), which
themselves are founded on the chain of resolutions adopted
in 1978: resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978), 427 (1978) and
434 (1978). It is, therefore, clearly anti-climatic for us to
record our support and unreserved endorsement for the
minimal demands proposed by the representative of
Lebanon yesterday.
75. It is apparent, however that this Council cannot with
equanimity continue to evade its responsibility through the
adoption of paper resolutions without underwriting the
destruction of a nation. No one can doubt that the situation
in Southern Lebanon today has reached an explosive point,
threatening to engulf the entire region in conflict and disaster. It is incongruous that attempts for a socalled comprehensive peace in the Middle East should seek to silence the
voice of the majority of mankind over the systematic mass
and indiscriminate killing, havoc and destruction wrought
inside Lebanon.

81. My country supports all measures that will enhance
the capacity of UNIFIL to implement its mandate and to
strengthen the security of the area in the fulfilment of the
7

87. My Government’s position on the Lebanese question
is, 1 believe, by now well known. In order to avoid doubt,
however, let me reiterate its quintessence.

relevant resolutions of this Council-and,
in particular,
resolutions 425 (1978), 444 (1979) and 450 (1979).
82. We therefore attach the greatest importance to the
suggestions presented by the representative of Lebanon in
his letter of 28 August addressed to the Secretary-General
[S/23519]. We believe those suggestions, as well as others
brought to our attention in that spirit, deserve to be carefully considered by this Council, and that we must spare no
effort to show to all the parties concerned that not only is
violence not the only choice, but even that it is not a choice
at all if they really mean peace.

88. The Lebanese tragedy is inextricably -linked to the
over-all Palestinian question, which, in turn, continues to
remain at the core of the larger Middle East crisis. Only a
political solution guaranteeing unfettered freedoms and the
right to self-determination for all Palestinians in the Diaspora is likely to lead to durabie peace in the region. Unless
this fundamental question is addressed, peace in the region
will, in my delegation’s view, continue to be elusive. The
alternative to peace will always remain too ghastly to contemplate.

83. Before I conclude, allow me to pay a tribute to General Erskine and to the men serving under his command in
UNIFIL for the courageous way in which they have been
carrying out the dangerous task assigned to them. Allow me
also to present my condolences to the Government of Fiji
and to the families of the three Fijian soldiers who last week
sacrificed their lives to the cause of peace.

89. Nigeria is at one with all the voices that have condemned the intemperate acts perpetrated by Israeli forces
and their surrogates. We also condemn acts of aggression
against the territorial integrity of Lebanon in the conviction
that eventually those acts will prove to be counterproductive. As we have stated many times in the past in this
chamber, expressions of moral outrage and condemnation
alone can never resolve the complex problems. As we have
had occasion to wonder in the past, for how long will the
Council fold its hands and watch helplessly while, in contemptuous defiance, Israel holds the collective conscience of
the majority of mankind to ransom? For how long will the
Council tolerate the dangerous situations in which the credibility of UNIFIL and its capacity to act efftciently are being
eroded? The Council must act, and decisively, before it is
too late.

84. Mr. BLANKSON
(Nigeria): It is with the greatest
sorrow and the deepest concern that my delegation has been
following the mind-boggling events of recent weeks in
Southern Lebanon. That the cycles of mindless and indiscriminate violence have now engulfed the UNIFIL area of
operation has equally aroused the deep concern and indignation of my delegation. Within the past few weeks,
UNIFIL forces have sustained possibly greater casualties
than in any comparable period since their emplacement in
Southern Lebanon. According to published reports, the toll
is 10 soldiers killed and 13 injured, some very seriously. May
I join previous speakers in paying a particular tribute to the
dead soldiers and express my Government’s condolences to
their Governments. It remains our hope that their sacrifices
shall not be in vain.

90. We find merit in the over-ail thrust of the suggestions
made by the representative of Lebanon with a view to
strengthening the operational capacity and effectiveness of
UNIFIL.
We recommend that consultations on the fuiI
implications of those suggestions be started as early as is
convenient. We are also convinced that peace in Lebanon
should not await the dawn of a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East. Something must be done, and
urgently, to save Lebanon and its population. In this regard,
we call for strict adherence to resolution 450 (1979) and all
other relevant resolutions.

85. For the civilian populations, Palestinian and Lebanese alike, the recent weeks have been no less harrowing. It
has been the same nightmare of Israeli bombing raids and
shelling, with the usual grisly results; the loss of hundreds of
innocent lives, the destruction of property and farmlands,
the tragedy of the displacement and the turning of civilians
into refugees in the very land of their birth.

91. The least the Council should do now is to call on all’
parties concerned to exercise maximum restraint. The fragi
ile cease-tire now in force must be respected and in no sense
be violated by any party to the conflict.

86. Another worrying development is that UNIFIL,
,which this Council has mandated to undertake its delicate
but crucial mission, would now appear to be cast in the role
of scapegoat by all sides. According to Reuters news
agency, General Erskine has said:

92. Finally, as the issue at stake is human lives, our plea is,
“Let the people of and in Lebanon live”. And, as always,
my delegation stands ready to support all initiatives
designed to bring peace to Lebanon and the Middle East.

“The Israelis charge that we are co-operating with the
Palestinians and joint [Palestinian-leftist] forces, and in
Beirut it is said that we co-operate with Israel and [militia
Commander Saad] Haddad . . . if this situation persists,
and we have to clash every day, with people getting killed,
the day will come when States participating in the United
Nations Force will say they have had enough.”

93. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
94. Mr. VAN BUUREN (Netherlands): Mr. President,
thank you for giving my delegation the opportunity to takepart in this debate.

My delegation is inclined to the view that that attitude is
illustrative of the determination of some interests to abort
the UNIFIL mission. There is no doubt that the Security
Council will respond adequately to this challenge.

95. First, I should like, on behaif of the Netherlands deIegation, to say that it is a source of great satisfaction to see
8
..”

/

I

you in the Chair. At the same time we would express our
regret that this will probably be the last occasion on which
you will preside over this Council. My delegation would like
to extend to you its best wishes for the future.

104. Mr. KEATING
(Ireland): Mr. President, may I, in
thanking you and the Council for your courtesy in affording
my delegation the opportunity to participate in this debate,
join in the universal ,flood of tributes and good wishes paid
to you personally and say that I hope that, under your wise
presidency, we can take at least a step in the direction of
peace at this meeting of the Security Council. May I also at
the outset express to the Government of Fiji and to the
families of the three Fijian soldiers killed recently in
Lebanon, the sincere condolences of the Irish Government
and people.

96. The Netherlands delegation has asked to take part in
this debate on the issue because, as one of the countries
which contributes to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, the Netherlands would like to express its deep
concern at the worsening situation in Southern Lebanon
that has occurred in recent weeks. This situation has made
its increasingly difficult for UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate of
peace keeping.

105. In the debate in the Council on the situation in
Southern Lebanon on 14 June of this year [2149th meeting],
my country requested to speak since we felt we had a
particular interest in contributing to the debate because of
the involvement of an Irish contingent in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. This is again the reason
why we have requested to speak on this occasion and any
comments which we make are again made with that particular restraint which we feel involvement in a United Nations
peace-keeping operation in the area imposes.

97. Yesterday, before this Council, you, Mr. President,
gave the Secretary-General’s report on the events in the area
in the past days, including those acts of violence which took
the lives of three UNIFIL
soldiers and which severely
wounded several others. I should like to express to the
Government of Fiji the condolences of the Government of
the Netherlands on the deaths of those soldiers, who died in
the course of their duty.
98. The shooting and bombardments of the past days also
claimed civilian lives and we feel the deepest sympathy for
the bereaved families.

106. When speaking in this Council on 14 June last, I
expressed the concern of the Government and people of
Ireland at the continuing serious situation in the area, and
took the opportunity to appeal to the parties involved, and
more particularly to the Government of Israel, to cooperate fully with UNIFIL and to assist it actively in carrying out the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.
My Government welcomed resolution 450 (1979), adopted
that same day, which, inter alia, reaffirmed the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Lebanon
and the validity of the General Armistice Agreement
between Israel and Lebanon, called on all parties to cooperate with the Force, and called upon Israel to cease
forthwith its incursions into Lebanon and the assistance
which it provided to irresponsible armed groups in the area.
In our view, these continue to be prerequisites for the return
of normality to the area.

99. A cessation of hostilities was tinally arrived at through
the good off&s of the Secretary-General and the UNIFIL
Commander and following your appeal, Mr. President, for
restraint to all parties concerned made in this Council last
Friday [2163rd meeting].
100. It is clear to my Government that a recurrence of
violence, no matter from what source, will again put in
jeopardy the peace-keeping role of UNIFIL.
Therefore,
upon the instruction of the Netherlands Government, I
appeal solemnly to the defucto forces of Major Haddad, to
the armed elements and to the Israel Defence Forces.
101. The Christian militia should stop making incursions
into the UNIFIL area in its attempts to expand its area of de
facto control and to intimidate the local population in that
area. The Palestine Liberation Organization should carry
out its pledge to remove all its armed groups from villages
and towns and to co-operate with UNIFIL in fulfilling its
mandate. To Israel we address an earnest appeal to end its
policy of preemptive strikes.

107. Since the adoption of resolution 450 (1979), however,
the situation has not improved but has, if anything, worsened. It is to be deeply regretted that not all the parties have
been prepared to co-operate with the Force. The sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
Lebanon continue to be violated. Israel has increased the
scale and frequency of its armed incursions by land, sea and
air into the sovereign territory of Lebanon, incursions
which have, on several occasions recently, led to serious loss
of life among civilian communities, and it continues to
supply large quantities of sophisticated military equipment
to irresponsible armed groups operating to the north of its
territory. This has greatly contributed to the cycle of violence and counter-violence,
terrorism
and counterterrorism, which has escalated to such a dangerous degree
in recent weeks.

102. It is the conviction of the Netherlands Government
that the task of UNIFIL cannot be carried out if a state of
belligerency persists in and around its area of operation. Let
me stress that the role of UNIFIL is one of peace keeping,
not one of peace enforcement. It is not equipped, nor was it
designed, to perform the latter task. There is no hope in
adding violence to violence. I submit that the Security
Council would wish to strive for the scrupulous observance
of its resolution 425 (1978) by all parties concerned. In our
view, there is no realistic alternative. Only in this way can
peace and security in the area be ensured and the suffering
of the people alleviated.

108. When UNIFIL
was established, my Government
was happy to contribute a contingent at the request of the
Secretary-General. We felt that by so doing we were contributing to the maintenance of international peace and
security, which is one of the purposes of this Organization.
We remain fully committed to the peace-keeping role of the

103. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative ot Ireland. I mvlte htm to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
9

United Nations. However, we find it totally unacceptable
that there should be interference with the Force from any
quarter. The incursions by Israeli and de facto forces into
the UNIFIL area, the increased harassment by the defacto
forces and their efforts to encroach further on the UNIFIL
area are a source of particular concern to my Government.
The fact that UNIFIL has not been permitted to extend its
authority over the wholearea entrusted to it by this Council
remains a fundamental obstacle to the full execution of its
mandate. All this makes more difficult the task of UNIFIL.
in carrying out other important aspects of its duties, including the prevention of infiltration by armed personnel into its
area.
109. Despite all the difficulties which UNIFIL is facing, it
is still, as the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report
of 8 June [S/13384, performing an indispensable function
in the area. We recognize the continued efforts of this
Council to ensure that UNIFIL can carry out its duties and
would, of course, welcome action by the Council which may
serve to improve the functioning of the Force. We feel,
however, that it is not the basic structure of UNIFIL which
prevents an improvement in the situation but rather the
refusal by many parties for many reasons to co-operate in
the maintenance of peace. We appeal to all concerned to
consider the very serious consequences for the region as a
whole that a further deterioration in the situation would
entail, in the context of which many present concerns would
pale into insignificance.

114.. On 27 August, The New York Times reported that
after the Ministers* weekly meeting the Israeli Cabinet
spokesman had said: “We will continue to strike. Nothing
has influenced our position to change it.” The strategy of
conducting pre-emptive strikes against the civilian population in Southern Lebanon was confirmed as a government
policy by Prime Minister Begin. This also was reported by
i%e N@u York Times on 28 August, according to which he
stated that: “We are trying to hit the terrorists at their bases
prior to their actions against Israel”.
115. In the light of such flagrantly aggressive statements
and policy, one hardly needs any proof to reach the
conclusion that Israel is defying the rules of international
law, world public opinion and even Security Council
resolutions. Such a policy has been condemned in intemational organizations and by all the nations of the world.
No less a country than the United States, the protector
and ally of Israel, could not support such genocide and it
openly condemned it in the Council yesterday, Mr. President, in your statement, you said that:
“we condemn the policy of artillery shelling and preemptive attacks on Lebanese towns, villages and refugee
camps which Israel and armed Lebanese groups which
Israel supports have followed in recent months” [2164th
meeting, para. 7a].
We feel that the time has come for this Council to put an end
to, and act decisively against, the terrorist policy and aggression of Israel.

110. My country has used this occasion once again to
underline our concern as a troop contributor regarding the
serious situation in Southern Lebanon and the difficulties
with which UNIFIL continues to be faced. It is, in our view,
essential that all parties concerned, particularly Israel, cooperate with this Council and with UNIFIL if the Force is
to be successful in carrying out its task in the interests of
peace in the whole area.

116. This Council has become accustomed to the allegations, distortions and fabrications that were stated again in
the Council yesterday by the representative of Israel. My
Government’s position with regard to the situation in
Lebanon has been repeatedly stated in this Council. It was
so stated as recently as 14 June [2148th meeting] and, for the
sake of the record, I should like to state that the fact of the
matter is that the Syrian force is under the direct command
of the Lebanese Government. Because of Syria’s long and
close historical ties with Lebanon, it responded to the latter’s call for assistance in bolstering its presence and authority in the south, where it has been and continues to be
besieged by continual Israeli aggression.

111. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
112. Mr. MANSOURI
(Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, I thank you and the other members of the Council
very much for giving me this opportunity to speak before
this important august body which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
Council has for a long time been besieged with the deteriorating situation in Southern Lebanon. We are all aware that
continued Israeli intrusions and violations of Lebanese sovereignty have time and again been the purpose of this
Council’s meetings in the past, and today is no different.

117. The Syrian force is more than ready to leave
Lebanon the moment the Lebanese Government indicates
its desire to terminate the mission of the Arab deterrent
force. lf Israel stops its aggression against Lebanese territory and stops instigating armed provocations in the south
by ending its criminal support of the renegade Major Haddad, then the Lebanese central Government will be in a
position to impose peace and tranquillity in the south and in
Lebanon as a whole.

113. The Security Council has in its resolution 450 (1979)
once again called upon Israel to cease forthwith its acts of
aggression against the territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon. Now we are
faced with the same Israeli outright defiance of Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 450 (1979) and the
continued destruction and loss of innocent lives in Lebanon
brought about by the Israeli relentless bombardment and
shelling of Southern Lebanon which occurs on an almost
daily basis.

118. Furthermore, Syria is committed to a sovereign independent Lebanon and considers the sovereignty and
national independence of Lebanon to be as important as its
own sovereignty, national independence and territorial
integrity.
119. We strongly feel that peace in the Middle East cannot
be achieved without creating the conditions for it-the total
10

withdrawal of Israeli forces from all occupied Arab territories and the recognition of the Palestinian people’s right to
exercise its selfdetermination and national independence in
accordance with the United Nations Charter. Furthermore,
failure of the Security Council to help to put an end td the
bloodshed and sufferings of the people of Southern
Lebanon and the Palestinians would result in a bigger
tragedy that might go beyond Lebanon and the Middle
East.

stances, the Soviet representative could be expected to have
the good grace not to inject himself into this debate. He does
not have such good grace. Instead he engaged in the rewriting of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
126. He apparently believes that we are dealing here with
loose-leaf binders of the Soviet encyclopedia, where pages
are replaced to meet the requirements of changing political
expediency. But if he has forgotten the events of 1948 in the
Middle East, let him consult the statements made by Soviet
representatives in this Council. He will then discover to his
consternation that his predecessors in this chamber rightly
branded the Arab side as the aggressor in the Arab-Israel
conflict and supported the cause of the national liberation
movement in Palestine, defending itself against Arab
aggression. That is what Mr. Kharlamov’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Gromyko, said in 1948. The national liberation
movement that Mr. Gromyko was referring to was Zionism, the national liberation movement of the Jewish people.
But today, with utter cynicism and disrespect for historical
truth, he engages here in patent fabrications.

120. We in Syria and in the Arab world earnestly hope
that a final solution to the problem of Lebanon can be
achieved. We are confident that truth and justice will
prevail over the expansionist and terrorist schemes of Israel.
121. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
122. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I should like to thank all those
members of the Council who have expressed their sympathy
to the victims of PLO terrorism in Israel. I would be remiss
in my human duty if I did not remind the Coun@ of the
plight of the Lebanese villagers and farmers‘in the southern part of that country-Christian,
Shiite and Druzewho have been one of the prime targets of PLO terror.
Despite their ordeal and suffering, they consider themselves
more fortunate than their brethren in other parts of
Lebanon who have been subjected to qngoing PLO terror
and to the rigours of the Syrian occupation.

127. The Kuwaiti representative referred to the three
Fijian casualties of UNIFIL of last week as being victims of
Israel. He apparently drafted his statement before listening
to the Secretary-General, who informed the Council that
those Fijian soldiers, like all UNIFIL casualties in recent
months, were the victims of “armed elements”. “Armed
elements”, of course, is the United Nations euphemism for
the terrorist PLO. All this did not deter the Kuwaiti representative from making his ludicrous statement here today,
representing a country whose army participated actively in
the dismemberment of Lebanon.,How is one supposed to
respond to such an obvious lack of intellectual honesty?
The best course, perhaps, is simply to treat it with the
contempt it deserves.

123. Israel wishes to reaffirm its desire to co-operate fully
with UNIFIL in the implementation of its mandate in all its
parts-I
repeat, in all its parts. We have repeatedly sought
assurances that the territory of Lebanon would no longer
serve as a staging ground for the harassment of Israel and its
civilian population. So far, such assurances have not been
forthcoming.

128. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Kuwait has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of his right of reply,
and I now call on him.

124. In the course of this meeting, some statements stood
out for their unusually high degree of hypocrisy. I refer to
the’crocodile tears shed here today by the representatives of
the Soviet Union, Kuwait and Syria. I need not refer to the
statement of Syria. His country’s role in the destruction of
Lebanon is too well known. It was in fact confirmed yesterday by the representative of Lebanon, who thanked me for
accompanying my remarks before the Council with a map,
which, in his words, showed the drama of his country.
Equally well known are Syria’s long-standing ambitions to
annex Lebanon and to incorporate it within “Greater
Syria”.

129. Mr. El-JEAAN (Kuwait): I should like to respond to
what the Israeli representative has just said. The Israeli
representative is, again, unconvincing. His diversionary tactics have robbed him of any credibility in the United
Nations since he came. It is an old routine, and he.should
change it.
130. If the Israeli representative had been listening to the
debate conducted yesterday and today and to the state
ments of the Secretary-General and the representatives of
the countries that are contributing to UNIFIL, he would
have reached the conclusion that there was a consensus in
the Council that it rejected Israel’s policy of genocide in
Lebanon. He would also have reached the conclusion that
Israel must abide by the resolutions of the Council.

125. The Soviet representative represents a country whose
grave responsibility for the exacerbation of tension in the
Middle East over the past 25 years is common knowledge.
The Soviet Union has constantly fuelled the flames of
hatred and belligerency in the Arab world. It has also
attempted to fish in the troubled waters of Lebanon. It is
Soviet-made Kalashnikov sub-machine-guns that are used
by PLO terrorists in their murder raids and incursions
against Israeli civilians, including women and children. It is
Soviet-made Katyusha rockets in PLO use that hit peaceful
IsraeLi villages in the northern part of my country and
threaten the lives of our civilians. Under these circum-

131. As always, when they come to speak in this Council,
Israel’s representatives never address themselves to the
issue. They resort to diversionary tactics, which are not
acceptable in this Council.
132. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union in exercise of his right of reply.
11

142. .. lMr.,EL-JEAAN
(Kuwait): I want to ask the representative of Israel-who
is answerable to the Security Council, -the.members of.the Security Council are not obliged to
answer to him: is Israel willing to recognize the PLO? /

133. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (interpretation from Russian): I had not intended
to speak in reply, but it appears that.the representative of
Israel is speaking here in the Council as an accuser. Everybody is guilty, including the countj .I represent, and thl
Arab ccjuntries as well; ‘and Israel is apparently a holy
country. its representativehere is a holy person and speaks
the holy truth. But, in fact, he speaks nothing but out-andout lies.
.

143.’ The PRESIDENT:‘1 call oil the repr&&tative of’the
Soviet Union who wishes to speak in exercise of his right o?f
reply*
,).
144. ‘Mr. KHARLAMOV
(l&ioA of S&et
S&&t
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The representative
of Israel has r&d&
question which has nothing to with
him. The Soviet people have something to say about the
post-war settlement. To gain victory, and so that Jeti
might exist in Europe and other peoples live in pea&; they
sacrificed 20 million lives. Mr. Ambassador, don’t forget
that fact.

134. First and foremost, if we s&ak about the beginning
of Israel’s existence over the ‘past 30 years, the United
Nations took a decision, and the Soviet Union does not
deny that decision. But is Israel still in its previous boundaries?Thereafter
did it not, in fact, seize a tremendous
amount of territory from neighbouring Arab countries? Is
it not continuing to create tension in the Middle East? And
did the question before us today arise simply because the
Lebanese were not a peaceful people and did not want peace?

145. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and make his statement.

135. What he said were pure lies. How could he speak
about such things? If he had spoken here from a different
position and said, “Yes, we did in fact expel the Palestinians
from their homes, and now they are to a great extent
scattered about, but we recognize the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to create their own
State”. if he had said that Israel would depart from all the
occupied territories and give them an opportunity to determine their own fate, then who could have objected to such a
policy? But he was silent. The cunning of Israel isseen in the
fact that, relying on powerful forces that support it, Israel
plans to go on attacking the Arabs, one by one, and giving
them a piece here and a piece there as bait to lure them into
various kinds of seeming peace agreements.

146. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation Organization): I should like to apologize to the members of
the Council for taking the floor once again.
147. Once again the Council has been subjected to lies and
distortions by the representative of the notorious terrorist
Menachem Begin, who was responsible for the killing, on
9 April 1948, of 254 Palestinian children, women and men
in the village of Deir Yassin, a man who was wanted by the
British authorities for crimes committed during the British
administration of Palestine. The ironical element in all this
is that here today he declares himself a crusader, that he and
his Government are concerned about the welfare of the
Palestinians in Lebanon.

136. Israel and its policies are the cause of the tension in
the Middle East, and, until Israel changes its policies and
gives up the territories it has seized and recognizes the right
of the Palestinian people to exist and even to create their
own State, there can be no peace in the Middle East. Israel
has been told this by the Arabs, and not just by the Soviet
Union. The President of the Council said this yesterday,
although he could have put it in stronger terms.

148. I should like to remind him through you Mr. President, that the Palestinians are also Christians, Moslems,
Shiites and Druzes and are the very people of Jerusalem,
Bethlehem, Nazareth, and of the two villages, Ikrit and Kafr
Burum. For the information of those who are not familiar
with those two villages, they were inhabited by Palestinians
who were expelled from their homes in 1948. And they still
live on the outskirts of their villages, not allowed to return
to their homes by order of the Israeli authorities.

137. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Israel in exercise of his right of reply.
138. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I have a simple question to put
to Mr. Kharlamov. When he refers to “occupied territories”, is he referring to the territories occupied by the Soviet
Union since the Second World War? Has he just announced
to the Council that his country is willing to give up a11those
occupied territories?

149. We, the Palestinian people of all faiths-Christians,
Moslems, Druzes-are
victims of Israeli terror against us.
We are victims because we have been deprived of a basic
human right: our right to live in our home in freedom and
dignity. If the representative of Menachem Begin is serious
about his crusade, he and his Government should allow the
Palestinian people to exercise their basic rights.

139. I ask you, Mr. President, to be good enough to
inquire of the representative of Kuwait whether his country
is now willing to accept Security Council resolution 242
(1967) and to abide by its provisions.

150. I have one word for those who speak of violence and
counter-violence: I think it is absurd to equate the violence
used by the victim with the violence used by the victimizer.
You cannot equate the thief with the police, the thief with
the victim. We, as Palestinians, have never expelled anyone
from his country. For centuries, we lived in peace in our
homeland, cultivating our land and building up a culture
for ourselves and our children. We would like to be afforded

140. Let him who comes in judgement come with clean
hands.
141. The PRESIDENT.
I call on the representative
Kuwait in exercise of his right of reply.

of
12

,

-,the opportunity to do that once again. Thus, our struggle is
basically intended and directed to create conditions under
which we can live in peace, building up a national existence
for ourselves and our children.
,151. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

.

153. The PRESIDENT:

There are no further speakers.

154. At the close of the 2163rd meeting, I appealed for
restraint on the part of all concerned so that hos::“ties could
be brought to an end through the efforts of the Commander
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. It is a
source of satisfaction to us all that this appeal has been
heeded.

I call on the representative of

152. Mr. TU&NI (Lebanon): I have nothing to add to
what has been said, but I should like to address one word to
the Secretary-General, who was not with us yesterday. I
should like to express my country’s sentiments of appreciation for all that he has been doing and for the assurances he
has given us today. I also wish to say that my country’s case
has been better stated by each and all the members of the
Council than it could be by me.

155. In my capacity as President of the Council, I appeal
to all concerned to make permanent the cessation of hostilities and to implement resolution 425 (1978) in all its parts.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

13

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Lea publications
des Nations
Units sont en vcnte dens lea libniries
d&oaitaires
du mondc entier. Infonnez-vour
sup&a de votre libraire
h : Nations Units. Section dea ventes. New York ou Genhe.
KAK

COMO

flO.lYWfTb

CONSECUIR

H3~AHHSl

OPl’AHH3AUHH

PL’BLICAClONES

DE LAS

Lss publicaciones
de las N&ones
Unidss
&An
buidoras
en todar partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas. SercUn de Ventas. Nucvn York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

fJNIES
et les agences
ou adresser.-vous

00-bEiViHEHHIJX

NACIONRS

HAUAH

L’NIDAS

en venta en librerlas
y cnsas dishe su lihrero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

79-700024ct0be~

1982-2.250
