S/2000/909

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2000
English
Original: French

Letter dated 21 September 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As you are aware, as my Special Adviser, Mr. Mohamed Sahnoun has been
actively engaged in efforts to help resolve the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia,
in particular by supporting the mediation efforts of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). The efforts of the OAU led to the signing of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities on 18 June 2000, and the United Nations has been engaged
in efforts to help implement the Agreement by deploying the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE).
A number of outstanding issues still remain to be addressed before a
comprehensive peace agreement can be agreed upon. It should be noted in this
connection that the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities links the termination of
the United Nations peacekeeping mission with the completion of the process of
delimitation and demarcation of the common border. It would be desirable for Mr.
Sahnoun to stay engaged in efforts to support the mediation efforts of OAU towards
a comprehensive peace agreement.
Mr. Sahnoun has also been following developments in other countries in the
Horn of Africa subregion, especially Somalia and the Sudan, and to represent me in
meetings on the two countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the IGAD Partners Forum. Regarding Somalia, notwithstanding the
major progress achieved in the Djibouti peace initiative on Somalia, much remains
to be done for the United Nations to assist the people of Somalia in achieving a
comprehensive settlement of the conflict in their country.
For these reasons, it is my intention to seek the extension of the appointment
of my Special Adviser until 31 December 2001.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

00-65983 (E) 260900
`````````

260900
