UN.lTEDNATIONs

TWENTY-SECOND

th

1
NEW

YEAR

MEETING:

13 JUNE 1967

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l359)

......... .I.. . . ... .. ..... .. . ..

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .

Page

1

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May I967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . . , . . , . . . .
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . a . . + . . . . . . .
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SlPV.1359

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates u reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of tie Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND FIFTY-NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 13 June 1.967, at 10.00 p.m.
Presi&~t: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark),
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 359)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering inter
national peace and security” (S/7907).
4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern IreIand addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0).
5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).
Adoption of the agenda
l7lc ogerzciawas adopted.
letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peaceand security” (S/7907)

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0)
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967)
1, The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, 1 shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council table; and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Kidron (Israel),
Mr. M. A, EE Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr, M. IL El-Furra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. S. Chanmas (Lebanon), Mr.
K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J. M.
Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. Al-Shahecn (Kuwait), Mc
M, Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took the
places resewed for them.
2. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, to whom I now give the floor.
3. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The Security Council is at a
crucial juncture because at stake is the very future of the
United Nations as an international Organization created to
preserve the international community against disintegration, against aggression, and to Iay down the rules of
contemporary international conduct, within international
co-operation.
4. This happens at a time when the Arab world is
witnessing, in the early summer of 1967, twenty-two years
after the establishment of the United Nations, what Europe
witnessed in the late summer of 1939. What we are facing
now is a neo-nazi onslaught, well prepared to realize its
dreams of expansion.
5, Has the stand of the Council vis-a-vis this Israel
conquest of Arab countries been on a level with this grave

responsibility, or compatible with these purposes? Does
not the attitude of indifferent spectators, after ten days of
Israel conquest, constitute a most dangerous precedent on
which the attention of the small States in the world should
focus, since they all, sooner or later, may fall victims to
unchecked, ruthless imperialist forces?

10. These are the dimensions of the struggle. These are the
forces that array themselves with Israel, i.et us give a
hypothetical example that can be applied to the situation
of Israel. Suppose that a battle arises between the white
minorities in Africa and all the African peoples. What
would be the outcome? Let our African brothers think
about this analogy very carefully, because, as the imperialist
potentialities
are the same, so are the strategy and the
outcome.

6. Most certainly, the pressure exerted by the United
States of America, in order to defeat any move in the
Council to condemn Israel and to check its aggression, has
been a decisive factor in the paralysis immobilizing
the
Council. And even at the time we are deliberating here,
crimes are being committed by the invaders: mass destruction on a large scale and crimes against the civilian
population. If these crimes being committed today are met
only by silence from members of the Council, will not
history attribute to the Council not only failure to fulfil its
duties, but complicity as well?

11. United States intervention is the force that Ieads the
struggle against the Third World. The representative of the
United States has, with some frequency, relt called upon to
remind the Council of the limitation of its competence with
respect to intervention into what he considers domestic
United States affairs.
12. It cannot be disputed that when the usual proprieties
between sovereign States fully obtain, the distinctions
which the United States representative has made are valid. I
believe most of us here are experienced enough in the rules
of diplomacy to respect the usual proprieties without such
frequent admonitions as the United States representative
has felt called upon to offer. If this fairly obvious
presumption of our individual competence is accepted, the
question must arise as to why, in the debates that have
proceeded here, there have been so many occasions when
something said has appeared to transgress generally understood proprieties.

7. In the hour of truth, how else can the silence of some
members be viewed? I cannot add much to the most
accurate description of this lamentable state of affairs,
given to the Council on 11 June by the representative of
Mali. He said:
“In my delegation’s view, this means that the Council is
failing in its duty, in a manner unworthy of such an
important body. Unhappily, some occult force seems to
be frustrating any attempt to reach a decision here. I am
bound to state, with regret, that this attitude on the part
of the Council, at a moment of such gravity and in the
light of the deteriorating situation in the Middle East, is
not only shameful but unworthy of this United Nations
organ. For too long now we have been offering the sorry
spectacle of a body which is not impotent, as some would
have it, but is guilty of tacit complicity in efforts to
undermine the prestige of the Council and of the United
Nations.” (1357th meeting, para. 69.1

13. My delegation has, from the outset, stated clearly that
what Syria was doing was of a defensive nature. We
therefore expressed the earnest hope that this Council, first,
would prevent the fighting which was initiated by Israel on
5 June, and then would bring the fighting to an end.
14. We have all been advised by the United States, with
some frequency during these trying debates, that these first
considerations of preventing and then of halting the war
must come first. And we have also been advised that it is
the position of the United States Government that when
the hostilities ceased, this Council, in a search for peace,
would then have the responsibility to confront basic and
fundamental causesof the conflict.

8. Is it not clear to any man of conscience that the
conflict is not merely between Arabs and Israelis? It is
between the Arab people, who fight to live, and all the
forces that put petroleum and strategy above morality and
human dignity, and want to, dictate the r&ime they must
adopt and the ideas they must embrace, as though the clock
had been turned back to the diplomacy of the nineteenth
century. As a matter of fact, this struggle today is the
struggle of the Third World, the struggle of all people who
want emancipation, the struggle of freedom in the world.

15. Those statements were repeated earlier today by the
representative of the United States in his intervention
(1358th meeting/. It is at this juncture, and taking the
representative of the United States at his word, that I now
feel free to address myself to the frequently raised question
of the proprieties and the competency of the Council to
discuss certain aspects of the problem which the United
States representative seems to want to avoid discussing, on
the grounds that they are internal and domestic United
States affairs.

9. To those who wonder how Israel can have succeeded in
its military operations, the answer is in its awareness of the
extent of the forces behind Israel: the backing-military,
political, material, financial-that
it received. Perhaps only
one example among thousands will suffice. The Israel
Minister of Finance is now, as I understand, in New York to
collect $200 million; the figure has since been raised, as we
understand it, to $1 billion. Let the Third World think
about this amount. How many African-Asian countries can
afford to raise this sum, and in how many years? What is
their economic potential that would allow them to put
aside for military defence, from their revenues, up to $1
billion, for example, an amount that Israel can coIlect in a
few months here?

16. In ventilating this problem here and now, I wish to
state in advance that the evidence I shall adduce is not
gathered from the propaganda speeches of either Israel
officials, Zionist demagoguery or electioneering addresses
of United States politicians. I state that in advance, and
with great emphasis, because what I have to say is based
upon the public, international law duly enacted by the
Israel Knesset, on definitive statements of responsible Israel
2

governmental officials who provide insights into the legisIative history of the Israel law I shall specify and upon
clearly evident public policies of the United States. The
distinction between evidence from such sources, on the one
hand, and propaganda from any source, on the other hand,
is crucially important. None of us wishes to attempt, even
by indirection, to invade the rights granted United States
citizens by their own laws and form of government. But we
who represent other nations in the United Nations also
cannot withhold comment when public policies of the
United States or any other nation affect the national
interests of our country.

Jewish people in the Diaspora; the State of Israel,
therefore, expects the co-operation of all Jews, as
individuals and groups, in building up the State and
assisting the immigration into it of the masses of the
people, and regards the unity of all sections of Jewry as
necessary for this purpose.“2
I submit that this may be one of the most unique
paragraphs in any legislation of any State which is a
Member of the United Nations.
20. The meaning of that language is clear. The Zionist
movement is a public body or an Israel Government organ.
Its activities in Israel are required to be in accordance not
only with broad statutory regulations of the country, but
also with departmental regulations and administrative
instructions as well.

17, What I have to say, therefore, is-in the opinion of my
Government-of vital interest to the Member States represented at this Security Council. It is relevant to the debate
an fundamentals of the Palestine problem in which we must
engage. And it is relevant to the frequent interventions of
the representative of the United States with respect to the
amenities and proprieties of international diplomacy which
we are admonished time and again to respect. These
amenities and proprieties, I said, would be respected if all
States maintained normal postures embracing the usually
recognized.respect for sovereignty.

21. What is the meaning of these facts and how are they
relevant to our debate? During the time that the Council
has been debating the fate of war and peace in Palestine and
the Middle East, this body, the United Jewish Appeal, has
been raising, as I stated before, $200 million as an
emergency measure, now to be raised to $1,000 million for
this institution of the Israel Government. True, the labels
on the packages which this $200 miIlion or the $1,000
million to be raised later is supposed to buy are things like
relief, construction and rescue. But the fact, supported by
incontrovertible legal evidence, is that the money will go to
the treasury of the State of Israel. I do not believe that it is
possible to construe this fantastic campaign in any sense
other than as helping to subsidize the mobilization of the
State of Israel, its occupation of Arab territory, its
conquest and invasion and perhaps the reconstruction of its
war damage.

18. But by its own duly enacted law, the State of Israel
flouts these amenities, as it flouts so much of the
established rules and laws of the international community.
My first piece of evidence supporting this contention goes
back to 24 November 19.52. On that day the Israel Knesset
enacted a piece of legislation known as the “World Zionist
Organization-Jewish
Agency for Palestine (Status) Law,
5713-1952”. The full and official text of this law is
published in English in the Govenment Year-book of
Israel. Let us look through a few articles of that law:

22. It is relevant to remind the Council of the slanderous
references to Arabs accompanying this campaign-which 1
have referred to-made daily in the strident newspaper
advertising and in some of the fund-raising speeches in
which Senators of the United States Congress and mayors
have participated and are participating and of this whole
campaign against the Arabs, which constitutes clear-cut
interference and intervention in the domestic affairs of the
Arab countries. Suffice it to mention that a United States
Senator found it necessary and possible yesterday-and
even legal-to fix the limits and the frontiers of the Arab
States and Israel.

“1, The State of Israel regards itself as the creation of
the entire Jewish people, and its gates are open, in
accordance with its laws, to every Jew wishing to
immigrate into it,
“2. The World Zionist Organization, from its foundation five decades ago, headed the movement and efforts
of the Jewish people to real&e the age-old vision of the
return to its homeland, and with the assistance of other
Jewish circles and bodies, carried the main responsibility
for establishing the State of Israel.
“3. The World Zionist Organization, which is also the
Jewish Agency for Palestine, takes care as before of
immigration and directs absorption and settlement projects in the State.“l

23. But the campaign for this staggering sum of money is
not the beginning or the end of the work of this institution
of the Israel Government which performs in the United
States what the State of Israel itself cannot do, to quote a
former Primer Minister of Israel. There can be little doubt,
as the Senate investigation by Senator Fulbright in 1963
showed, that this world Zionist structure poisoned the
minds of all the American people with respect to Arab
rights in Palestine. The vast sums of money collected, even
in normal years, somewhere in the neighbourhood of $70
million, as the United States Senate learned and put on
record, are used in part to influence the American Press,
television, academic institutions, colleges and all the media
of mass and even sophisticated information.

19. I submit that no understanding of the problem of
Palestine can be accurate without a full study of this law
which I have quoted. But it is particularly paragraph 5 of
this legislation which I wish to read out here in full:
“5. The mission of gathering in the exiles, which is the
central task of the State of Israel and the Zionist
movement in our days, requires constant efforts by the
1 Government Year-book, 5 714 (1953-4), (Jerusalem,Government

Printer, 19531,p. 243.

2 Ibid., p. 244.

3

Council a clear-cut statement about the attitude of the
United States Government, which has not changed in tile
last twenty years, since the beginning of the Arab-Israel
conflict, with regard to the world Zionist movement, &tiler
that movement constitutes, as I have proved it to be and as
in fact it is, an institution, an organic part of a foreign
Government, and in that caseit could be removed from tllc
life of the United States, or if permitted as a foreign
instrumentality, as this law has proved, then the conspiracy
between the United States Government and the world
Zionist movement is categorically established.

24. There is more evidence for all this. But perhaps I have
submitted enough for my purpose at this time. These funds
are tax-deductible by the laws of the United States. That is
certainly an American prerogative. But the exercise of it
also makes these funds part of the public funds and relates
them to public policy.
25. It is also United States public policy to tolerate and
endorse the American branches of the World Zionist
Organization or Jewish Agency or both of them. That, too,
is an American prerogative. But I do submit that the
representative of the United States, quite properly seeking
to defend the good name of his Government and the
integrity of the rights of its citizens here, cannot have it
both ways. The Government of the United States cannot
tolerate, encourage and even indirectly subsidize a specifically defined institution of the belligerent Government of
the State of Israel and, at the same time, ask representatives
of other belligerents or their friends at this table to grant
immunity to the public policy and the governmental
officials which permit the State of Israel through Zionist
establishments to do inside the, United States what the
State of Israel wants to achieve in this country. While the
representative of the United States has been proclaiming his
country’s neutrality-or whatever word was eventually used
to describe the United States position-his
country in
public policy and indirectly with public FLmds has been
fully, even munificently, supporting one protagonist in this
war. And the support is not only in terms of words, but in
terms of material substance and political agitation, not of
innocent, impartially informed United States citizens, but
political agitation, organized, directed, focussed and timed
by the “institution” of the Government of the State of
Israel known as the World Zionist Organization and/or
Jewish Agency for Israel or Palestine.

29. The old myth of American guarantee of frontiers and
peace in the Middle East was exposed by America itself
when the United States declared that it was no longer
committed to former attitudes with respect to the borders,
On the contrary, we hear today from different quarters that
these boundaries have become inadequate and the Arab
countries should accept the political reality. Real-politik is
a term that recalls many unhappy phases of history, evenin
our own lifetime. We are confronted today with a
tragedy-an invasion and occupation prosecuted by imperialist forces. We request the Council to discharge its
responsibilities by condemning Israel and by demanding
that Israel evacuate its forces and put an end to this
international act of piracy. We do not accept invasion. We
shall resort to whatever energies the Arab people can
muster against it, today and in the future. All we can sayis
that the Arab people are passing through disaster, but the
disaster will not last forever. Throughout history the Arab
people have witnessed many disasters and tomorrow is
another day. We should like to remind the Council of this
and, at the same time, the United States and the other
Western nations.
30. This ordeal will always remain vivid. The Arab people
will bear friendship towards its friends and enmity towards
its enemies, and the future will decide the outcome.

26. The time has come in the unhappy history of the
Palestine problem to speak plainly. And I say plainly and
calmly out of all the pain, the shambles, the sufferings, the
tragedies and the shattered international relations, let the
United States also speak plainly. We Arabs do not ask the
United States to take our side. We know that this has been,
is and will remain impossible. Nor are we in our national
freedom to be expected to give blank cheques to the United
States or any other Power. But it is too much for the
United States to sit at this table of aspiring peacemakers to
allow the institutions of my country’s enemy to operate
inside the United States with impunity,
and then to
reprimand us Arabs when we refer to this impropriety and
inequity. The least that could be requested is to ask the
United States Government to adopt in the circumstances an
objective, even a minimum of an objective, policy in the
face of a naked aggression recognized by the aggressors
themselves.

31. The United States delegation has submitted a draft
resolution in document S/7952/Rev.2 dated 9 June. Any
resolution that does not clearly condemn Israel and provide
for the withdrawal of forces from Arab countries falls short
of meeting the situation, and lessening its dangerous
implicalions for the peace of the world and for the survival
of the United Nations. On the other hand, my Government
and delegation fully support the draft resolution submitted
by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, because it
actually meets the situation, condemns the aggressorclearly
and asks for the withdrawal of the invading forces.
32. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I wish to be as brief as I
can, but even at this late hour I cannot help but refer to the
tragic loss of human life suffered by a number of nations as
a result of this short but violent war0 The seriousnessof
those losses, which are only now beginning to be revealed,
should evoke from us not only profound sympathy, but
also the desire to take most seriously the responsibilities we
have in this Council.

27. In the light of the evidence supplied-and unless the
representative of the United States has an answer with
equally valid and legal documentation-I
must say that I
shall continue to regard relevant references to Zionist
activities in the United States to be proper, relevant and
material in the context of this debate.

33. Several representatives have made references to the
responsibilities of members of this Council. In the view of 1
the Canadian delegation, the approach to which we are I
committed under the Charter and our responsibilities arc

28. On the other hand, we are entitled in all due respect to
ask the representative of the United States to give this
4

I

clear, Article 2 cf the Charter, in its third principle, enjoins
that :

the Charter and history have given them, and co-operate in
ff nding positive solutions.

“‘All Members shall settle their international disputes by
peaceful means in such a manner that international peace
and security, and justice, are not endangered.”

39. It is in the light of this approach that the Canadian
delegation will determine its position on the draft resolution on which the Soviet representative has asked for a
vote.

It is that principle which, in the view of my delegation,
should guide action in the Council and on the part of the
parties most directly concerned at this time. If this
Organization is not concerned with the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the prevention of war and threats of war,
then what, I ask, is its purpose?

40. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Jordan.

I now give the floor to the

41. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I have three observations
to make in reply to the statement made by my colleague,
Mr. Goldberg, this afternoon. The first observation relates
to the territorial integrity of all nations of the Middle East.
I raised this qnestion before, and I raise it again. When the
term “territorial integrity” is used, I often wonder what is
the definition
of that term, Territorial integrity was
violated, and we have neither heard nor seen any move to
protect the territorial integrity of Jordan. Our lands were
invaded and a substantial part of Jordan was occupied
illegally. But despite the assnrances about the territorial
integrity of all nations of the Middle East, nothing was
done to prevent an act of aggression against Jordan Of
course, the Sixth Fleet was there; it was manoeuvring to
show its presence. But when we found that we had become
subjected to aggression and that the Sixth Fleet stood idly
by doing nothing to protect the territorial integrity of
Jordan, we wondered whether it was intended to safeguard
the members of the Middle East or whether it wasthere as
an assurance for the Israel aggression.

34, It is very difficult, in the light of that approach, to see
what useful purpose will be served by an attempt to force a
vote upon the draft resolution in document S/7951/Rev,2.
While there are aspects, no doubt, of that draft resolution
which must indeed be dealt with by the Council, they
should be dealt with in a manner which will ensure the
successful outcome of our work,
35. The Canadian delegation is interested in achieving
practical and lasting results which we believe the Council
should seek by stages. The cease-fire calls by this Council
are, to the best of our knowledge, being respected by all the
parties concerned. This objective, as we all agreed, was only
a first step, a step which must be followed by other steps.
On this point, I entirely agree with the Soviet representative, but, in the view of the Canadian delegation, those
other steps which will pave the way to a peaceful
settlement of the burning issues which have constantly
inflamed the situation in the Near East, must clearly
include, firstly, an arrangement for the disengagement and
withdrawal of the forces; secondly, immediate attention to
the urgent “human problem” described by the representative of Jordan last week and again today, and, thirdly,
the development of understandings which will, now that
the smoke of battle is clearing away, guarantee the vital
interests of all the States in the Near East.

42. My second question relates to the question of
knowledge. It can be argued that the United States bad no
information about the invasion. My delegation feels that
the United States, with the Liberty ship standing there for a
purpose, had good reason to believe that the Israelis were
contemplating aggression against Jordan.
43. My third point relates to the question of pressure
groups, and this is my last point, Reference was made to a
certain Arab&nerican
society, Dr. Mehdi’s organization.
This is a purely American organization, and we have
nothing against purely American organizations. There is the
American Council for Judaism, and this is an American
organization. It is an organization which has the interests of
the Americans at heart. We have nothing against organizations of this kind, whether they be Arab, Jewish, Polish
or whatnot. We do have every objection to a destructive
expansionist movement which works for certain plans and
goals which are not related to the United States people and
Government, but to a foreign Power, and I am referring to
Israel,

36. Canada believes that work along these lines should he
the focus of our efforts, and any proposal which deals with
these matters in an objective and balanced way and which
would advance us towards a peaceful solution will gain the
support of the Canadian delegation.
37. On this point, I would again like to mention the ides
raised by several speakers of the designation and dispatch to
the area of a special representative of the Secretary-General,
A suitably qualified representative could, I believe, be of
great assistancein reviewing the application of the cease-fire
and looking into the situation in general, He could report to
the Council on an urgent basis. The United Nations, by
means of UNTSO, is already playing a valuable role, and
that role could be made more useful still if a special
representative were appointed as a matter of urgency.

44, The Zionist movement has nothing in common with
any United States organlzation; it has everything in
comman with Nazism, and I would hope that either the
Israel representative here or any other member of this
Council will refute the evidence. I maintain that both
Nazism and Zionism have everything in common. They
both hold to the concept of race, Both Nazism and Zionism
hold to the concept of nazi supremacy and Zionist chosen
people, The third element is that both Nazism and Zionism
hold to the concept of Lebensroum. The Zionists want a

3X. I must also say that it is the firmly held view of my
Government that the permanent members of the Council
should concert their actions. They should not work in a
way which divides the Council and diminishes the chances
of any useful results emerging from our work..They must,
on the contrary, exercise the special responsibilities which
5

master indefinitely in the regions it now occupies. The first
positive step towards peace would be the unconditional
withdrawal of the Israel troops to their positions of 4 June
1967.

space to be made for the gathering of exiles from all over
the world into Palestine.
45. What the Security Council is discussing now is a
glaring example of an act of aggression and expansionism.
The same thing happened in 1956; it did not work. There
was the same thing in 1947, and it is still on the move. The
problem before the Council proves the point which I am
raising. Both Nazism and Zionism hold to the concept of
the fifth column. The Nazis used to have a fifth column,
and the Zionists in the United States have pressure groups;
they have a city within every city and they have a town
within every town.

52. In the light of these considerations, my delegation
considers that the least the Council can do is to adopt the
Soviet draft resolution [S/7951/Rev.2]
unanimously. My
delegation proposes that the Council should vote on this
draft resolution immediately. We believe that any delay in
the adoption of this draft resolution by the Council would
perpetuate the present serious situation in the Middle East,
In view of all the statements of good intentions which have
been made around this table, we believe that we will be able
to adopt this draft resolution unanimously.

4G. They have a pressure group within every single branch
of the United States Government. These are facts. Let the
Israelis refute a single one of them, Therefore, a movement
of this destructive purpose should not be permitted to
function against the interests of both the Arab people and
the American people; a movement which has this expansionist design aimed at displacing my people, expanding in
our lands, displacing more of our people, acquiring m.ore of
our towns and cities-this movement should not be permitted to function in the United States.

53. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker before we adjourn
tonight is the representative of the United States, to whom
I now give the floor in exercise of his right of reply.
54. Mr. GOLDBERG
try to be very brief.

(United States of America): I shall

55. The representative of the United Arab Republic, our
esteemed friend and colleague Mr. El Kony, this evening
repeated unwarranted allegations that the United States
supported and encouraged the recent hostilities in the
Middle East and was guilty of collusion. That is simply not
true. No member of this Council has made greater efforts
than the United States, both in the Council and outside the
Council, to prevent this conflict, The United States simply
has not intervened in any way in this conflict. That, perhaps, is also my reply to what our friend and colleague, Mr.
El-Farra, has said. I had not assumed that any intervention
of any sort by the United States would have been regarded
as appropriate or proper in the circumstances of the present
conflict.

47. Those were the points which I wished to raise before
this Council.
48. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): It is
confirmed that Israel is continuing its conquest and
occupation of Arab territories. The most recent statements
by the Israel leaders reveal Israel’s intention to remain in
the Arab countries, which it now controls as a result ,of the
advantage gained by its surprise attack. There is talk that it
will administer those territories, and the exploitable
resources are already being surveyed. Israel, encouraged by
the silence and the passive collusion of this Council, is
already behaving like a conqueror in the Arab lands.

56. As for the remarks of the representative of Syria, Mr.
Tomeh, who has asserted the idea that the Israel military
establishment has been sustained by United States military
and economic aid, the fact is that United States military aid
to the Arab States in the last twenty years has been more
than ten times the amount of United States military aid to
Israel. I repeat, more than ten times the amount. As for
economic aid afforded by the United States Government,
the amount given to Arab States in the past twenty years
has been almost three times that given to Israel; and this aid
has been made available as part of our desire to maintain
friendly and co-operative relations with all countries in the
area.

49. It must, however, be recognized that Israel can never
retain indefinitely
its control over the regions it now
occupies, It will have to abandon the lands it has invaded as
a result of its surprise attack, Those who desire peace in the
Middle East must understand here and now that Israel will
be forced to evacuate the lands it has occupied by a future
war, It is thus in the interest of peace and of the whole
international community that Israel should abandon those
lands now. That is the only way to avoid an inevitable war.
50. The Israel aggression is a precedent which my delegation most severely, as it does any act of force. This
aggression is a defiance of our Organization, an insult to the
Charter, and a warning to the Third World and to Africa.
The impunity enjoyed by Israel after its aggression is an
encouragement and a guarantee that the Council would
apparently be ready to grant to any future aggressor.

57. It is true that many United States citizens have made
generous gifts to Israel, That is their right as individuals.
And it is also true, if we want to keep the record
completely straight, that the Arab States have received
substantial aid, both economic and military, from the
Soviet Union, which Israel has not, This is also a part of the
record of the past twenty years.

51, Those who think that it is for Israel, which is now in a
strong position, to undertake negotiations with the Arab
countries with a view to achieving a stable peace are
deluding themselves and mortgaging Israel’s future in the
midst of the Arab world, Everyone should realize that there
will never be a stable peace in the Middle East based on
present conditions, and that Israel will be unable to remain

58. But really, all of these things have no bearing
immediately on the basic point, that the United States
Government, as a matter of public policy, has helped both
the Arab States and Israel over the past twenty years, and
6

that the amount accorded to the Arab States has been
substantially greater than that accorded to Israel.

witn all members before this meeting and I think it wasthe
general understanding that there would be no more
speeches. Is there any objection to our adjourning now?

59. It is our desire-and I said this earlier in the debate-to
have the economic conditions of the whole area improved
and to play a constructive role in the improvement of those
economic conditions in the entire area.

62. Mr. TARABANOV (Bulgaria): Mr. President, I seethat
there is a request from the Permanent Representative of
Syria to exercise his right of reply. Do you not think it
would be possible to give him the floor for that right of
reply?

60. With respect to the statements made by our colleague
Mr. Fedorenko, he has given a most distorted interpretation
to our draft resolution. If I heard him correctly, he said
that unless the territorial demands of Israel on the United
Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan are met, there will be an
explosive situation and war-that this is the effect of our
draft resolution. This is, to say the least, a gross and
flagrant distortion of our draft resolution and the statement
I made to the Council, which speaks for itself, and our
desire to bring about the conditions that can create the
basis for a just, equitable and peaceful solution to the
conflict.

63. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Bulgaria for calling it to my attention. I repeat what I said,
that-1 had consultations before the meeting and it was the
general understanding of members” of this Council that
there should be no more speeches. Having said that, I asked
whether there was any objection.
64. Is there any objection? Does anyone want to speak?
Since that is not the case, the meeting is adjourned until 11
o’clock tomorrow morning.

61. The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection, I shall now
adioum the meeting until 11 o’clock tomorrow. I consulted

The meeting rose at 10.55 p.m.

7

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publicotions.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
d&paritaires
du
Nations

Unies,

KAK

IlOJlY~MTb

be

obtained
or write

from
bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

des
monde
Section

PUBLICATIONS

Notions
entier.
des

DES NATIONS

Unies
sont
Informez-vous

venter,

New

M3AAHMFI

CONSEGUIR

York

ou Genbve.

OPrAHM3AlJMM

Las publicaciones

PUBLICACIONES
de

DE LAS

las Nociones

Unidos

en todor
partes
del mundo.
Consulle
Ventos,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

UNIES

en vente
dons
ler librairies
et ler ogences
oup&s
de volre
libroirie
ou odrersez-vous
b:

IkI,!(iiIIWI
O~KIIIII~~~~II~
Ohe~RI?OIlIIbIX
hI@
~WCIITCTIEIX
no BCCY pafiorrax
a111pa. IIaBofirrTe
YaramIe
II.UI IIIII~IT~
no aqmy
: OpraIIn3aym
npoAax;c
n3Aamfi,
HbwflopI{
mn JSCenena.

COMO

throughout
New York

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAuMti

MO)IiIIO KyIlrITh
II I~II~iiiIIhIX
3IartUm~X
A
cnpamm
06 Ira+qaImIX
R naumc
IiIIItiIiHOH
&~?~IIIICIIII~X
IIaqIfii,
CeKqrIH
no

NACIONES

ertcin

en vento

o su librero

o dirijase

0.50 (or equivalent

UNIDAS
en librerias

in other

Y sosos

ok Nociones

currencies)

Unidar,

distribuidoms
Secci6n

de

10771-November

1970-2,100
