S/PV.7430

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7430th meeting

Tuesday, 21 April 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Judeh/Mr. Hmoud/Mrs. Kawar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jordan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

15-11163 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1511163*

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Maldives,
Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine,
Qatar and Zimbabwe to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Deputy
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine
to the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Fodé Seck, Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am grateful to the
Kingdom of Jordan for organizing today’s meeting. It
comes at yet another crucial period in the evolution of

2/67

21/04/2015

the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, as the whole region is
threatened by violent conflicts and extremism.
Over the years, we have seen determined efforts
to achieve a comprehensive, negotiated peace based on
a two-State solution. Instead of peace, however, there
have been decades of missed opportunities and failures
that have come at an enormous human cost. The
prospect of a two-State solution continues to recede,
with potentially explosive consequences. In the coming
weeks, a new Israeli Government will be formed. I
strongly urge the incoming Government to reaffirm
Israel’s commitment to the two-State solution and to
take credible steps to foster an environment conducive
to a return to meaningful negotiations, including a
freeze of settlement activity.
I welcome the agreement reached last week
between the Palestinian Authority and the Government
of Israel, under which Israel has now transferred more
than $470 million in revenues collected on behalf of
the Palestinian Authority. I wish to underline, however,
that the recurrent withholding of such revenues is
counterproductive and seriously undermines the
ability of the Government of Palestine to carry out its
responsibilities. I urge the parties to find a sustainable
solution on tax collection in line with the Paris Protocol
of the Oslo Accords.
Seven months since my last visit to Gaza, I continue
to be concerned by the fragile security situation, the
lack of progress on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and
the pace of reconstruction. Gaza is facing a crushing
financial crisis. Public sector employees remain
unpaid. The impact of the conflict and of extreme
poverty on Palestinians in Gaza has been severe. I
urge the international community to support a second
humanitarian payment to Palestinian civil servants in
Gaza as an integral part of the necessary and agreed
crucial reforms.
I welcome ongoing efforts to promote Palestinian
reconciliation. The Government of National Consensus
must assume its leadership of Gaza, including control
of border crossings. Until the crossings are fully
reopened within the framework of resolution 1860
(2009), the temporary Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
shall continue to serve as a critical tool to alleviate the
suffering of Gaza’s people. To date, the Mechanism
has enabled approximately 70 per cent of households
in need of shelter repairs to procure the necessary
materials. Additionally, 60 of 130 projects funded by
the international community and the private sector have
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

been approved by Israel, with six of these currently
under way.
These are promising developments, yet the
needs remain enormous. Despite the generosity of
some donors, critical funding gaps threaten stability.
Humanitarian agencies are struggling to raise the
$720 million needed for temporary shelters for 100,000
internally displaced people. Without immediate
funding, the World Food Programme will be forced to
suspend its food assistance to 95,000 Palestinians in
Gaza by July. Gaza’s water and energy supply is also
perilously unstable, with no long-term solution in sight.
I again urge donors to fulfil pledges made in Cairo last
October.
In the West Bank, clashes between Israeli
security forces and Palestinians continue, along with
the destruction of Palestinian-owned structures.
Administrative detentions are increasing at an alarming
pace, including the recent arrest of and charges against
a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council. Such
realities feed frustration and tension in a vicious cycle
that undermines the path to peace. Both sides need to
see more constructive actions, such as Israel’s recent
approval of a master plan for building 2,500 housing
units and public buildings for the Palestinian population
in East Jerusalem. Such steps can help to reduce
pressure, but they also need to lead to tangible results.
The international community must do more to
promote a return to negotiations that will end nearly
half a century of occupation and allow two States,
Israel and Palestine, to live side by side in security and
peace. I am encouraged by current discussions among
Member States. The United Nations is committed to
supporting such efforts.
Both sides face difficult choices. But one choice
stands above all others: whether to choose peace or
the death, destruction and suffering that have defined
the conflict for far too long. Too many lives have been
lost, too many families have been destroyed, too many
livelihoods have been shattered and too much distrust
has been sown. Ultimately, the parties themselves must
demonstrate the commitment and courage necessary to
chart a viable course towards a better future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.

S/PV.7430

Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine) (spoke in
Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the State of
Palestine, allow me to thank you, Your Excellency
Mr. Nasser Judeh, Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, for
presiding over this important meeting of the Security
Council. We also congratulate Jordan on its presidency.
We very much appreciate the Jordanian delegation’s
efforts to address the many critical issues on the
Security Council’s agenda, including its principled,
unwavering support for the just cause of Palestine.
(spoke in English)
We also express our appreciation to the delegation
of France for its skilled leadership of the Security
Council during the month of March. We thank His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing and his unrelenting calls and efforts for peace,
humanity and justice. We congratulate his new Special
Representative and Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, on his appointment, and we wish him
success and affirm our readiness to cooperate with
his efforts. We also reiterate our deep appreciatcion to
Mr. Robert Serry for his years of service. We recognize
his efforts in support of the Palestinian people and
Government through many critical periods during his
tenure, including three brutal Israeli wars against Gaza,
as well as his constant efforts to advance solutions to
emerging problems and to promote peace, including his
impassioned entreaties to the Council to act to bring an
end to this devastating conflict, which remains a threat
to international peace and security.
Regrettably, our collective appeals to the Security
Council have been unanswered, with all initiatives for
serious action thwarted, the latest on 30 December 2014.
The failure to act has greatly fostered Israel’s impunity
and compounded the conflict, with the heaviest price
paid in human suffering and in the credibility of the
international system.
As we mark next month 67 years since the Al-Nakba
of 1948, and mark in June 48 years since the 1967 Israeli
occupation began, the tragic irony of those dates should
not go unnoticed. The Palestinian people are enduring
the longest occupation in modern history, and over
5 million Palestine refugees have been enduring nearly
seven decades of exile. They are a people struggling
to preserve their national identity and existence in the
face of overwhelming challenges in their ongoing quest
for liberation. Their crisis has become untenable; it has
become existential.

15-111633/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

When Palestinians in Gaza are mercilessly
slaughtered and maimed by the Israeli occupying forces
in their homes, United Nations schools, playgrounds
and hospitals; when mothers and fathers are killed
and 1,500 children are orphaned in the course of 51
days; when destruction and humanitarian disaster are
wantonly inflicted on them; when they are subjugated
to a dehumanizing, suffocating blockade, crippling
their society, forcing them to live in poverty in the
ruins of their communities, and isolating them from the
entire world — the crisis is existential.
When they are killed or injured by Israeli
occupying forces in peaceful protests for simply
demanding freedom and an end to occupation; when
their land is stolen and colonized; when their homes are
demolished and they are dispossessed, impoverished
and forcibly displaced; when they are terrorized by
extremist settlers; when their religions are insulted and
their religious sites, including mosques and churches
in their Holy City of Jerusalem, are desecrated; when
thousands of civilians, including children, are detained
and imprisoned, their minds and bodies tortured, their
families broken — the crisis is existential.
When the State of Israel legislates more than 50
discriminatory and racist laws against its Palestinian
Arab citizens, and constantly attempts to negate their
identity and history; when that State’s political, religious
and military leaders voice threatening diatribes against
them, including calls to “chop off heads with axes” of
those who oppose their extremist policies, and calls
for the transfer of Palestinian Arabs — the crisis is
existential.
When a refugee camp in Syria, where Palestine
refugees have peaceably resided for more than 60 years
awaiting a solution to their plight, is ravaged by war
and siege, comes under barbaric assault of terrorists of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and is described
by the Secretary-General as “the deepest circle of
hell”, with children, women and men forced to flee
for their lives, dispersed and traumatized once again;
when Palestinians, whose resilience is legendary, are
drowning in the waters of the Mediterranean Sea, along
with others attempting to escape war and poverty — the
crisis is existential.
How many indignities, injustices and tragedies
must one people endure? How far must the situation
deteriorate before the Security Council upholds its
Charter duties and its own resolutions to contribute
to a just and lasting solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
4/67

21/04/2015

conflict and to peace and security in our region? How
long will Israel, the occupying Power, be permitted to
deny the Palestinian people their rights and freedom
without consequence? How long will Israel ignore the
bold Arab Peace Initiative, insisting instead to impose
endless conflict?
When we have reached this point — the depths of
crisis so grave — the Security Council’s deliberations
on the question of Palestine should be anything but
routine, and the sense of urgency should be great.
There is unanimity that the situation is unsustainable
and that a solution must be achieved without delay.
The exception is Israel, which remains intransigent,
continuing to believe it is a State above the law that
can perpetrate crimes and obstruct peace with zero
accountability, while falsely believing that the conflict
can be managed and that the occupation can continue
indefinitely. This was starkly reaffirmed last month
when the two-State solution, enshrined in Council
resolutions from 242 (1967) onward, was openly
ridiculed and tossed aside by the Israeli Prime Minister
during the elections, further proving Israel’s deceit
throughout years of negotiations.
Faced with this situation, will the Council work to
salvage that solution, or allow it to disintegrate, triggering
a frantic drive for alternative solutions — foremost the
one-State — and guaranteeing many more years of
violent conflict and suffering?
We believe it is time for leadership by the Council.
The fundamental parameters of the two-State solution
have long been clear and globally endorsed. It must be
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. It must
be based on the 4 June 1967 borders. Israel must fully
withdraw from the Palestinian territory occupied in
1967, including East Jerusalem, and end its occupation
in all manifestations, including the illegal settlement
enterprise. A just solution must be found for the status
of Jerusalem as the capital of two States. And a just
solution must be achieved to the Palestine refugee
question based on resolution 194 (III) and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
There is also broad agreement that creating a
credible political horizon requires setting a time
frame to end to the Israeli occupation. The Palestinian
people need to believe — and be given hope — that the
occupation will end. And, admitting the failure of more
than 20 years of negotiations, it is widely agreed that
the political process should not be reincarnated and that
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

an international conference and framework of support
for negotiations would be a more rational, viable path
towards a solution. Moreover, there is agreement that
the critical situation in Gaza cannot be ignored in any
attempts to move a political process forward.
As we consider that consensus, we recall that
there was no actual consensus in 1947, and yet the
international community somehow found the political
will to act, adopting General Assembly resolution
181 (II), which partitioned Mandate Palestine and
created the State of Israel. In 2015, however, there is
an international consensus. Based on that consensus,
in which 135 countries recognize the State of Palestine
and European Parliaments call on their Governments to
accord official recognition as an investment in saving
and actualizing the two-State solution, we believe it is
high time for the international community to exert the
political will necessary to make the two-State solution
a reality, to achieve the independence of the State of
Palestine, to rectify the historic injustice inflicted
on the Palestinian people and to establish genuine
Palestinian-Israeli peace and coexistence.
We therefore appeal to the Security Council to
seriously respond to this crisis and to assist the parties
to overcome the dangerous impasse. A meaningful
draft resolution must be adopted and, more important,
the determination must be found to implement the
international will for the achievement of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace, whereby the State
of Palestine and the State of Israel can live in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders.
We commend France’s initiative in that regard, in
close coordination with the Arab Ministerial Followup Committee, and the widespread calls by Member
States for the Council to uphold its duties and its
clear, principled expressions of support and readiness
to contribute to creating a credible political horizon.
Palestine stands ready to cooperate with those efforts.
We we reaffirm our commitment to pursuing a peaceful,
political, diplomatic and legal path to the realization
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, a
just, comprehensive peace that fulfills that people’s
legitimate national aspirations to live in freedom and
dignity in their State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, as well as a just solution for the Palestine
refugees.
Beyond a political process, the situation on the
ground must change. Immediate efforts are needed
to stem the deterioration of the situation before the

S/PV.7430

situation completely destabilizes and slips beyond
our reach. The international community must act
urgently to compel Israel to cease its illegal policies
and practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, which, in 2014, witnessed the
highest civilian death toll since the occupation began
in 1967. Hollow words and promises will not suffice.
The international community must demand that the
new Israeli Government demonstrate its intentions and
commitment to peace and respect for international law.
Israel must cease its settlement activities in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. We cannot have a
two-State solution while Israel continues to actively
and illegally alter the demographic and physical
situation, and entrench the occupation. It must cease
the confiscation of Palestinian land, the construction
of settlements and the wall, the demolition of homes
and the forced displacement of civilians. It must bring a
halt to the terror, violence, provocations and incitement
by its settlers, including in occupied East Jerusalem
and towards the Al-Aqsa Mosque — a toxic situation
that could erupt at any moment, including in a religious
conflict. Israel must end the arrest and detention of
Palestinians, including children, and stop its abuse of
prisoners and detainees and act forthwith to release
them. It must cease its constant attempts to undermine
the Palestinian Government and institutions.
In the Gaza Strip, the scars of war must be
healed. Emergency efforts are needed to alleviate the
humanitarian disaster wrought by the Israeli war. Recent
reports, including by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), UNICEF, and the Association
of International Development Agencies, attest to the
dangers of this festering crisis, and we must heed
the warnings. The illegal Israeli blockade must end,
and Gaza’s crossings must be opened for unimpeded
humanitarian access, the sustained movement of
persons and goods into and out of Gaza and a link with
the West Bank. Reconstruction is imperative, as more
than 110,000 people remain internally displaced. The
fuel and water crises must also be addressed.
We appeal to donors to honour reconstruction
pledges, and we recognize the generosity of donors who
have done so. We also appeal for continued support to the
Palestinian Government of National Consensus, under
the leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime
Minister Rami Hamdallah, to empower it to assume full
responsibility in Gaza and play its role in addressing the

15-111635/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

many challenges. All of that is essential for rebuilding
Gaza, reviving its destroyed economy and giving hope
to our people. The alternative is allowing desperation,
anger and radicalization to increase, especially among
our large youth population, making inevitable another
implosion, which must be averted at all costs.
We also reiterate our call for protection for the
Palestinian people. They are a defenceless civilian
population entitled to protection under international
humanitarian law and to avail themselves of all the
protections of international law. That is the primary
reason for our accession to the Geneva Conventions,
core human rights instruments and other international
treaties, including the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. We will not cease calling, and working,
for the protection of our people, accountability for all
the Israeli war crimes perpetrated against them, and
justice for the victims.
Before concluding, I must add a few words about
the crisis of Palestine refugees in Syria, particularly in
the Yarmouk refugee camp. The conflict in Syria has
rendered their situation precarious, and their needs for
assistance and protection are immense. We welcome
the press statement issued yesterday by the Council,
as well as the press elements of 6 April focusing on
Yarmouk. We recall resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014). We urge full compliance with
their provisions. The obligation to protect civilians
in situations of armed conflict must be respected by
all parties. We reiterate the call for unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access and assistance to the
camp’s residents and those displaced from Yarmouk,
and for the safe temporary relocation of any civilians
seeking refuge from the violence. We recognize the
efforts of UNRWA Commissioner-General Pierre
Krähenbühl during this crisis, including his important
Council briefings and visits to Yarmouk, and are
grateful for the valiant efforts of UNRWA staff, along
with partners in the field, in providing support to the
Palestine refugees in Syria and in the neighboring
countries of Lebanon and Jordan, despite extremely
difficult and unstable circumstances. We urge donors
to respond to UNRWA emergency appeals as swiftly
and generously as possible, while fully recognizing the
long-standing support of the international community
and host Governments over the decades. Today, we also
reaffirm the official position of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to maintain the neutrality of the Palestine
refugee camps in Syria and the refusal to be drawn
into the conflict. The Palestinian leadership also fully
6/67

21/04/2015

shares the international community’s hopes for a
political solution to end the horrific conflict in Syria.
In conclusion, we stress that this tragic crisis
reconfirms the real vulnerability of the Palestine
refugees and the need for a just solution to their plight
in the context of the Palestinian-Israeli and Arab-Israeli
peace that we continue to seek. Although hopes for
peace have diminished, our conviction in the justness
of our cause and our commitment to peace remain
resolute. We respectfully implore all the members of
the Security Council seated at this table to demonstrate
the responsibility and leadership needed to open the
doors for peace, to revive hope and to advance these
goals as both a matter of urgency and necessity for our
region and our world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his briefing. I also want to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriate
Affairs of Jordan for being here today to preside over
this special meeting.
Earlier this month, Jews throughout the world
celebrated Passover, which commemorates the
liberation of the ancient Jews from enslavement and
the birth of the Jewish nation. The Seder begins with
the youngest child in the family asking four questions,
also known as Ma Nish’tana. The child asks “What
has changed and why is this night different from all
other nights?” We answer the questions by recounting
the story of how freedom triumphed over oppression.
Those lessons are as relevant today as they were 3,000
years ago. For centuries, the Jewish people longed for,
prayed for and fought for the right to be free. Israel is
the realization of those dreams, and Passover reminds
us that we can never take those freedoms for granted.
Since our last debate on this topic (see S/PV.7360),
the chaos in our region has only grown worse.
Another nation State has been overrun by radical
extremists — first Syria, then Iraq, then Libya and
now Yemen. The extreme elements in our region
have displayed a level of barbarism that is shocking,
even by Middle Eastern standards. The situation has
become so dire that, in a rare display of unity, the
Arab leaders have joined forces. It should come as no
surprise that they have lashed out with little regard for
the consequences. The Saudi-led air strikes in Yemen
have hit humanitarian aid convoys, hospitals, schools

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and civilian neighbourhoods and left entire families
dead. Yet there have been zero Human Rights Council
condemnations and zero calls for commissions of
inquiry. If the novelist Jane Austen were writing about
the United Nations today, the book could be called
Pride and Prejudice, but a more fitting title would be
Hypocrisy and Double Standards. One would think that
some of the Arab nations would demand justice. After
all, the Saudi Ambassador was quick to stand at the side
of the Palestinian representative during last summer’s
Gaza conflict and preach about the value of civilian
life. The truth of the matter is that when Israel is at the
heart of a crisis, the Arabs do not miss a beat. But when
fingers cannot be pointed at Israel, some Arab nations
show themselves to be downright heartless.
On Passover we ask what has changed. Today, I am
here to tell the Council that unless it stops singling out
Israel, the only democracy in the Middle East, and starts
focusing on the real threats in our region, nothing will
change. Just as we ask four questions on Passover to tell
the sad story of freedom, today I offer four questions to
explain why freedom and peace remain a distant dream
in the Middle East.
The first question is: What has changed with regard
to Iran? The answer is that Iran is more dangerous today
than it has ever been before. Make no mistake — Iran
is not only a threat to Israel, and it is not only a threat
to the Middle East. It is a threat to the entire world.
Iran is the engine of aggression behind the chaos in our
region. It has supplied Hizbullah, which today has more
than 120,000 missiles hidden in and within civilian
neighbourhoods. Hizbullah is playing a dangerous game
of Russian roulette. Instead of betting on red or black,
they are now gambling everything on the Blue Line,
where Iranian-sponsored terrorist groups surround
Israel. There is Hizbullah in the Syrian Golan and
southern Lebanon, with Hamas in Gaza. The Iranian
doctrine is apparent from Baghdad to Beirut and from
Damascus to Sana’a. Terrorists are committing a double
war crime, hiding behind civilians, while targeting
civilians.
As Iranian influence spreads, so do tyranny,
subjugation and terrorism. In the past four years alone,
Iran has committed or ordered attacks in 25 countries on
five continents. I am sure the representative of Bahrain
has not forgotten the last time that Iran meddled in that
country’s internal affairs, much as I suspect the Saudi
Ambassador in Washington, D.C., still remembers the
bitter cup of coffee he had at Café Milano. Imagine

S/PV.7430

how much more dangerous the situation will become
in our region and around the world if Iran is allowed to
snap open a nuclear umbrella. Iran is cunning, and it is
fanatical. Yet the international community is willing to
allow the regime to keep its thousands of centrifuges,
continue developing its long-range ballistic missiles
and conceal the military dimensions of its nuclear
programme.
What message is the Council sending when it
rewards an outlaw regime for violating Security
Council resolutions and international law? Ayatollah
Khamenei lies, deceives and betrays even more than
does the character Frank Underwood of the television
show House of Cards. The two of them would get on
like a house of cards on fire. What about President
Rouhani? One of his first acts as President was to
appoint Mostafa Pourmohammadi —
­ known in Iran as
the Minister of Murder — as the Minister of Justice.
He has lived up to his name. In the past year, Iran has
executed 753 people; that is the highest total recorded in
the past 12 years. Iran is one of the worst human-rights
offenders, the primary sponsor of global terrorism and
is behind much of the chaos ravaging the Middle East.
If the international community gives Iran its support by
signing a nuclear agreement, the regime will be more
dangerous than ever before.
The second question is: What has changed when
it comes to Hamas? The answer is nothing. Hamas
continues to abuse its people and wage war against
Israel. Last summer, Hamas proved its utter disregard
for the well-being of the Palestinian people. It hid its
rockets in schools, fired missiles from hospitals and
used civilians as human shields. Today, Hamas is once
again disregarding the needs of its people as it rearms
and rebuilds its terror infrastructure.
Earlier this month, Israeli authorities revealed
that Hamas is using the Kerem Shalom crossing, the
only humanitarian crossing to Gaza, to hide tons
of dual-use items inside shipments of humanitarian
goods. The smuggled materials are used to rebuild
tunnels, reconstruct training camps and manufacture
rockets. Since Operation Protective Edge, Hamas has
test-fired more than 150 rockets. With every test rocket
launched into the sea, Hamas propels itself towards
another conflict. Just in the past week, a senior Hamas
leader issued a new call for Palestinians to kidnap
Israelis. It may just be my hearing, but I have yet to
hear a single United Nations official report on any of
those inflammatory developments. Some Members of

15-111637/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Organization refuse to name Hamas as the terrorist
group that ignites tensions in our region and ignites
United Nations offices. In January, Hamas members
looted and set fire to the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
in Gaza.
The Council does no favours to the Palestinian
people by failing to hold Hamas to account. I have not
heard any criticisms of Hamas for denying its people
freedoms or for failing to hold free elections. The closest
Hamas has come to reaching out to the people in Gaza
is the social media campaign it ran earlier this year.
In an effort to improve its image, Hamas encouraged
people to ask questions on Twitter using the hashtag
#AskHamas. A number of important questions were
posed to the terrorist group. Those questions included:
How does Hamas prevent repetitive strain injury when
firing dozens of rockets into Israel on a single day?
Does Hamas think it is better to hide its weapons in
a hospital’s pediatric or its geriatric unit? Is Hamas
leader Khaled Mashaal right- or left-handed? From the
safety of his luxury hotel in Doha, he seems equally
adept at ordering room service with one hand, while
ordering terrorist attacks with the other.
It is time for a change. The Council must see Hamas
for what it is and call it what it is — an internationally
recognized terrorist organization. Stop giving Hamas
a free pass and start giving Israelis and Palestinians a
chance for a better future.
The third question is: What has changed when it
comes to the Palestinian leadership? If nothing has
changed with Hamas, why should one expect anything
to have changed with President Abbas? President Abbas
claims to support the two-State solution, but apparently
that message gets lost in translation because one will
never hear him make that claim in Arabic. He insists
that Palestinian refugees be allowed to flood the Jewish
State. So in truth he is committed to the creation of
two Palestinian States. President Abbas also claims to
oppose terrorism, but his Government forged a pact
with a terrorist organization, pays salaries to convicted
terrorists and incites violent attacks against Israelis.
Last month, the Palestinian Authority dedicated
a monument in Ramallah to the terrorist responsible
for the murder of 37 Israeli civilians. As if that were
not bad enough, the monument is in the shape of
what the Palestinian Authority describes as Palestine,
and it includes all of the State of Israel from the

8/67

21/04/2015

Mediterranean Sea to the Dead Sea. The Palestinians
want a State without making compromises, without
making concessions and without making peace. I want
to be clear. Israel is in favour of a Palestinian State,
and that would end the conflict. On three separate
occasions, Israel offered the Palestinians a State, and
on all three occasions the Palestinians refused the deal
or walked away from the table.
The very last thing Israel can afford is another
terrorist State in its backyard. Just imagine what that
State would look like. We got a preview when Israel
disengaged from Gaza in 2005. Hamas took over the
Gaza Strip and created a terror stronghold. Given the
chance, Hamas would gladly create a second terror
State in Judea and Samaria. Such a terror State might as
well be called ISIL, which would stand for Iran, Syria,
Iraq and Lebanon. It would be sponsored by Iran and
would be as volatile as Syria, Iraq, and Lebanon.
Hamas is terrorizing the people of Gaza, and the
Palestinian Authority is not doing anything about
it. It has ignored its oversight obligations, namely, to
ensure that construction materials are not channelled
into terror activities. It has not imposed sanctions
on merchants selling cement on the black market. In
contrast, Israel has fully cooperated with the trilateral
Gaza reconstruction mechanism and has overseen the
transfer of tens of thousands of tons of construction
supplies. If President Abbas is serious about making
peace, he must break his alliance with Hamas, put an
end to incitement and return to direct negotiations with
Israel.
The fourth question is: What has changed when
it comes to the international community? Winston
Churchill once said, “A lie gets halfway around the
world before the truth has a chance to get its pants
on”. Month after month, individuals in this Chamber
have argued that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a
territorial dispute that can be resolved by addressing
the so-called root causes. That lie has circled the world
countless times.
The fact of the matter is that our conflict is not
about the right place for Israel’s borders. It is about
Israel’s right to exist in the first place. Israel stands
for democracy, for human rights and for freedom. Last
month, the Jewish State held its twentieth national
election. That makes 20 more free and fair elections
than Qatar and Iran have ever held. Yet Members of the

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Organization question Israel’s democratic nature and
focus disproportionately on our conflict.
The agenda item of today’s debate is “The situation
in the Middle East”, but listening to the meeting briefing,
one could well think that the only thing taking place
in the Middle East is the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The world’s disproportionate focus on our conflict is an
injustice to the tens of millions of victims of tyranny and
terrorism in the Middle East. One has to wonder why
the Palestinians deserve more time and attention than
the Yemenis, the Syrians or the Libyans put together.
The time has come to focus global attention where it
belongs, namely, on the terrorists and their sponsors.
The enemies of freedom are trying to drive us back to
the dark ages. They deny women their freedom, censor
the media, dictate how religion must be practiced and
impose their radical way of life through barbaric acts
of violence. Israel is on the frontline of that fight, but
it is not just Israel’s fight. It is the fight of anyone
who believes in progress and pluralism, tolerance and
freedom.
The Jewish people have fought for those rights for
generations. Israel was one of the first countries in the
world to screen people at airports. For its efforts to protect
passengers, Israel was criticized for putting travellers
through an invasive ordeal. Three decades later, Israel’s
once so-called insensitive policies have become the
standard procedure at every airport across the globe.
In its short history, Israel has repeatedly confronted the
moral dilemmas that go hand-in-hand with combating
terrorism, long before other democracies woke up to
the threat. Make no mistake — Israel’s battle today will
determine how we all live tomorrow.
Tomorrow, Israel will commemorate Yom Hazikaron
and honour the 23,320 individuals who have lost their
lives to war and terror. We will remember the brave
soldiers who died so that we can have our freedom,
and we will mourn the thousands of men, women and
children who were robbed of their lives simply because
they were Israeli. War has never been the choice of the
State of Israel. Our choice is and always has been the
path of peace. But when war and terror are forced upon
us, we will not surrender, and we will not back down.
For nearly 2,000 years, the Jewish people were stateless
and powerless in the face of hatred and indifference.
Those days are no more.
On Thursday, Israel will celebrate Yom Ha’atzmaut,
our sixty-seventh anniversary as a free and independent

S/PV.7430

Jewish State. With great joy and with heads held high,
we will celebrate the realization of the words of our
national anthem, Hatikvah. Our hope will not be
lost — the hope of 2,000 years, the hope to be a free
people in our own land, the land of Zion and Jerusalem.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now make a
statement in my national capacity.
I am honoured to preside over today’s meeting of
the Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We would like to take
this opportunity to emphasize Jordan’s commitment, in
particular through its membership in and presidency
of the Council this month, to continue working with
other members to achieve the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations with respect to the
maintenance and preservation of international peace
and security, as well as international harmony and
stability. Supported by the leadership of His Majesty
King Abdullah II and relying on the policies of Jordan,
which reflect the voice of logic, wisdom and balance
in an ever-changing hotbed of tension, we intend to
use our position productively in pursuit of those noble
goals.
The Kingdom of Jordan is presiding over the
Council at a delicate stage, when multiple, shifting
challenges demand an instantaneous response in the
face of constant change. We would therefore like to
reiterate that failure to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict through a two-State solution, whereby a fully
sovereign, independent State of Palestine would be
established on Palestinian soil along the borders of
4 June 1967, with Al-Quds-al-Sharif as its capital,
would intensify the dangers to our region. There are
legitimate international reference points to support that
view.
The Kingdom of Jordan is close to Palestine and its
citizens, and its situation impacts us directly. Jordan is
not a mere observer or mediator in the peace process
but has a real and tangible interest in achieving peace
through serious and committed negotiations based on
a timetable conducive both to bringing about the twoState solution and to tackling all substantive issues,
including the status of Jerusalem, refugees, security,
borders and water, inter alia. All those issues affect the
interests of Jordan in accordance with the principles of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative,
and must be resolved in a manner that fully satisfies
vital Jordanian interests.

15-111639/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Regarding occupied East Jerusalem, as well as
Muslim and Christian holy sites, in line with his Majesty
and Jordan’s oversight role in East Jerusalem, we will
continue to make every effort to preserve and protect
them, in particular Al-Haram al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. Furthermore, we will not compromise on any
Israeli infractions on this matter and will take the
appropriate legal and diplomatic measures to counter
them. In accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, Jordan will continue to preserve the Arab
character of East Jerusalem and its position as a city
under Israeli occupation.
Concerning Palestinian refugees, we host the
greatest number of Palestinians living in the diaspora,
the majority of whom are Jordanian citizens, and
support their inalienable status as refugees. Protecting
their legitimate rights, as dictated by international law,
is a core responsibility. As a host country, we have rights
and duties imposed on us by the massive burdens that
we have borne since the Palestinians became refugees.
I would like to express here my deep appreciation to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for its ongoing
efforts in support of Palestinian refugees in our region.
Additionally, I the great burden of our expenditures in
supporting the Palestinian refugees, which exceed the
UNRWA budget.
We continue to emphasize the need for an immediate
and lasting solution of UNRWA’s budget problems
and deficit. This is the only way to allow UNRWA to
continue its work and programmes until a final solution
to the question of the Palestinians refugees is reached.
It is no secrect that any reduction in the Agency’s
services will be tantamount to making an indirect call
on hosts countries to make up for these services, and
these States can not bear this burden.
As to the Gaza Strip, Jordan calls on the
international community to lift the suffocating Israeli
blockade on Gaza, put an end to the deteriorating
humanitarian tragedy and make a serious effort to
achieve reconstruction. This is our collective duty in
the face of the suffering imposed on the beleagered
children of the Strip.
We call for concerted efforts to resume direct
negotiations in order to achieve the two-State solution
and find a comprehensive settlement. These negotiations
must be earnest, characterized by good intentions
and time-bound. They should be complemented by
commitment to avoiding any unilateral action that
10/67

21/04/2015

would prejudge the outcome, including settlement
activities, which are illegitimate in the eyes of the
entire world.
We will pursue our efforts a member of the Security
Council and President this month — in addition to our
membership in the Arab ministerial committee entrusted
to consult with international parties — to lauch serious
negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian parties
and to conclude an international agreement within
parameters that all parties can agree upon, including
the possible adoption of a unanimous Security
Council resolution that identifies a time-table for the
negotiations to end the occupation and achieve the twoState solution, we are conducting requisite negotiations
on this score through the aforementioned ministerial
committee by maintaing contacts with all interested
parties and States.
The tragedy being endured by Syria has entered
its fifth year and is deteriorating day by day. Killings,
assassinations and destruction persist in that country.
This tragedy feeds radicalism, criminality and
terrorism, which are outlawed by all international
conventions and religions. Consequently, we have to
press ahead in finding a political solution in Syria,
which, as we have stressed since the beginning of the
crisis, is the only way to meet the aspirations of the
Syrian people and achieve political transformation into
a new reality in which all Syrian parties will take part.
Such a solution would be based on the outcomes of the
first Geneva negotiations, restore stability to Syria and
uproot terrorism in that country, which is now reaching
beyond its borders. It should also preserve Syria’s
territorial integrity and political sovereignty and allow
for the voluntary return of Syrian refugees, particularly
those in neighboring States. On this matter, we will
elaborate in extenso at the briefing on 24 April.
I wish to express our appreciation of the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to find a political
solution to the Syrian crisis. Jordan is hosting more
than 1.5 million Syrian citizens, with whom we share
our limited resources. This task has overburdened
Jordan’s economy and exceeds its capacities. In that
regard, I thank all those brothers who have assisted us,
particularly Kuwait, for its significant efforts in hosting
three pledging conferences.
We support political legitimacy in sisterly Yemen,
which is embodied in President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour, and reiterate our full endorsement
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the resolutions adopted at the most recent Arab
summit, held last month in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt,
which emphasize support for legitimacy in Yemen
and assistance in accordance with the joint Arab
defence initiative and Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations, and reject any attempt to undermine
the legitimacy, territorial integrity and political
independence of Yemen. We reiterate our call for full
commitment to the implementation of resolution 2016
(2015), an immediate end to the violence and unilateral
actions, rejection of any violent overthrow of power, the
normalization of the situation in Yemen and a return to
the political track and dialogue, in accordance with the
Gulf Initiative.
The Kingdom of Jordan emphasizes the need to help
sisterly Libya to consolidate its security, sovereignty
and stability, as well as to support the elected Parliament
and the Government, as they are considered the basis
of legitimacy, and we encourage national dialogue
among the Libyan national parties that reject violence
and radicalism. The adoption of resolution 2214 (2015),
submitted by Jordan, is part and parcel of that effort.
We welcome the dialogue between the Libyan brothers,
hosted by Morocco, and we support Mr. Bernadino
León’s efforts. We hope that they will succeed.
In recent years, the danger of terrorism has been
on the rise in our region and the world. Criminal and
terrorist gangs under different names and forms, such
as Daesh, Al-Shabaab in the Horn of Africa, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida, have hijacked tolerant Islam and
distorted its image. Our religion is innocent of such
violence. All religions have a peaceful message. Those
gangs perpetrate their horrendous crimes in the name
of our great religion of Islam, but they are unrelated to
it. Islam provides a model for cherishing human dignity
and life and the rights of man, for respecting dialogue
and for accepting the other. Therefore allow to me
reiterate the words of His Majesty King Abdullah II in
his statement before the European Parliament:
“All my life, every day, I have heard and
used the greeting, Assalamu aleikum, a wish for
the other to be blessed with peace. That is what it
means to be a Muslim. More than a thousand years
before the Geneva Conventions, Muslim soldiers
were ordered not to kill a child, a woman or an old
person, not to destroy a tree, not to harm a priest,
not to destroy a church. These are the same values
of Islam that we were taught in school as children:
not to destroy or desecrate a place where God is

S/PV.7430

worshipped, not a mosque, not a church, not a
synagogue. This is what it means to be a Muslim.
These are the values that I teach my children and
that they hand on to theirs.”
Therefore, I would like to say once again that the
ideological war will be long, involving many fields and
different levels. It is a war launched by an enlightened
ideology against a retarded ideology that calls for
killing and assassination. This requires a collective
effort and cooperation among all States that agree with
these lofty goals with a view to protecting themselves
from the dangers of terrorism and radicalism. Here, I
would like to emphasize the need for immediate and
collective work, as I have mentioned, as well as for
developing a comprehensive strategy that includes
military and political aspects, the renewal of religious
speech, the rectification of erroneous concepts and
ideas adopted by people, as well as the launching of
cultural campaigns that address people’s minds and use
sound logic.
The modern-day Khawarij, with their terrorist
gangs and their radicalism, are expanding because of
underdevelopment and the inequitable distribution of
wealth, a political vacuum and the presence of sectarian
and religious strife among the different strata of society
and within States. That makes it necessary not to
allow any such imbalances in our countries. We must
pave the way for the return of harmony and stability
to those sisterly Arab States whose social fabric has
been harmed. We are descending into violence and
radicalism.
In that connection, we would like to affirm our
support for the current Iraqi Government and Prime
Minster Mr. Haider Al Abadi in their combat against
terrorism and in their quest to eliminate criminal gangs
from Iraqi territory. We also support their efforts to
achieve national reconciliation. We are equidistant
to all components of Iraqi society. We state that the
participation of all of the components of Iraqi society
in a substantive process, not the marginalization of any
of those elements, is necessary for the success of those
efforts. Iraq is a sisterly, neighbouring State to Jordan.
Its security is our security.
In light of the changes taking place in the region
we are following the framework agreement agreed to
between the P5+1 on the Iranian nuclear file. We have
always emphasized the need for a peaceful solution,
while asserting the right of people to make peaceful
use of nuclear energy. We hope that the final contour

15-1116311/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/04/2015

of the agreement will consolidate peace and security in
our region and the world, and will lead to solving many
other issues.

geography and a common future link us all. Together,
we will be able to build the basis of mutual respect for
the benefit of all future generations.

(spoke in English)

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I will switch to English for a couple of minutes as I
address the question of the need to arrive at a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In
anticipation of the formation of the new Israeli Cabinet
and given the situation in the region, I would like to
mention to the Ambassador of Israel that the region has
never been short of excuses not to do things. I think that
what we need to examine today is the set of decisions
needed to create peace, not to look for excuses not to
do that. The Arab Peace Initiative, as I am sure the
Ambassador will appreciate, contains all the elements
needed to ensure that peace is sustainable, but for that
peace to take shape and be implemented, will power
and good intentions are needed.
With all due respect for the television shows that
people watch, whether it is House of Cards or Pride and
Prejudice, at the end of the day the reality on the ground
requires that we all put our differences aside and that
we launch a substantive time-bound, peace-negotiating
process that will ensure the end that we all seek,
namely, the two-State solution. I would advise the
Ambassador to revisit the Arab Peace Initiative and
look at the elements that we still are committed to in
the Arab world. Like I said, that will not only ensure
peace between Israel and the Palestinians, but between
Israel and the entire Arab world.
Given all the dynamics within and beyond the
region, especially the threat of terror and extremism,
the Palestinian question remains the essence and the
root cause of much of the instability that we see in our
part of the world. It is through resolving the Palestinian/
Israeli conflict and achieving peace and security for all
the peoples and States of the region, especially Israel,
that we will be able to collectively deal with the dangers
and threats that we all face as a region. Israel must
become part of the region, not just be in the region.
Through peace, I think that end will be achieved.
(spoke in Arabic)
In conclusion, I would stress that Jordan will
continue to act resolutely to strengthen relations of
cooperation and friendship between the peoples of the
world. We will continue with our message of promoting
international peace and security and confronting
despair and hatred under one human umbrella. History,
12/67

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Minister Judeh, for presiding over this meeting.
Your presence testifies to the huge significance of the
issues before us.
On 8 April, two Israeli soldiers, a medic and
a paramedic, were stabbed in the West Bank by a
Palestinian man. On 20 April, a 28-year-old Arab
municipal worker was stabbed in Herzliya, north of
Jerusalem, by an Israeli who reportedly screamed
“Death to Arabs”. Those are just two of the recent attacks
that reflect the persistent and deadly tension between
Israelis and Palestinians. It is critically important that
leaders urgently re-engage in efforts to achieve peace,
which is the most effective way to prevent such tension
from escalating, as it has too many times before.
The United States remains committed to a twoState solution that results in a secure Israel alongside
a sovereign and independent Palestinian State and that
can bring lasting peace and stability to both peoples. A
two-State solution is the only way for Israel to ensure
its future as a Jewish and democratic State, and it is the
best path forward for Israel’s security, for Palestinian
aspirations and for regional stability. It is important that
both sides refrain from any actions that could further
destabilize the situation in the region and undermine
the prospects of reaching a two-State solution. It is
good that the parties have reached agreement on the
transfer of Palestinian clearance revenues, an important
step that will benefit the Palestinian people and help
stabilize the situation in the West Bank.
We welcome the arrival of the new United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Nickolay Mladenov, who brings with him deep
diplomatic experience in the region and has already
been meeting with key figures since he arrived on the
ground about a week ago. We encourage all sides to
work closely with him.
We also strongly support United Nations efforts to
encourage donors to disburse funds as soon as possible
to meet the commitments they made in Cairo in October

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

2014. To support that effort, the United States has
disbursed more than 95 per cent of our Cairo pledges and
provided additional money above our original pledge
amount. However, although up 100,000 Palestinians
reportedly remain displaced in Gaza, only a fraction of
the funds pledged in Cairo have been released. Member
States must step up, and United Nations agencies must
be able to carry out their operations in Gaza without
disruption.
Let me now turn to Syria. In the weeks since
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), with
the support of the Al-Nusra Front, advanced on the
besieged community of Yarmouk, the already desperate
situation of its estimated 18,000 residents, most of
them Palestinians, has gotten even worse. People long
deprived of food, potable water, medical supplies and
other vital humanitarian support now find themselves
trapped between warring parties, which show a callous
disregard for the welfare of civilians. Residents have
reportedly been barrel-bombed by the regime from the
air and shot at by ISIL and other armed groups from
the ground.
While thousands appear to have escaped,
many thousands are still trapped. In Tadamon, a
neighbourhood bordering Yarmouk, some of those who
have managed to escape are sheltering in a school. Last
week, a man there said, of the Al-Assad regime’s siege
in Yarmouk, “We lived inside a disaster. We were dying
there, for two years and six months, with no water, no
electricity.” Another escapee said “We got out just
as you see us, with nothing else. We ate animals and
leaves.” A woman named Fatima stood cradling her
baby boy, born less than two weeks earlier in Yarmouk.
Fatima told the officials she had fled because she feared
her son would die if they did not get out.
Siege is a tactic we see applied across Syria by both
the Al-Assad regime and terrorist groups. Last month,
Under-Secretary-General Amos told the Council (see
S/PV.7418) that the United Nations estimates that
440,000 civilians are living in besieged areas, meaning
most people cannot get out, and assistance cannot get
in. Some aid groups estimate the total is much higher.
In Dayr Al-Zour, another besieged city, ISIL has
systematically blocked humanitarian access and even
cut off the water supply for months at a time while
regime forces have prevented residents from leaving.
The Al-Assad regime and the terrorists use the
suffering of Syrian civilians as just another tool to
advance their position or undermine that of their

S/PV.7430

enemies. This must stop. All parties have an obligation
to protect civilians, and all parties have an obligation,
under resolution 2165 (2014), to enable the immediate
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance
directly to people throughout Syria by United Nations
agencies and implementing partners. All civilians who
want to leave besieged areas must be allowed to do so
safely, without being detained, interrogated or separated
from their families. The Al-Assad regime’s assurances
count for nothing, so international supervision for any
relocation from Yarmouk is urgently necessary.
We members of the Security Council have an
obligation as well to ensure that the reported use
of chemical weapons is investigated thoroughly
and promptly and that those responsible are held
accountable. Since members of the Council adopted
resolution 2209 (2015) on 6 March, condemning the
use of chlorine as a chemical weapon, we have seen
allegations of at least a dozen attacks involving the use
of chlorine or other chemical agents.
Last week, Council members heard first-hand from
Dr. Tenari, who works in Sarmin’s field hospital, which
received more than 120 victims of just one of those
attacks. There were so many victims, he said, that they
were piled on top of one another on the floor. He told
us about how he and his colleagues did everything they
could to save three siblings, aged one, two and three
years, with the hospital’s paltry resources. He told of
the doctors’ and nurses’ sense of helplessness as they
tried to pump oxygen into the delicate chests of these
small children. He told of his unspeakable grief as he
washed their tiny, lifeless bodies.
If we members are appalled upon hearing such
accounts, and I do not believe that there was a person
in that room who was not shaken by Dr. Tenari’s
experience, we must channel our indignation into
stopping more attacks like it from occurring. That
begins with the Council enforcing the resolutions it has
already adopted, such as 2209 (2015) and 2118 (2013),
which the Al-Assad regime has repeatedly ignored.
Ending those attacks also requires countries to
stop propping up and arming the regime and instead
use their leverage to help stop Al-Assad from gassing,
barrel-bombing, torturing and starving Syrian civilians.
Countries of the region and those with influence must
come together to press for a political solution, which
is the only way to end this wretched conflict. To that
end, we welcome the renewed push by Special Envoy

15-1116313/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

De Mistura to expand ongoing dialogue efforts and the
Secretary-General’s robust support for those efforts.
As President Obama has said repeatedly, the only
viable political solution is one without Al-Assad in
power. He has no legitimacy and no role to play in
Syria’s future. Partnering with Al-Assad will not help
us defeat violent extremist groups. It will only make
them stronger.
One reason it is so important to reach a political
solution is the deeply destabilizing effect the conflict
is having on Syria’s neighbours, such as Lebanon,
where one in four of the country’s residents is now a
Syrian refugee. Since the influx of refugees began,
Lebanon’s unemployment has doubled, and its schools
have taken to teaching double shifts. The crisis in Syria
has also exacerbated Lebanon’s security challenges,
particularly those posed by violent extremist groups.
The Lebanese security and armed forces have played
a crucial role in countering these threats and defending
the State’s authority. We also commend the ongoing
effort undertaken by the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and Special Coordinator Kaag to prevent
any escalation in hostilities along the Blue Line, an
effort made all the more challenging by Hizbullah’s
dangerous actions, such as its acquisition and evident
willingness to use weapons in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon area of operations.
Resolving the Syria crisis and mitigating the
unrivalled suffering caused by the conflict inside Syria
and in neighbouring countries — and I thank Minister
Judeh for Jordan’s generosity in sheltering so many
refugees from Syria — could not be more urgent.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening and chairing today’s meeting. Your
presence here today clearly demonstrates the importance
Jordan attaches to today’s open debate. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Iran and Saudi
Arabia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
We have all heard loud and clear the message
conveyed by the Secretary-General to the Council
repeatedly on the untenable situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The situation on the ground is
undeniably moving further and further away from a
two-State solution on a daily basis. Over the years, we
have witnessed relentless and systematic actions by the
14/67

21/04/2015

Israeli authorities to chip away the conditions for a twoState solution. This includes the expansion of illegal
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
in complete disregard of international law and the
overwhelming views of the international community.
The escalating settlement constructions further led
to the demolition of Palestinian homes, the forced
displacement of Palestinian families and increasing
violence and provocations by Israeli settlers.
We have heard condemnations by the international
community, but no real action has been taken, including
by the Security Council, to halt the emerging one-State
reality. Instead, the international community continues
to tackle the symptoms of the problem, such as the
humanitarian crisis and terrorism, since it lacks the
political will to address the root causes of the problem
and end the longest occupation in modern history.
Based on repeated failures in bilateral negotiations
for the past four decades to resolve the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, Malaysia believes that the time
has come for the international community in general,
and the Security Council in particular, to lead the
way to end the status quo in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Prolonged foreign occupation of Palestine by
way of oppression, injustice and discrimination will
do nothing to safeguard Israel’s long-term security
concerns. Instead, it has brought about despair, anger
and extremism, with repercussions that continue to
resonate far across the globe.
For those who insist that the only way to create
a Palestinian State is through bilateral negotiations, I
urge them to apply the same standard to Israel. Would
the State of Israel have existed if the international
community had insisted that Israel could be created
only through direct bilateral negotiations with its
neighbouring Arab countries? Is it not time for the
Council to act decisively on the creation of a Palestinian
State, just as the General Assembly did in 1947 to create
the State of Israel?
One aspect of the unsustainability of the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory that Malaysia
wishes to highlight is related to the gross violations
of Palestinian children’s rights. About 300 Palestinian
children are now being detained by the occupying forces
in the West Bank, including in occupied East Jerusalem.
Over the past three years, the number of child detainees
has increased by 87 per cent. Moreover, the existence of
a juvenile military court in Israel, the only such court
in the world, is clearly in violation of the Convention on
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Rights of the Child, the Fourth Geneva Convention
and other provisions of international law.
According to Defence for Children International,
more than 700 Palestinian children are sentenced
in Israeli military courts every year. Ill treatment of
Palestinian children in the Israeli military detention
system is widespread and systematic and nearly three out
of four kids experience some form of physical violence
during arrest, transfer or interrogation. Such practices
are causing widespread trauma, the loss of childhoods
and increasing radicalization. Malaysia condemns
this unacceptable situation and calls for the release of
Palestinian children detained by Israel. We urge Israel
to adhere to its obligations under international law,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to
which it is a State party.
Malaysia welcomes the recent accession by
Palestine to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Such action will go a long way towards
ending impunity and deterring war crimes and crimes
against humanity by both sides. Similarly, we welcome
Palestine’s decisions to accede to various international
and multilateral conventions and treaties. We continue
to support the peaceful, legal and multilateral efforts by
Palestine to be a respectable member of the international
community who abides by international law, norms and
standards.
After last month’s poignant final briefing by the
outgoing Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, we have seen some
positive momentum among Council members to
initiate concerted efforts towards resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. Malaysia stands ready to play
a constructive role in the Council in realizing a twoState solution. We reiterate our long-standing support
for the inalienable right of self-determination for the
Palestinian people and a just, comprehensive and final
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Jordan’s initiative to convene this open
debate on the question of the Middle East. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I have
also listened attentively to the statements delivered by
the representatives of Palestine and Israel.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the
question of the Middle East and affects regional peace
and stability. As the current situation in the Middle East
remains volatile, resolving the question of Palestine and

S/PV.7430

Israel has become more important and urgent. China
hopes that the parties concerned will redouble their
efforts in the following aspects so as to move towards
an early solution to the question between Palestine and
Israel.
First, both Palestine and Israel should adhere to
the strategic choice for peace talks. The creation of an
independent State of Palestine through peace talks and
the peaceful coexistence between the two countries
is the only way out for the problems between the two
countries. China urges Palestine and Israel to keep
peace in mind and come together to resume peace talks
as soon as possible and make progress therein. We hope
that Israel will demonstrate good will and sincerity,
stop the construction of settlements and completely
lift the blockade on Gaza. At the same time, Israel’s
legitimate security concerns should also be addressed.
Secondly, with regard to the question of Palestine,
the Security Council should step up and assume its
essential responsibilities and respond positively to the
reasonable demands made by Palestine and other Arab
States. It should play a greater role in promoting peace
talks, putting an end to the occupation and facilitating
the reconstruction of Gaza. It should take practical
actions to promote progress on the question of Palestine.
Thirdly, the international community should
strengthen coordination and widen its vision. China
hopes that the existing mechanisms for the peace
process in the Middle East will be further utilized.
Meanwhile, countries of the region and relevant regional
organizations should be encouraged to play a positive
role. Efforts should be stepped up so as to resume peace
talks between Palestine and Israel as soon as possible
so that the situation can move in the right direction.
Fourthly, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
must be alleviated effectively as reconstruction there
faces a multitude of challenges, including the Israeli
blockade, the volatile situation in Palestine and the
massive gap in financial resources. We therefore urge
the international community to deliver on its promises
of aid, to cooperate with the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East in every way possible and play a positive role in
safeguarding the rights of the Palestinian refugees and
providing humanitarian assistance.
China firmly supports the people of Palestine
in their just cause seeking the restoration of their
legitimate national rights and, in its own way and

15-1116315/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

through its own channels, has always engaged actively
with the parties concerned to facilitate dialogue and
promote peace. We have always supported the creation
of an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and
enjoying full sovereign rights. We have also supported
Palestine and Israel living in peace and security. We
are open to all initiatives that may contribute to the
resumption of peace talks.
China’s special envoy for the Middle East paid
another visit to Palestine and Israel in April and has
engaged actively with both parties to facilitate peace
talks and promote peace. China will continue to make
great efforts with a view to finding a solution to the
question of Palestine and alleviate the humanitarian
situation.
The Syrian crisis has entered its fifth year and has
caused profound suffering to the people of Syria. It
has also gravely affected regional peace and stability.
A political solution is the only way to restore peace,
stability and development in Syria. China has always
supported the United Nations playing a positive role in
finding a political solution and supported the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, in his
good offices. We also welcome the efforts of Russia and
Egypt, among others, to promote a political solution to
the question of Syria.
China calls on the international community to
remain steadfast in its commitment to a political
solution and to exert positive influence on all the Syrian
parties urging them towards a swift ceasefire and end
to the violence so as to find a settlement plan that fits
the particular situation of the country and takes account
of the interests of all parties.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement, which
underscored the need to act to preserve the two-State
solution.
I once again express my warmest congratulations
to the Jordanian presidency of the Security Council as
well as our profound appreciation of your presence, Sir,
at this important debate.
Since last summer, France has maintained a simple
position — the two-State solution is fast disappearing.
The continuation of the illegal settlement activity
undermines, day on day, the viability of a Palestinian
State on the ground. The political vacuum raises the
risk of escalation. In Israel and Palestine alike, public
16/67

21/04/2015

opinion is becoming radicalized and support for the
two-State solution is dissipating.
There is therefore an urgent need to end the
downward spiral we are witnessing. To do so, we must
reaffirm our commitment to the two-State solution and
thence map out a political path leading to the creation of
a Palestinian State alongside that of Israel. Without such
a political path, we will have to face the continuation
of the unilateral strategies under way, which will serve
only to fuel the mistrust between the parties. It is in
no one’s interests for security cooperation to cease; for
the Palestinian Authority, in which we have invested
so much, to founder; or for diplomatic spats to ensue in
international institutions, always with the underlying
risk of an explosion in violence. We cannot pretend that
these risks do not exist.
France’s analysis for several months now has been
based on a simple premise — only with renewed and
strengthened international support can the parties
commit resolutely to the necessary path of peace.
Everything in the recent past shows how vain it would
be to hope that Israel and the Palestinians can resume,
and less likely still conclude, negotiations without a
major change in methodology. The peace process, as
we have been going about it for more than 20 years, has
not succeeded. To pretend otherwise is tantamount to
accepting the irreversible deterioration of the situation
on the ground.
France renewed efforts to mobilize the Security
Council last autumn, when we listened to the calls for
patience from our partners — that we had to wait for
primaries then for elections. We must now take stock of
the Israeli elections and statements made around them.
Against the present backdrop, the international
community has two options. The first option is to
manage the crisis with stop-gap solutions, hoping that
the degree of violence remains contained and waiting
for better timing to address the underlying problems.
There will, unfortunately, be good reasons to move the
goalposts, for instance to the formation of the Israeli
Government, regional events or yet further elections.
What will happen tomorrow, while the settlements,
violence and tension carry us ever closer to a point of
no return, when everybody loses?
The second option is to take action. This is France’s
choice, not only as it is our responsibility as a member
of the Security Council but also because we have a
direct interest in the emergence of a Palestinian State

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to contribute to stability in the Middle East. The choice
to act must, in our view, be based on two particular
elements. First, the international community must
act jointly. France wants to promote a new approach
incorporating a greater number of partners in addition
to the central role of the United States — namely, the
European Union, the League of Arab States and the
permanent members of the Security Council — with
a view to helping the parties to make the difficult
compromises that are necessary for peace and to
support them in their implementation.
Moreover, the Security Council can provide useful
support in this process and must be a central player in
the conflict. This does not mean imposing a solution
on the parties, of course, but setting the framework
for negotiations. Indeed, it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to adopt a consensual and balanced
resolution that finally sets the parametres of the final
status and a timetable for negotiations. Almost 50
years since the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), this
is an imperative step. Such a resolution must provide
a credible basis for a resumption of negotiations and
generating the necessary renewed healthy political
momentum.
Let us be frank; there will be no Palestinian State,
and therefore no peace in the Middle East, without a
strengthened collective commitment on the part of the
international community. We cannot give up and we
cannot resign ourselves to a status quo that would lead
inevitable to disaster. We believe more fervently than
ever that there is no alternative to the establishment of
a Palestinian State: it is in the interests of all parties and
above all of peace. That is why it is vital to ensure that
the Security Council shoulders its responsibility.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): The political and
security situation in the Middle East has rarely been
more dramatic. The worst possible humanitarian crisis
is unfolding there, and the most brutal and savage abuses
of human rights are being committed as conflicts flare
and radical extremists seek to strengthen their foothold
in the region. As the conflict in Syria enters its fifth
year, the situation in that country could not be more
dire. We have lost count of the dead, and the Syrian
Government continues to fail in its responsibility
to protect its own people, instead waging a war on
its own population, using barrel bombs, mortars,
shelling, torture and forced disappearances. While
the dismantling of Syria’s declared chemical-weapons
programme is nearing completion, reports of repeated

S/PV.7430

chlorine attacks on civilians raise new concerns. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
should urgently investigate all such reports, and the
perpetrators must be brought to account, including
through referral to the International Criminal Court.
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014) remain largely unimplemented.
The lack of humanitarian access in Syria is devastating.
As we have discussed twice this month in Council
consultations, the situation of the Palestinian refugees
in the besieged camp of Yarmouk in Syria remains
horrific, and the suffering there defies description.
There are other besieged locations to which access
has been cut off for even longer periods of time, such
as Darayya, where United Nations aid last arrived in
October 2012. We can only imagine the situation there.
This already unbearable situation has been compounded
by the spread of Da’esh, whose extreme savagery has
shocked the world time and again.
The four long years of the Syrian crisis have put
the Council’s credibility increasingly in question.
A political solution could not be more urgent or
imperative. Relaunching a political dialogue in line with
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex) is paramount. The Council should stand united
behind the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
to alleviate the suffering and plight of the Syrian people
and find a viable and inclusive political solution to the
crisis. Ensuring justice and accountability should be
an integral part of that process. The commission of
inquiry has suggested possible avenues to be followed
to make sure that all those who have committed serious
violations of human rights, crimes against humanity
and war crimes are brought to justice. The onus is on
the Council to act.
Hailed as a success story only a year ago, Yemen
is now on the brink. The Council must do everything
it can to prevent Yemen from falling into the abyss
of sectarian strife, civil war and fragmentation. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2216 (2015), which
has imposed an arms embargo and expanded sanctions
measures against the spoilers and their associates. The
resolution also includes an important call to resume
and accelerate inclusive United Nations-brokered
negotiations. It is our firm belief that the United Nations
remains indispensable to efforts to bring Yemen back
on a track towards a peaceful transition.
In Iraq, political leaders, led by Prime Minister
Al Abadi, are working to promote national unity

15-1116317/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and reconciliation. Those efforts are taking place in
the shadow of the deadly presence of Da’esh, which
has managed to grab large parts of Iraqi territory
and launch savage attacks on ethnic and religious
minorities, including torture, executions, enslavement,
gang rapes and child recruitment. Last year, the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria torched 11 of 35 churches
and monasteries scattered around the city of Mosul,
destroyed the statues of poets and literary and historical
figures and dug up the grave of the prophet Jonah. In
March, Da’esh militants stormed several churches and
Christian graveyards, smashing hundreds of crosses
and headstones on Christian graves. Historic cities,
the monuments of Khorsabad, Nineveh, Nimrud and
Hatra, and Sufi shrines, all forming a precious and
irreplaceable part of the world’s historical and cultural
heritage, have been destroyed. Unique artefacts are
being trafficked to finance criminal terrorist enterprise.
As they chase Da’esh out, the Iraqi people are now
discovering mass execution sites in areas liberated
from the terrorists and are mourning their loss. It must
be stressed, however, that the lingering grievances that
preceded Da’esh’s onslaught should not be compounded
by new abuses directed at Sunni communities, which
would undercut the progress that the country so badly
needs. We take note of the Prime Minister’s calls to
the Iraqi armed forces and Shia militias to refrain
from violence. Progress must be made in the areas
of genuine inclusiveness, reconciliation and just and
adequate revenue- and wealth-sharing. We also urge
the Government of Iraq to reaffirm its commitment to
international justice by acceding to the Rome Statute.
Moving on to the Middle East peace process, we
welcome the appointment of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as
the Special Coordinator and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General, as well as that of the new Special
Representative of the European Union, and wish them
all the best in their exceptionally important and difficult
tasks. The challenges are enormous, but the process
must move forward. Wait-and-see is not an option. There
can be no solution other than an immediate resumption
of peace negotiations aimed at reaching a final political
settlement based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles — including land
for peace — the road map, the agreements previously
reached by the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative,
leading to two democratic and sovereign States living
side by side within established borders, in peace and
security and mutual recognition. That is the only way
to address both the aspirations of the Palestinian people
18/67

21/04/2015

to viable statehood and Israel’s concerns about genuine
and lasting security. The current stalemate is not
sustainable, and it is explosive. Any unilateral action or
incident could lead to renewed and dangerous violence
that would close the remaining window of opportunity
for reaching a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
In Lebanon, multiple challenges collide. The
refugee burden is huge. The country’s policy of
dissociation from the Syrian crisis must be maintained.
The presidential vacuum has lasted too long and must
be solved without further delay. The international
community should continue supporting the Lebanese
security and armed forces and helping the country to
manage the impact of the influx of Syrian refugees,
including the provision of essential services such
as education and health care. That is vital to the
preservation of Lebanon’s stability and security. We
welcome the strong presidential statement on Lebanon
that the Council issued on 19 March (S/PRST/2015/7).
We call on all concerned to implement its provisions
and the relevant Council resolutions in full, including
by working to ensure stability along the Blue Line.
Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
for Jordan’s tremendous efforts in tackling the Syrian
refugee crisis and maintaining a balancing, constructive
role in a highly volatile and fragile region.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening and participating
in this open debate on the Middle East, including the
question of Palestinian, a subject that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela considers crucially important.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his participation.
Our delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Sadly, the Middle East is enduring a terrible
situation marked by war, sectarian violence, instability,
extremism and foreign interference, which has resulted
in massive violations of its peoples’ fundamental
human rights and an unprecedented expansion of the
terrorist organizations that have been ravaging the
territories of the region with an unusually powerful
military capacity. But while the entire situation in
the Middle East deserves our attention, the situation
of the Palestinian people and the occupation of their

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

territories is a root cause of the conflict in the region
and a permanent threat to peace. The Palestinian issue
is the most emblematic of all the armed conflicts and of
the continuation of colonialism and foreign occupation
in the Middle East, a remnant of the colonial partition
that followed the Second World War. From 1948 until
today the Palestinian people have been subjected to
a systematic process of colonization and expulsion
from their own territory, as evidenced by the more
than 7 million Palestinians who have been forced to
live outside of Palestine, in contravention of General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), which proclaimed the
inalienable right of Palestinians to return to their land
and to be compensated for the damages they have
suffered.
Israel’s occupation of Palestinian territories and the
settlement process that it has conducted as an occupying
Power have developed in contravention to the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. The Security
Council has adopted more than 68 resolutions on the
question of Palestine, and Israel has openly ignored all
of them. It seems that when it comes to the Palestinian
question, there is a double standard among the
countries in the Security Council, which is responsible
for ensuring peace, the human rights of the Palestinian
people and the respect for international law. The
impunity with which Israel behaves is a decisive factor
in the worsening of the conflict, which, after more than
60 years, could become a terrible failure on the part
of the Security Council. This represents a challenge
for the Council to act constructively in the quest for a
peaceful solution to this question. We firmly believe
in multilateralism and in the need for this matter to be
resolved through the decisive action of this body of the
United Nations.
Venezuela deems it crucial that the Security
Council work decisively on a definitive solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. This involves an end
to the occupation of the Palestinian territory and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within internationally recognized pre1967 borders.
The Venezuelan delegation reaffirms its full
support for the right to self-determination, which would
allow nationals of the State of Palestine to live within
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

S/PV.7430

Our country calls for an immediate end to the
settlement process of which the Palestinian people are
victims. The construction of Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories must end. We reject the
demolition of Palestinian homes and the construction of
new Israeli settlements, which form part of an expulsion
and colonization process that the Security Council has
spent more than 50 years discussing without having put
an end to this illegal situation.
We must also put an end to the recurring practice
of the blockading and destruction of the Gaza Strip, the
territory where the Israeli occupying Power is carrying
out systematic violence, transforming it, sadly, into
a new ghetto that is home to human tragedy and the
despair of an entire people.
The impunity with which Israel acts in denying the
Palestinians their right to an independent future and
in the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
against the Palestinians was made very clear in the
middle of last year, when Israeli military forces spent
more than seven weeks indiscriminately bombing the
Palestinian population in the Gaza Strip, using all of
the sophisticated weaponry at their disposal, including
arms banned by the United Nations, such as cluster
bombs and phosphorus bombs.
Let us recall that 2,220 people were killed
during that short period of time, of whom 551 were
children — children whose deaths, like those of all the
other children who have been killed there throughout the
years, leave an indelible mark on the human conscience.
Our country calls for an end to impunity and for the
necessary accountability of those responsible for these
crimes against humanity.
There is a particular and unfathomable cruelty to
the violence of the occupying Power against Palestinian
children. Since 2000, more than 10,000 children have
been imprisoned in Israeli detention centres, resulting
in psychological consequences that are difficult to
overcome. The latest UNICEF report indicates that
within the Israeli military detention system, the
mistreatment of Palestinian children would appear to
be widespread, systematic and institutionalized.
Besides the victims that are counted in the various
reports of the United Nations agencies referring to the
Palestinian question, we cannot overlook the number
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the area as a
result of the violence. According to estimates by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,

15-1116319/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

more than 500,000 people were displaced last year
during the most recent Israeli military operation against
the Gaza Strip, which represents the highest number of
IDPs since 1967.
It is high time for the Council to express to the people
of Palestine its unanimity as to a political solution to
the conflict based on the peaceful coexistence of two
States: the Israeli State and the State of Palestine. We
cannot accept the denial of the existence of a Palestinian
State, otherwise there can be neither peace nor justice.
As the Israeli military occupation is the main cause
of the clear violations of human rights of the Palestinian
population and of international humanitarian law,
Venezuela calls for the establishment of a timeline
that would put an end to the unsustainable and illegal
occupation of territories belonging to the State of
Palestine, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 446 (1979), inter alia.
Our country encourages the parties to continue
negotiations to achieve a firm and lasting peace where
both States can live as sovereign and independent
countries in safety, within internationally recognized
borders.
A comprehensive political solution to the
conflict must include a commitment to respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon and Syria.
Lastly, we invite the Council to take a proactive
stance aimed at shoring up the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process, which would make it possible to break the
current deadlock. A negotiated political solution to this
question would be decisive for peace and security in the
Middle East.
Although we call for a negotiated solution based on
the peaceful coexistence of two States, then Palestine
must be recognized as a State and a full Member of
the United Nations, and to do so it must benefit from a
resolution of the Council establishing that fact.
Lastly, we call on this organ to assume the
responsibilities that the Charter of the United Nations
has conferred upon it in its Article 4.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to welcome you, Mr. Minister, and thank your country
for having convened this high-level open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I should also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
20/67

21/04/2015

My statement will be focused mainly on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and the situation in Syria.
Regarding the Palestinian question, we are of the
view that everything has been said at previous Security
Council meetings, open and closed, yet no significant
headway has been made in the political process. Indeed,
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians are at
a standstill, while Israeli settlement and occupation
activities continue, with near-daily arbitrary detentions
and attacks on Palestinian civilians by the occupying
Power.
Just two weeks ago, 107 Palestinians, including
children, were arrested. This was further compounded
by the ongoing seizure of land, the illegal expansion
of settlements, and the various collective-punishment
measures inflicted on the Palestinians, which make
their lives increasingly difficult and decreasing the
likelihood of a genuine peace in the region.
Thus the recent statements made by the Israeli
Prime Minister during the electoral campaign publicly
calling into question the two-State solution dangerously
undermine prospects for a viable peace, which could put
an end to the conflict and give Palestinians a sovereign
and independent State within pre-June 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In the light of the situation, the Security Council
must assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations by clearly and effectively committing to
saving the solution of two States living side by side on
the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles — especially land for peace — the
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. That is the
only realistic and feasible way for the Palestinians to
satisfy their aspirations to self-determination and for
the Israelis to meet their legitimate security needs.
In that regard, we believe that the Security Council
should identify a clear plan of action establishing the
framework and parametres of future negotiations,
pegged to a deadline so as to break the never-ending
cycle of negotiations. That will require synergy of
action and firm consistency in the international
community’s approach. In that connection, the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and other stakeholders in the political process are
particularly called upon to act.
Regarding the Syrian crisis, Chad remains deeply
concerned over the ongoing deterioration of the
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

security and humanitarian situations in that country,
which is now in its fifth year of conflict with no
political solution on the horizon. According to recent
statistics issued by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 200,000 people have
been killed in the fighting, more than 7.6 million have
been internally displaced, and some 4 million have
taken refuge in neighbouring countries. This is without
a doubt a true humanitarian catastrophe that cries out to
our collective conscience.
We call on the international community as one
to mobilize additional resources so that United
Nations agencies and their partners can deliver the
necessary aid and assistance to besieged, displaced
and refugee civilian populations. Furthermore, given
the difficulties encountered by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, in
obtaining a cessation of hostilities in Aleppo in order
to establish conditions conducive to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, we believe that it is time to
seek specific and innovative ideas that could bring
the parties to the negotiating table on the basis of the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
In conclusion, it is our moral duty to intensify our
collective efforts to find an appropriate and lasting
political solution to the Syrian crisis. In that regard,
we call on States with influence on the parties to spare
no effort in persuading them to reject violence and
resume dialogue so as to put an end to that disastrous
war, which poses a genuine threat to peace and security
throughout the Middle East.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to extend a
warm welcome to you, Sir, and express our gratitude
to you for presiding over this very important debate.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, and we shall concentrate our attention on the
Palestinian question.
There is an international consensus that a settlement
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question and to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would be a decisive
development for the attainment of greater stability in
the Middle East and for the easing of tensions that are
the cause of immense harm to the peoples of the region.
There is also an international consensus that a two-State
solution is the only viable basis for a comprehensive
settlement to the Palestinian question and for peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.

S/PV.7430

It is our understanding that the question of Palestine
and the ensuing conflict are the main stumbling blocks
to social and political development in the Middle East
and a breeding ground for the most radical forms of
extremism and terrorism spreading through the region
and beyond. We have now reached a critical point,
and finding a solution to the Palestinian question is
an absolute necessity. The main actors in this tragedy
should be aware that what is happening in the Middle
East might shape a future of horror, since the present
already presents a very grim reality. Against such a
backdrop, we intend in this statement to address three
straightforward messages to the main actors in the
Palestinian question: the international community and
the Security Council in particular, the Palestinians and
the Israelis.
Over the years, the international community has
been called on — to no avail — to play a role in the
search for a solution to the Palestinian question, given
the impossibility of Israelis and Palestinians advancing
towards any meaningful dialogue by themselves and
without external assistance. In that sense, and following
the collapse of the United States mediation effort, we
are of the view that the Security Council, as the organ
upon which the international community has conferred
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations, should uphold its responsibilities and
apply all its political power, influence and prestige
to seeking a comprehensive solution to this painful
conflict, which is dangerously harmful to the entire
international community. It is our conviction that only
a united Security Council has the required influence
to assume a leadership role in bringing the parties
to the conflict to the negotiating table, mediate the
attainment of the necessary concessions, and provide
the guarantees needed to advance towards a political
and comprehensive solution.
International public opinion despairs over the
hesitations and lack of purpose that the Security Council
has demonstrated over the years on this extremely
sensitive issue. The great Powers in particular should
commit their leadership in the Security Council by
pushing the parties to the conflict and the entire
international community to uphold a solution to the
Palestinian question. We believe that the great Powers,
being invested with special privileges in the Security
Council in accordance with the Charter of the United

15-1116321/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations, have the capacity to do so. Those privileges,
which in our view should be upheld not for mere national
interests but instead for strengthening world peace and
security, confer on the great Powers responsibilities of
leadership that should be applied in order to make a
meaningful contribution to resolving the Palestinian
question.
It is our conviction that, with the evolving situation
in the Middle East, if the Security Council is to remain
relevant it must assume in the Palestinian question
the statutory leadership role entrusted to it. Angola,
as a non-permanent member, is ready to support any
initiative that the Security Council might adopt in order
to ensure such leadership, and it would be our greatest
achievement if, during our mandate, the Council should
take positive steps in that direction.
The Palestinian people are the victim of an historical
injustice, subject to being refugees and a people
under occupation. We deem the maintenance of such
a situation as totally unacceptable. The Islamic world
perceives it as collective humiliation, which breeds the
current trends of extreme radicalism and terrorism.
The Palestinian people deserve nationhood status. The
framework of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security seems possible
to achieve if the international community, and in
particular the Security Council, assumes its duty and
works to make a reality of resolutions, declarations and
the array of decisions adopted over the years on the
two-State solution.
In the event that the Security Council finally
decides to push forward the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process, the Palestinians must be prepared for difficult
choices, which include reaching real and meaningful
unity among them, making painful but unavoidable
concessions at the negotiating table, putting and end
to the culture of hatred and being politically and
psychologically prepared for reconciliation and full
recognition of the State of Israel. The maintenance
of the status quo, with the Palestinians confined to
refugee camps and subject to permanent humiliatation,
without prospects for a breakthrough for a political
settlement, can be a recipe for a disaster of unthinkable
proportions — while the regional and international
situations deteriorate dangerously.
The Security Council should make Israel understand
that the policies of occupation, settlement expansion
and collective punishment of the Palestinians are
counterproductive and raise formidable obstacles for the
22/67

21/04/2015

launching of a peace process for the establishment of a
viable Palestinian State and for mutual understanding,
acceptance and reconciliation. Moreover, such policies
destroy the social and political fabric of Palestine, put
the Palestinians in an extremely dire situation and
pave the way for extremists who seek the worst and
are bent on sabotaging any developments towards
peace. Like the Palestinians, Israel must be prepared
to make far-reaching compromises and concessions to
the Palestinians and to the international community,
if a settlement for peace is to be achieved under the
auspices of the Security Council. It is fundamental
that the Security Council deepen dialogue with Israel,
that it gives full assurances to the parties as an honest
broker and that its members extend firm international
guarantees for Israeli and Palestinian security in a
peace settlement.
In conclusion, more than 20 years have elapsed
since the Israelis and Palestinians were near to a
comprehensive peace settlement through mutual
concessions and political will for both peoples to live
together side by side in freedom, peace and security. It
is our conviction that, by assuming a leadership role,
a united Security Council will be able once again to
put Israelis and Palestinians back on the track towards
peace and to make the decisive contribution that we
believe it can provide to the attainment of peace in
Palestine and the entire Middle East. After the collapse
of the American mediation effort, we do not foresee
another framework for negotiations. It is up to the
Security Council to step up decisive efforts and to
assume its responsibilities as the main organ in charge
of international peace and security.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, to preside
over the Security Council.
It is clear today that, in essence, the so-called
Arab Spring some time ago ceased being a democratic
rebuilding. The turbulent processes in the region have
led to the fall of former regimes in a number of countries,
and to the emergence of difficult crises in others.
However, it did not create productive momentum. For
example, the recent events in Yemen make it clear that,
even in those States that were being touted as models
of successful political transformation, events have
taken a violent and unpredictable turn. We consider the
events in the Middle East as the manifestation of some
dangerous universal trends today. The intervention in
States of the Middle East and embarking on projects

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of regime change for undesirable regimes have led to
chaos and destabilization in the region. the subject of
foreign intervention in 2011, Libya today has parallel
Parliaments and Governments. There are also clashes
between armed elements. Another example is last
year’s events in Syria and Iraq, where extremists from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) took a
number of key provinces in a very short period.
Given the scale of the events and the threats under
way from ISIS and other such jihadist organizations, it
is clear that the threats spread far beyond the Middle
East. We have already seen them manifest in Denmark,
France, Australia and Canada. Based on our position
of principle, we believe that there is a need to combat
terrorism. That position has not changed. There is
also a need to shore up international efforts to counter
this global threat. Counter-terrorism activities must
be based on international law and be carried out
under the auspices of the Security Council. That is
the very foundation upon which we resolved the issue
of eliminating chemical weapons in Syria and drew
up efforts to counter foreign terrorist fighters. It was
on Russia’s initiative that resolution 2199 (2015) was
adopted, in order to halt the financing of armed terrorist
groups by way of the illegal sale of oil.
Russia is interested in a democratic and prosperous
Middle East where all sides are brought together by
traditional ties of friendship. Unlike others, we draw no
benefit from chaos and destabilization. We stand ready
to cooperate with all interested parties so as to support
the States of the region to resolve the challenges they
face. With regard to chronic conflicts in the region,
events cannot be allowed to run their course — first
and foremost when it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which is a basic factor of instability in the
entire Middle East that helps extremists recruit new
members. We think that a fair solution to the longstanding problems in the region will foster overeall
stability in the Middle East and North Africa.
We underscore our readiness to work bilaterally
with Palestinians and Israelis, as well as in international
forums, first and foremost the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators. In that regard, the Quartet’s
Munich ministerial statement of 5 February 2011
(SG/2168), concerning closer cooperation between the
Quartet and the League of Arab States and interested
Arab countries, remains relevant.
In order to resolve the Gaza issue, there is a need
for a two-track solution to address the core issues on

S/PV.7430

the basis of principled positions. In that regard, two
things must be dealt with: extending the control of the
Palestinian Authority and ensuring stability in enclaves.
We reiterate our commitment to moving forward with
intra-Palestinian dialogue on the basis of the political
platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the Arab Peace Initiative. Among other things, a
long-term solution in Gaza can guarantee Palestinians
the timely provision of the donor resources pledged
by participating countries at the October 2014 Cairo
international confernce on Gaza reconstruction.
It is also with that logic in mind that we will continue
to be guided in establishing intra-Syrian consultations
in Moscow. We believe that, following the first round in
April, certain progress has been made in relaunching a
search for a political settlement to the Syrian crisis. The
main outcome of the last round was agreement on the
so-called Moscow platform document, supported by
most participants at the meeting, which sets out various
assessments of the current state of affairs in Syria. It is
clear that, without stepping up direct contacts between
the Government and the moderate opposition, there
will be no implementation of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). Syrians must come together to
counter the growing terrorist threat emanating from
ISIS, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other terrorist and extremist
groups. For our part, we stand ready to continue to
assist intra-Syrian dialogue. We hope that the Moscow
momentum will continue to be drawn upon thanks to
the efforts of Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura, as was the case with the launching
of the political process for the Geneva communiqué
and his efforts at confidence-building efforts on local
truces.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank you for convening this open debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing earlier.
Last month marked the start of the fifth year of
the Syrian conflict. For the past four years, Al-Assad
has repressed, maimed and killed his own people.
He has ruined the country he should protect. Syria is
now a shell of its former self, and still the situation
gets worse. We are deeply concerned by the fate of
the Palestinian refugees in Yarmouk, where intense
fighting is continuing between armed groups, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Jabhat Al-Nusrah. Thousands of civilians, including
many children, have been living under siege from the
Al-Assad regime for nearly two years, and are trapped,

15-1116323/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with little access to humanitarian assistance. The plight
of the people in Yarmouk is also the tragic reality for
more than 440,000 Syrians currently under siege by
Al-Assad and ISIL, without access to humanitarian
assistance. That includes nearly 230,000 people
besieged in Dayr Al-Zour by ISIL. They face severe
shortages of food and basic goods. Power and water
supplies have been cut and public health concerns are
growing. We call on all groups to protect civilians,
ensure humanitarian access and allow the safe passage
and evacuation of civilians.
The need for a political settlement in Syria has never
been more pressing. The regime’s recent loss of Idlib
shows that neither side can win on the battlefield. There
is no military solution. The only way to bring about
sustainable peace remains a political transition through
mutual agreement of the Syrian parties, supported by
the international community. The Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
continues to have the United Kingdom’s strong support
in his efforts to achieve that, and we look forward to his
briefing later this week. We remain clear that Al-Assad
can play no part in Syria’s future.
We must also be unwavering in our humanitarian
commitment to Syria. We thank Kuwait for their
leadership in hosting the third International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference. The $3.8 billion
pledged goes a long way to meeting the United Nations
financing needs for 2015. The United Kingdom itself
has now committed more than $1.2 billion to the Syrian
crisis. But more needs to be done. We urge all States
to disburse their pledges promptly, and we encourage
the United Nations’ humanitarian agencies and their
partners to scale up humanitarian deliveries to besieged
areas, including through cross-border routes.
I will now turn to the Middle East peace process.
We all know that the only way to resolve this 60-year
old conflict is through a negotiated two-State solution.
We must have renewed international efforts to support
progress and to start serious negotiations towards a deal.
The parties themselves must also resume negotiations
to reach a durable ceasefire in Gaza and tackle the
underlying causes of the conflict. The Palestinians need
to take concrete steps towards moving the Palestinian
Authority back to Gaza, starting with border crossings.
Israel must support Gaza with exports, energy and
water. Egypt needs to resume its mediation role and
show flexibility in opening Rafah, and donors need to
deliver on their pledges as soon as possible.

24/67

21/04/2015

The regional turmoil we are witnessing only
reinforces the importance of resolving the IsraelPalestine conflict. Both parties must think seriously
about how they can work together to improve the reality
on the ground. It is clear that comprises on the part of
both parties are needed. Israel must stop its illegal and
totally unnecessary settlement building, which seems
designed to undermine a two-State solution. It should,
instead, be easing economic conditions on the ground
and removing barriers to Palestinian development.
Furthermore, while the Palestinians seek legal
international roots to statehood, they must realize
that there can be no substitute for negotiations with
Israel. The United Kingdom sees merit in the Council
adopting a clear resolution setting out the parameters
for a peaceful and negotiated solution. That will require
proper consultation to achieve the full backing of the
Council.
As this is my final Middle East open debate, I
would like to thank Council members, past and present,
for their efforts on these issues over the past five
years. But it is deeply regrettable that greater progress
on Syria and the Middle East peace process has not
been possible during this time. Much greater unity of
purpose and more willingness for members to set aside
their narrowly defined interests will be needed if we
are to overcome these intractable issues in the future.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of Minister Nasser Judeh, and
extend our gratitude to the Jordanian presidency of the
Security Council for April. We are grateful for the very
thorough presentation given by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, and greatly appreciate the recent appointment
of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process. The impetus he provides
will be very important to relaunching the peace process
in the Middle East.
We find ourselves in a very disturbing time. New
conflicts are having an impact on the region, and we
find ourselves unable to resolve issues that have dragged
on for decades. With regard to the issue of Palestine
and Israel, the shared view is that the status quo is
not acceptable; as a result, we believe that we should
relaunch the peace process with defined parameters
and within a specific time frame. The Security Council
has a key role to play in this matter.
The two-State solution is still the best alternative
for the Palestinian people to be able to exercise their

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

right to self-determination, and for Israel to enjoy
security safeguards that would protect its existence.
Political realism has shown time and again that it is
not possible to maintain a negotiating process without
considering these legitimate demands. We also need
a commitment on the part of the parties, who must
adopt confidence-building measures, comply with
agreements and renounce extremist rhetoric. It is also
crucial to respect international law, human rights, and
international humanitarian law. A peace process is not
viable while the Israeli settlement policy continues.
Palestine must also make progress in internal
reconciliation, under the leadership of President Abbas.
We would also like to make a special appeal to not
disregard the humanitarian situation that affects the
population living in the Gaza Strip. We should also
properly address the harsh reality facing Palestinian
refugees in the Yarmouk camp in Syria, who find
themselves trapped in a conflict that is not their own.
With respect to Lebanon, we acknowledge the
efforts of Prime Minister Salam to combat terrorism
and strengthen State institutions under very difficult
circumstances marked by a presidential power vacuum
and the non-compliance of certain Lebanese actors
with the disassociation policy established in the Baabda
Declaration. This is a time to reiterate our gratitude
for the many humanitarian gestures that Lebanon and
other countries in the region, in particular Jordan, have
shown toward Syrian refugees, who require protection
as well as humanitarian assistance.
Finally, with respect to the Syrian crisis, the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2015/124)
confirms that the conflict has spread with new levels
of violence. We must urgently adopt measures to
protect the most vulnerable population, as evidenced
in the violence against women, boys and girls. Those
responsible must be brought to account. Humanitarian
action in itself will not be enough if there is no political
solution. Dialogue is the only way to act responsibly
and with a view towards the future. In that mission we
support the work of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and we eagerly await
his report to the Security Council at the end of this
week.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to New York to preside over
today’s debate. We are also grateful for Jordan’s role in
the region. As for your country’s generosity in hosting

S/PV.7430

Syrian refugees, we feel that Jordan has been a positive
force on the Middle East peace process.
Today I will focus my statement on Syria and
the Middle East peace process. On Syria, there is a
chorus calling for a political solution. With Yarmouk
resembling a death camp and many parts of the country
witnessing unimaginable human suffering, that call is
as important now as it has ever been. It is also just as
difficult to achieve.
We welcome the efforts of Special Envoy de Mistura
to freeze the fighting in Aleppo. We will hear from him
in a few days on how that proposal is progressing, but
we understand that, given the modest possibilities, the
prospects are not good. We also support the efforts
of Russia and Egypt to reinvigorate a political track.
However, it is important that all those efforts be
coordinated under the United Nations umbrella and that
they be based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
Until there is a political solution — and there
must be one day a political and not a military
solution — Syrians will suffer, and Minister Judeh’s
country of Jordan and Syria’s other neighbours will
strain under the refugee burden. As with the Middle East
peace process, the Council should bring its significant
experience with peace processes gained elsewhere to
developing a lasting solution in Syria. We admit that it
is difficult to apply experience from other situations to
Syria; there are so many interests at stake and multiple
parties to the conflict. However, of themselves, those
differences are not unique; we encounter them in every
situation. Moreover, we all know the broad outline of a
political transition; it is set out in Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Let us therefore talk about it. We should sit around
a table and develop a plan for the next few months. The
price of inaction is high, and it is being paid by ordinary
Syrians. We would welcome the views of other Council
members, but also those of others in the Chamber,
many of whom are affected by the Syrian crisis. Permit
me to pose a question to all who speak today, whether
or not they are members of the Council. What would
representatives propose as pragmatic, concrete next
steps that the Council can take to alleviate the carnage
in Syria? The Council is listening; certainly, it should
be listening to those present.
On the Middle East peace process, I said in
January that New Zealand supported in principle

15-1116325/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the idea of a suitably balanced Security Council
resolution, and I outlined the five points that guided
New Zealand’s approach to the Middle East peace
process (see S/PV.7360). I said that the Council did
not just have a responsibility to remain seized of the
matter, it should also go further and actively promote
negotiations leading to a just, sustainable, long-term
peace agreement. Agreeing on a role for the Council is
not going to be easy, but New Zealand believes that it is
essential. We will also need to overcome the concerns
of some who feel that the Council should not play a role
at all.
While it is clearly for the parties to reach a final
agreement, we believe that now is the time for the
Council, with its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, to use its moral and
legal authority and the practical tools at its disposal
to shift the dynamics back to productive negotiations.
Again, that will not be easy. If it is to assume that role,
the Council will have to form a collective opinion on
issues that are sensitive, nuanced and weighed down
with historical baggage. We must respect the significant
investment that many countries have made over decades
and the direct national interest of many States in the
final outcome. We also need to convince stakeholders
to take difficult, politically costly decisions in the
interests of peace and long-term stability. That is not
easy, but it is necessary. We will be told that it is not
the right time, but it is always “not the right time”.
There will never be a perfect time. We cannot continue
to kick the can down an endless road, as outgoing
Special Coordinator Serry said in his briefing to us last
month (see S/PV.7417). We all know that if the Council
addresses only the symptoms and not the root causes of
the conflict, there can be and will be no lasting peace.
It is our view that there is a finite window of
opportunity for the Council to set that process in motion.
In the January open debate (see S/PV.7360), New
Zealand committed to exploring options for the Council
to inject new momentum into those negotiations, once
elections were concluded in Israel. That time has come.
It is appropriate that the Council take action, now
that those elections are over and before other election
campaigns begin. New Zealand’s friendships with
Israel and with the Palestinians motivate us to make
a constructive contribution and to work for progress.
New Zealand wants the Security Council to focus on
a practical outcome. We have therefore been working
on a draft text that might serve the purpose of getting
negotiations started. That is the important next step — to
26/67

21/04/2015

get negotiations started. It will require that both sides
step back from their optimum or preferred outcomes
and that they both put any preconditions aside. There
has already been reference to the fact that France is
working with others on a parameters draft resolution.
We know how difficult it will be to achieve nine votes
in favour and no veto, but we remain convinced that
the Council must discharge its responsibilities. We have
not seen the latest French text, but if it has a chance of
succeeding, New Zealand stands ready to engage and
to be helpful.
Friends in the region have told us that a second text
would complicate the process. Therefore, at this stage,
New Zealand is prepared to wait to see how current
efforts play out. But we firmly believe that for success
and buy-in, it is important that any text be considered
through an inclusive and transparent process. We must
break the cycle that has undermined previous Council
attempts to support the Middle East peace process.
Therefore, New Zealand stands ready to work with all
members to ensure that the next draft resolution that
comes to the Council has a genuine chance of bringing
the parties to the negotiating table.
Like the Ambassador of the United Kingdom, this
is the last time I will speak in the Council’s monthly
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I would like
therefore to add some further remarks.
I have talked today about the need for the Council
and other stakeholders to get around the table to talk
about Syria. As we sit here in New York, one must be
struck by the fact that discussions in the Council are so
formulaic and often disconnected from reality. We exist
in a world of diplomatic niceties, carefully avoiding the
elephants in the room, and usually, I might add, in a
Chamber deliberately screened from the world. We
endorse resolutions to protect civilians in Libya, but we
cannot stop the salvo of barrel bombs in Syria. We talk
of populations besieged in Syria, as we have today, but
we find it much harder to talk about the same in Gaza.
Even when we can discuss the most sensitive issues,
key players are often left out of the discussion.
New Zealand is a strong believer in the United
Nations and in the Security Council. We deeply
appreciate that so many in the United Nations
membership had the faith in us to elect us to the
Council for a two-year term. In seeking that mandate,
we promised we would say what we believe and that
we would listen and consult with all. We meant what
we said.
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

And so I end with a call for us all to deliver on
our responsibility — our collective responsibility — to
work together to end conflicts such as that in Syria
and that between Israel and Palestine. We have the
blueprints, including the Geneva communiqué for Syria
(S/2012/522, annex), the decades of work and the
known parameters for the Middle East peace process.
We have said that we have the will. What is left is for
this Council to find the way.
The President: I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of New Zealand for his service and to
wish him the best of luck in the years to come, as I do
for the representative of the United Kingdom. I thank
them both for their invaluable contributions. We will all
need their wisdom and wise counsel in the future and
hope they will not be stinting with their advice.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Minister Nasser
Judeh for convening this debate. It in honour to have
him here. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his unceasing efforts to address the conflict
in the Middle East.
My comments will focus on the peace process
between Israel and Palestine, which lies at the heart of
our concerns, but I will also refer to the situations in
Syria and Yemen, given their dramatic impact, as well
as to the need for support to Lebanon and to the ongoing
threat that violent extremism poses to the region as a
whole.
From the moment when the two-State solution
began to be accepted almost 25 years ago as a result
of the Madrid Peace Conference and the commitments
undertaken by the parties, not only have we been
unable to implement it, but we are on the verge of
seeing it become an unattainable chimera. If there is a
single clear message that should emerge from today’s
debate it is that there is no alternative to the two-State
solution, which is the only one capable of guaranteeing
comprehensive global peace based on respect for the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to
establish their own State and of Israel to live in peace
and security with its regional neighbours. That means,
first of all, that we must all work to re-establish trust
between the parties, which has gradually been worn
away and damaged by decisions and events whose
end result has been the absence of a common ground
for dialogue. Trust cannot be restored without clear
signs from both parties designed to help change their

S/PV.7430

perception of one another and to generate the climate
necessary for the resumption of negotiations.
We must recognize that over the past few weeks
both sides have gone out of their way to demonstrate that
they hope to get their relations back on track. I trust that
the new Government to emerge from the democratically
expressed will of the Israel people will ratify that
hope and that it will take the brave decisions that will
signal a change in its policy concerning settlements on
occupied territories, especially in the most sensitive
areas. Similarly, I trust that the Palestinian Authority
will be capable of meeting the challenges it faces
by prioritizing the process of reconciliation and the
establishment of an effective Government of national
unity, which is the key to building a Palestinian State.
Furthermore, we trust that the political will to commit
to the peace process will take precedence over other
possible routes, such as the legalization of the conflict.
Gaza demands its own mention. Despite a few
minimal signs of progress at the logistical and
operational levels, we are far from establishing the
bases for promoting the profound transformation
that the Strip requires. I would like to offer just one
statistic. With an unemployment rate of more than
47 per cent, we must inevitably acknowledge that there
will be no solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict if the
population of Gaza does not have some hope for the
future. To that end, we must all take responsibility; that
includes the Palestinian authorities themselves, without
whose reconciliation very little can be achieved; the
authorities of Israel who, to be fair, are helping with
the Reconstruction Mechanism but who must move
ahead with lifting the blockade; and the international
community, which must make good on its promises of
financial aid.
What is to be done? Robert Serry outlined the
path in his farewell remarks to the Council (see
S/PV.7417). The solution must be comprehensive, not
partial, and in order to achieve it there needs to be a
new political framework that revives the peace process
and stimulates dialogue between the parties. The goal
is clear — the end of the occupation that began in 1967
and the creation of a democratic, economically viable
Palestinian State whose existence will contribute to
Israel’s peace and security.
Many actors need to play key parts along the way to
achieving that goal. The leadership of the United States
has been and will remain crucial. The European Union

15-1116327/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is also playing an essential role, and the regional focus
is indispensable. The Arab countries, through the Arab
Peace Initiative, must take the lead in the process. I am
convinced, however, that the Security Council needs to
take the greatest responsibility at this critical time. I
would like to reiterate that the aim of all our efforts is
to reach consensus among the members of the Council,
as reflected in a resolution that brings together clear,
comprehensive parameters as the basic framework for
reviving peace negotiations. It will take time, effort and
above all flexibility to achieve it, but only by providing
clear evidence of the Council’s resolve to pursue that
goal will we be able to offer the Palestinians and
Israelis the political vision that grows more necessary
with each passing day.
The alternative is to do nothing or to do so little
that we simply end up managing a failure — and by
failure I mean a new intifada or a new conflict in Gaza,
which would feed violent radicalism and be yet another
open conflict in the region. That leads me to a second
issue. As a matter of moral imperative and political
responsibility, the Security Council must be involved
in the fight to combat violent extremism in the Middle
East and the protection of minorities and the most
vulnerable populations. Any decision we adopt must
that take into account.
With respect to Lebanon, Spain feels particularly
close to that country and is firmly committed to
Lebanese unity, stability and security. I take this
opportunity to express my support to the Government
and institutions of Lebanon, in particular to its armed
forces. It is vital for the Lebanese political authorities
to redouble their efforts to guarantee institutional
continuity through the election of a new President. We
are aware of the challenges involved in managing the
Syrian humanitarian crisis. Precisely for that reason,
we are working actively within the Security Council
on the basis of a strategy to alleviate the impact on
neighbouring countries that, like Lebanon, are suffering
the consequences of the Syrian tragedy. I listened very
closely to the President when he referred to the refugee
problem in his country.
Concerning Syria, I await with great interest the
information we are due to receive later this week from
Staffan de Mistura, who enjoys our full support and
trust. That will be a good moment to evaluate the
political options and various efforts already under way,
such as the discussions recently held in Moscow. But I
cannot speak today of the situation in the Middle East

28/67

21/04/2015

without reiterating our call on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights. I call
in particular on the Government in Damascus not to
shirk its inescapable responsibility to protect its people
from the atrocities being committed in that country.
The situation in Yarmouk is horrendous, but it
should not surprise us. The continuous denial of access
to humanitarian assistance for the inhabitants of the
Yarmouk refugee camp, by both the Syrian regime
and other armed groups, is intolerable. More than a
year ago, through resolution 2139 (2014), the Council
demanded an end to the siege of hundreds of thousands
of people and a guarantee of immediate, unhampered
access to humanitarian assistance, with respect the
very basic principle of medical neutrality. Perhaps the
moment has come for us to consider adopting further
measures. The adoption of a press statement (SC/11865)
yesterday is a good first step.
Finally, I want to mention the situation in Yemen.
Last week, by adopting resolution 2216 (2015), we gave
the Secretary-General 10 days to report on the degree
of compliance with the Council provisions on Yemen.
For now, the Houthis have continued their advance
towards the south, openly defying the international
community while severely worsening the humanitarian
situation in the country. We fully support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to seek a political solution in
Yemen and welcome the new Special Envoy. However,
if the Houthi defiance continues, the Council will have
to take action; the very credibility of this organ is at
stake.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to lend my voice
to those who have welcomed you in our midst today,
Mr. President. We believe that your presence at this
debate is profoundly indicative of the prominence that
Jordan accords the question of the Middle East. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The prolonged stalemate in the Middle East
process is impeding an early resolution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and causing considerable concern
across the world, as you, Sir, must have heard today
from the speakers. Indeed, the internal dynamics in
Israel and Palestine appear to be stalling a return to
negotiations. We encourage the leadership on both sides
to demonstrate the necessary political will to allow for
a resumption of negotiations in consonance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and other agreements between the parties.
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

At a meeting held in Munich in February, the
Quartet called for a prompt resumption of talks between
the parties. Nigeria endorses the position of the Quartet
on the need for talks to take into account Israel’s
security concerns while respecting the aspirations
of Palestine for statehood. Nigeria unequivocally
reiterates its support for a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine existing side by side in peace and
security, as the only basis for a final resolution of the
question of Palestine.
In his final briefing to the Security Council
as Special Coordinator last month (see S/PV.7417),
Mr. Robert Serry urged the Council to take the lead
and present a framework for negotiations between the
parties. We share his view that such a course of action
is the only viable way to preserve the goal of a twoState solution.
Nigeria is particularly concerned about the
difficult humanitarian situation in Gaza occasioned by
last summer’s war. Much more remains to be done in
the Gaza reconstruction effort, which has been largely
hindered by an acute shortage of funds. Six months after
a donor conference was held in Cairo, only a fraction of
the funds pledged have been redeemed. We encourage
donors to honour the pledges they made to expedite the
reconstruction of Gaza.

S/PV.7430

A cessation of hostilities is vital to ameliorating the
humanitarian situation in Yemen and restoring peace
and stability to the country. Nigeria therefore urges the
parties to the ongoing conflict to return to the political
process. Ultimately, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, as well
as the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference
involving all parties in Yemen, constitutes the most
viable framework for sustainable peace in the country.
Nigeria’s wish for Yemen is a peaceful, prosperous,
united and democratic country where cultural diversity
will be a vital source of strength.
The President: I would remind all speakers to
ensure that their statements do not exceed four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its business
in a timely, efficient and expeditious manner. I would
request that delegations with lengthy statements
distribute those texts in the Chamber and speak within
the allotted four-minute time frame. I would also
request that speakers bear in mind that the speed of
delivery of statements needs to be reasonable so that
interpreters can follow them. I also wish to inform
everyone concerned that, as we have a large number
of speakers, we will proceed with today’s open debate
through the lunch hour.
(spoke in Arabic)

United Nations agencies such as the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) carrying out vital operations
in Gaza need to be supported financially. UNRWA’s
activities have been severely constrained by a lack of
funding. Greater commitment by donors would not
only bolster the activities of UNRWA, but it would also
facilitate its service delivery to needy Palestinians and
prevent further deterioration in the dire humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.

Turning to Yemen, Nigeria is deeply concerned by
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country.
Reports indicate that over 250,000 refugees have
been affected by the ongoing conflict. We note with
appreciation that, despite the challenging circumstances,
United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners
continue to coordinate with the Yemeni Red Crescent
and local authorities to delivery emergency assistance
to those in dire need. We pay tribute to the humanitarian
workers on the ground who sometime risk their lives in
the course of fulfilling their duties.

Let us first admit that the main facts pertaining to
the Middle East conflict have all become increasingly
alarming and that the situation is now deteriorating in
an unprecedented manner. Suffice it here to recall the
following.

Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for coming to New
York to preside over today’s meeting. I would also like
to congratulate your Mission, Sir, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month and to
thank you for all your suggestions on our work.
(spoke in English)

With 2,314 Palestinians and 97 Israelis killed, the
year 2014 witnessed the highest civilian death toll since
1967, due to the July/August hostilities in Gaza and a
significant increase in Palestinian fatalities in the West
Bank. In 2014, Gaza also witnessed the highest rate of
internal displacement since 1967. Some 28 per cent of
its population was internally displaced at the height

15-1116329/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the hostilities. It is true that since the ceasefire was
announced on 26 August the majority of internally
displaced persons returned home, but shelter needs
remain enormous, as up to 18,000 families no longer
have homes to return to.
Also in 2014, the number of people displaced in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem due to the demolition
of homes and property was the highest recorded in a
single year since the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs began tracking this indicator in
2008. Moreover, in 2014, the Israeli Government set
a 10-year record for the number of tenders issued for
settlement construction in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and construction starts increased in
2014 by 40 per cent over the previous year. We cannot
fail to mention that 2014 witnessed the collapse of the
United States-sponsored peace efforts, mainly due to
Israel’s political intransigence, its refusal to honour its
commitment to release Palestinian prisoners and its
aggressive policy of settlement expansion.
Mr. Hmoud took the Chair.
In 2015, however, worse was to come when the
Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, said
loud and clear during his electoral campaign that if
he were to be re-elected, a Palestinian State would not
be established “on his watch”. Moreover, he vowed to
increase settlement construction in East Jerusalem by
adding “thousands of housing units”. On election day,
in a notorious racist statement, he warned Arab citizens
of Israel against voting “in droves”.
Naftali Bennett, Minister of Economy in Netanyahu’s
Government, was in turn loud and clear on rejecting
the establishment of a Palestinian State by saying that
“the notion of injecting a State, dividing Jerusalem,
dividing up the country and splitting and slicing it, is
not sustainable”. In the same racist vein as Netanyahu,
in one of his infamous speeches, he also suggested that
Arabs were simply “thieves”. Let us not forget that
for Avigdor Liberman, Israel’s Foreign Minister, the
solution to “disloyal” Israeli Arabs was simple: “We
need to pick up an ax” and behead them.
The situation in our part of the world is indeed
becoming more and more difficult, but this is no excuse
for inaction. On the contrary, the more difficult a
conflict situation becomes, the greater the Council’s
responsibility. As a matter of fact, to be meaningful, any
resumption of negotiations on the Middle East conflict
should be based on well-defined parametres. A new

30/67

21/04/2015

comprehensive international framework and clear and
agreed-upon deadlines are also needed for the success
of such negotiations. Accordingly, the Council is called
upon to shoulder its responsibilities in maintaining
peace and security by addressing these critical issues
sooner rather than later.
Mr. President, do not let the situation deteriorate
any further. It is time for action.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Arab Republic of
Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, please allow me to congratulate Minister
Nasser Judeh and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
for its presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. I would also like to thank the President for
convening this meeting at this crucial stage of the
history of the Middle East, when recent events have
taken place that threaten the existence of certain States
in general, and Palestine in particular. I am sure that
the professionalism of the Jordanian Mission and the
keen commitment of Jordan to defend Arab causes
during the past year or so has made our Jordanian
colleagues capable of guiding us towards establishing
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. I would also
like to extend my congratulations to Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov on his appointment as United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. I wish
him every success. He enjoys our full support in this
difficult task.
I said that the establishment of peace in the Middle
East was a difficult endeavour. Everybody knows that.
Numerous and serious challenges exist, and in certain
circumstances we feel that such issues are very difficult
to overcome. That might jeopardize the two-State
solution. We hear sceptic voices here and there rejecting
this solution as a basis for a comprehensive settlement.
Several times, over many decades, the international
community has demonstrated that a lack of political
will prevails in achieving such a settlement. Recently,
last December, this happened in this very Council. The
international failure is actually a threat to international
peace and security. The Palestinian people have become
convinced that perhaps the sole purpose of the talks
is to continue without the parties having any genuine
intention of establishing two States living side by side
in peace and as good neighbours. In Egypt we say that
the failure to establish peace in the Middle East is not
an option, and in that regard there is continued despair.
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

That will turn the occupied Palestinian territories into
a fertile ground for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and terrorist organizations to prosper,
thereby increasing the sufferings of the Palestinian
people.
Indeed, we see how the Palestinians have been
victims of ISIL’s atrocious acts in the Yarmouk
Camp. All other countries, including Israel, are facing
multiple threats. That should be an incentive for Israel
to embark upon serious endeavours to establish peace.
After six decades of this ongoing crisis, we are fed up
of the wasted opportunities. The world at large has
seen that certain opportunities have been wasted. We
are all responsible for ensuring the same mistakes are
not repeated after rounds and rounds of useless talks.
As Mr. Robert Serry said in his recent briefing (see
S/PV.7417), the peace process was akin to a can that
is kicked down an endless road. The international
community should not stand by and just watch one party
that is not willing to establish such a settlement. Let
us build on the commendable efforts, especially those
made through the Arab Peace Initiative at the twentysixth ordinary session of the Council of the League of
Arab States, held in Sharm El-Sheikh, which issued
resolution 614. Paragraph 3 of the resolution mandates
the Arab Ministers to continue their consultations with
the Security Council, the United States Administration,
the Russian Federation, China and the European Union
in order to continue to try and establish peace.
What do we need and what are we waiting for
to end the occupation and establish peace? We have
witnessed the erosion of the lofty aims on which the
United Nations was established long ago. We would
like to commend the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for
the efforts it has exerted. I would also like to refer to
the commendable efforts by France to move forward,
its urging the Security Council to extend its support
for the peace process and indeed for introducing a draft
resolution for the reactivation of the peace process. The
Arab Republic of Egypt, in its capacity as the Chair of
the Arab committee mandated to follow up on the Arab
plan to end the Israeli occupation, would like to urge
everyone to cooperate. Indeed, Gaza is part and parcel
of the Palestinian territories. I would like to request all
the parties that participated in the Cairo international
conference on Palestine and reconstructing Gaza to
provide the necessary assistance.
The crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic is now
entering its fifth year. There can be no solution other

S/PV.7430

than a political one, based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, anex), under which the integrity of the
Syrian territories is to be preserved. I would like to
reiterate that Egypt will continue its efforts to provide
the necessary political support to all Syrian parties
willing to come to an agreement.
Once again, Egypt calls for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Golan Heights, in accordance with
resolution 242 (1967).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): It gives me great honour to speak on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and its
member States.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
President, for presiding over the Security Council this
month. We wish you every success in your task. I would
also like to congratulate the Jordanian presidency for its
excellent performance over the past few weeks. We also
thank the presidency for inviting us to take part in this
important discussion with regard to the situation in the
Middle East. I would also like to thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign and Expatriates Affairs of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for his statement, and
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
First of all, on behalf of the member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, I would like
to welcome the decision of the State of Palestine to
officially join the International Criminal Court. We
look forward to Palestine becoming a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations, thereby achieving part
of the justice that Palestine has been deprived of over the
past few decades. Palestine’s joining the International
Criminal Court is a very important and natural step
in that regard. However, it is also very important for
Palestine to establish a framework of accountability for
those in charge of the Israeli occupation of Palestine
and responsible for the confiscation of Palestinian tax
revenues, the blockade against Gaza and the hunger and
war in Gaza, as well as other violations committed by
Israel against Palestine.
That brave step comes within the framework of
the obdurate practices carried out by Israel, which
has refused to honour its commitments. It violates
international law and impedes all negotiations aimed
at reaching a settlement of the issue. In fact, the Israeli

15-1116331/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Prime Minister has rejected the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State. Therefore, we would like
to call upon all the countries of the world to honour their
commitments to support Palestine and acknowledge the
State of Palestine based on the borders of 4 June 1967,
with Jerusalem as its capital.
The OIC is committed to the basic rights of the
Palestinian people, as well as to their self-determination,
their rights and the establishment of an independent
State with Jerusalem as its capital. The OIC stresses
the importance of putting an end to the occupation by
Israeli troops of Arab territory, as well as the Syrian
Golan Heights and Lebanese territory. We call upon
the international community to put an end to the Israeli
occupation and to achieve a peace based on the twoState solution.
Israel is stubbornly imposing its oppressive and
racist policies on Palestine. The statements of the Israeli
Prime Minister during the recent Israeli elections
confirmed the Israeli policies of building settlements
and the racist wall, as well as the use of extreme violence
by Israeli troops against peaceful demonstrators. Israel
is carrying out a policy of deporting and intimidating
Palestinian people, in addition to other policies based
on impunity. Israeli troops have detained a number of
Palestinians, including members of Parliament, such
as Ms. Khalida Jarrar, without charges. The OIC has
condemned the serious threats and terrorist activities
carried out by Israeli terrorist settlers against the
Palestinian people under occupation.
In February, the Al-Huda mosque in Bethlehem and
a building affiliated with the Greek Orthodox church in
Jerusalem were destroyed. We condemn those attacks
on Islamic and Christian places of worship.
The OIC holds Israel fully responsible for all
those horrendous acts against the Palestinian people,
because Israel brought the terrorist settlers into the
occupied territory. We call upon all the leaders of the
international community to place them on the list of
terrorist groups.
The situation in the Gaza Strip is deteriorating
as a result of the Israeli blockade and aggression last
summer, in which more than 2,000 Palestinians were
killed. Because of that aggression, the humanitarian
organizations working in Gaza are suffering from a
shortage of funding. We must therefore support those
who are working in the humanitarian field. The OIC
calls upon the international community to give generous

32/67

21/04/2015

donations to the Palestinian people and those who are
supporting them.
We call upon the Council to demand that Israel
put an end to its inhumane blockade against Gaza
and to implement resolution 1860 (2009) with regard
to the delivery of humanitarian aid to Gaza without
impediments. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
calls upon the Security Council to put an end to the
suffering of the Palestinian people and to protect
Palestinian civilians.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation welcomed
the convening of the parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention on 17 December 2014. We would like to
reiterate that those parties are obliged to force Israel
and its occupying troops to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention and to implement it in Palestine, including
in Jerusalem. In fact, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, during his
briefing before the Council last month (see S/PV.7417),
asked if it was time for the Security Council to take the
leading role. We would like to pose the same question.
We must move towards achieving the aspirations of the
Palestinian people and the independence of its State,
based on the borders of 4 June 1967, with Jerusalem
as its capital. We must also achieve a resolution of
the issue of the Palestinian refugees, according to the
internationally legitimate resolutions.
I would like to continue my statement in my
national capacity by stressing that the situation in Syria,
after four years of conflict, is the largest catastrophe
of the century. In fact, the Syrian authorities continue
to perpetrate crimes against the Syrian people and
to use chemical weapons against civilians. They
cooperated with terrorist organizations in order to
carry out a massacre in Yarmouk refugee camp, which
reached the level of a genocide against the Palestinian
refugees. They are impeding access of humanitarian
relief into the occupied territory. In fact, the Security
Council has committed to taking measures in cases
where chemical weapons are used by any party and
to punishing any party that hampers the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. However, such threats, unless
actually implemented, will do no justice to the people
but will cast doubt on the integrity and credibility of
the Security Council and help the Syrian authorities
to pursue their practices. Indeed, the practices of the
Syrian authorities have helped the terrorist groups to
expand in Syria.

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses its
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms, regardless
of the perpetrators. We also note stress that terrorism
is transnational and that, in order to uproot it, we need
to address the main causes that have led to its spread,
including the practices of the Syrians authorities
leading to suppression, chaos and sectarian sedation.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has shown its ability to
take firm decisions and support our brothers. We will
spare no effort in helping the Syrian people to achieve
their aspirations to dignity and freedom in a way that
preserves the territorial integrity of Syria and respects
the rights of people in Syria. We call on the Security
Council to implement the relevant resolutions, including
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), calling
for the establishment of a transitional governing body
in order to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian
people.
In conclusion, the Israeli Ambassador’s statement
regarding the attack on Gaza and the support of the
Arab countries for the Palestinian people reflects a
double standard. It seems as if he wants only to highlight
what Israeli authorities have done in suppressing and
oppressing the Palestinian people in recent weeks. In
fact, the acceptance of such practices has to come to an
end. It is now time for the Security Council to prove to
Israel that it is not above the law.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil):
I thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for
convening this important open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. Brazil also wishes
to acknowledge the interventions of the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Deputy Permanent
Observer of the State of Palestine.
About a month ago in this Chamber, Mr. Robert Serry
shared his thoughts as the outgoing Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process. His message could
not be clearer, nor could it be more frustrating: “the
parties are heading towards an outcome which I can
only describe as a one-State reality” (S/PV.7417, p. 4).
Those were his words. Indeed, that is what we have
been witnessing in the past years, in particular after
the failure of three peace talks initiatives, all followed
by tragic wars in Gaza and the expansion of settlement
activities.

S/PV.7430

In the past months, statements by the Israeli
leadership to the effect that there is no prospect for
a Palestinian State in the near future were appalling.
Such statements can only fuel the cycle of confrontation
and mistrust, exacerbate the situation on the ground
and lead us farther away from peace. The international
community must take all necessary measures to bring
about a renewed negotiating process that will lead to a
two-State solution.
The international community cannot allow for the
current circumstances to be taken as normal. A clear
message against business-as-usual is urgently needed.
As Brazil has repeatedly pointed out, it remains the
primary responsibility of the Security Council to play its
role in developing a new peace architecture for ending
the conflict. We call on the Security Council to exercise
its responsibility and actively set the parameters for the
relaunching of the peace process.
Brazil welcomes the entry into force for Palestine
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The accession of the State of Palestine to the
Rome Statute represents an important step towards the
universality of the ICC, positively contributing to the
fight against impunity and to the promotion of lasting
peace and reconciliation. Once again, we reiterate that
the resort to multilateral mechanisms should not be met
with reprisals and sanctions.
Brazil is deeply disturbed by the realization that
we have entered the fifth year of the conflict cruelly
ravaging Syria, a nation to which we feel deeply
connected to due to the presence of many of its
nationals and descendants in our country. The drastic
deterioration in the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp
is a stark reminder that the situation can get even worse.
We strongly condemn the killings and serious human
rights violations perpetrated by the so-called Islamic
State and the Al-Nusra Front in the Yarmouk camp. We
firmly support the efforts by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to provide all necessary assistance.
Brazil urges all parties to the conflict to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, to provide unhindered access to humanitarian
agencies and to refrain from any action that could
protract the conflict any longer.
As Brazil has consistently reiterated, there is
no military solution for the conflict in Syria. It is
the responsibility of all countries to prevent further

15-1116333/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

militarization of the conflict, and to push for genuine
dialogue with a view to finding a political solution to
the conflict. Brazil has been contributing with food
and medicine to help alleviating the dire humanitarian
situation of Syrian refugees and dislocated people.
The need for the enhanced engagement of all parties
in political negotiations in Syria cannot be overstated.
We reiterate our support for the work of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura, as well as to the International
Inquiry Commission headed by Professor Paulo Sergio
Pinheiro. A genuine and inclusive dialogue, based
on full respect for human rights, the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, is
as urgent as ever. Brazil welcomes the second round
of intra-Syrian talks, held in Moscow, as an important
step towards the re-launch of the political process.
The security and stability in Lebanon is a matter
of great concern. The recent escalation of violence
reinforces the need to fully support the Lebanese
policy of disassociation from regional crises agreed
in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012. We firmly
support Lebanon in its fight against terrorism and
in its pursuit of stability and development. Our
participation in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, whose Maritime Task Force has been led by
a Brazilian officer since 2011, plays a prominent role
in translating our commitment into practical actions.
Brazil also contributes to strengthening the Lebanese
Armed Forces by training Lebanese navy cadets at the
Brazilian Navy School in Rio de Janeiro.
Brazil is encouraged by some of the latest
developments concerning the internal political
processes and national reconciliation efforts in Iraq.
We are, however, very concerned by the security and
humanitarian situation in the country, particularly
the control of the so-called Islamic State of extensive
parts of the Iraqi territory and its implications for the
entire region. We believe that a strategy focused only
on military operations will not be able to address the
root causes that led to the proliferation of terrorism and
religious extremism in the country.
Allow me to say a few words on Yemen. Brazil is
deeply concerned about the escalation of the conflict
in Yemen. We urge all parties to cease hostilities,
refrain from violence and resume dialogue in order to
peacefully resolve their differences. We are alarmed by
the severe deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
particularly the reports of hundreds of civilians killed

34/67

21/04/2015

or wounded, including many children. All the parties
have an obligation to protect civilians and respect
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
urge the countries of the region to use their influence
to bring the parties to the negotiating table and engage
them in seeking a diplomatic solution. We thank Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar for his tireless efforts, and are
fully confident that the United Nations will join forces
to pursue a negotiated solution.
The stakes in Yemen are too high. The political
stabilization of the country is urgent if we are to bring
about a halt to the violence, suffering and destruction
affecting civilians and to pave the way for humanitarian
assistance. That is also crucial to preventing the further
proliferation of religious extremism and terrorism.
We support the Security Council in its efforts to act
decisively in order to help Yemen fully restore security
and stability.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I speak today as the representative of one of the
main parties concerned in the item on today’s agenda.
How is it possible, in the twenty-first century,
for the United Nations to accept Israel’s continued
occupation — an occupation that is military, racist and
colonial, an occupation that involves heinous crimes
and violations and supports terrorism? How can we
continue to allow the United Nations to fail to uphold
its legal and historic responsibility for ending the Israeli
occupation that has plagued our lands for more than half
a century? That is despite the fact that the Organization
has adopted hundreds of resolutions calling for an
end to this racist, colonizing occupation that bears a
strong resemblance to apartheid. Do we need more
commissions of inquiry, fact-finding missions, expert
groups and quartets to convince us of the gravity of
the Israeli occupation? The United Nations is being
severely tested. If we want to maintain what is left of its
credibility, some countries will have to end their policies
of hypocrisy, double standards and trafficking in their
peoples’ interests. Member States must act with deeds
rather than words by taking practical measures that can
force Israel to implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions, so that we can put an end this colonizing
occupation and the unprecedented tragic suffering that
Arab citizens have endured for decades in the Syrian
Golan and other occupied Arab territories.

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

There are those among us who should not deceive
themselves and the rest of the world by continuing to
provide excuses and justifications for Israel’s policies.
We are all well aware that successive Israeli Governments
have never cared about peace but have been eager to
continue with their policies of occupation, settlement
and aggression. They have occupied and annexed the
Syrian Golan and Palestinian Jerusalem. They have
committed crimes of aggression and war against
humanity; they have killed United Nations envoys and
peacekeepers; they have attacked Christian and Muslim
religious sites and are now trying to Judaize the State.
Israel’s current Prime Minister has stated clearly that
he rejects a two-State solution. In 1991, Israel’s former
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said in a statement on
the margins of the Madrid Conference that the Israeli
delegation had instructions simply to keep the talks
going for 10 years in order to buy time. It is shocking that
here in the Security Council there are those who would
deny Palestinians their most basic rights, including the
right to establish a State on their national territory and
to set a deadline for ending the Israeli occupation. They
continue to support Israel economically, diplomatically
and politically. They continue to guarantee its military
superiority and acquisition of nuclear weapons, as well
as protecting it from any accountability.
Israel has occupied the Syrian Golan since 1967.
It has imposed a bitter reality on Syrian citizens there
that must be ended by every possible means guaranteed
under international law. The United Nations must
therefore shoulder its responsibility for dealing with
that reality with full seriousness and through the
implementation of the relevant resolutions, particularly
Security Council resolution 497 (1981). Israel must end
its systematic and grave violations of human rights.
There should be an end to the policies of settlement,
terrorism, repression, racial discrimination and theft of
the Golan’s natural resources, including water, oil and
gas, as well as halting the arbitrary arrests of Syrian
citizens. In that regard, we urge the Secretary-General
and the Security Council to exert the humanitarian
efforts needed to force Israel to release all Syrian
detainees, most importantly the Nelson Mandela of
Syria, Sedqi Al-Maqet, who was arrested again in
February for no reason except his documentation of the
relationship of Israel’s occupation forces with terrorist
groups in the area of separation in the Syrian Golan.
He was imprisoned in Israeli detention centres for
27 years on no legal grounds, simply because he would

S/PV.7430

not renounce his allegiance to Syria and refused to
carry an Israeli identity card.
There is international silence around such Israeli
practices. Israel has violated the 1974 Separation of
Forces Agreement, endangered the lives of staff of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) and undermined UNDOF’s mandate by
supporting terrorist groups in the area of separation,
including Jabhat Al-Nusra, which is linked to Al-Qaida,
including by providing such groups with all kinds of
logistical support, even treating their injured members
in Israeli hospitals. We therefore demand that this
grave issue receive serious and immediate attention.
The Secretariat and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations have ignored it, and there can be no
justification for that.
In that regard, I would like to point out that it is clear
to all of us that some speakers’ misleading statements
are designed only to fabricate areas of contention
in order to distract the Security Council’s attention,
reduce pressure on Israel and mask the fact that Israel
has rejected a two-State solution and the entire peace
process. To the representatives of the United Kingdom
and the United States, I say here that they must stop
their hypocrisy and lies. If they are concerned about
the situation of Palestinian refugees, they should not
support Israel, which constitutes the main reason for
the ordeal that those refugees have endured since
1948. They are partners in creating and continuing
that ordeal, whether inside or outside Syria. They
have used the veto dozens of times in order to protect
Israel’s failure to implement the right of return under
General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Syria has taken
in those refugees, considering them to be its brothers
and sisters, welcoming them and treating them with
the same generosity we show to Syrians, and we will
continue to make every effort to protect them from the
terrorism supported by the United States, the United
Kingdom and other regional and Arab States, until they
can return to their homeland in occupied Palestine.
Finally, the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia used shameful and unacceptable words to refer
to my country. I will not address his political incitement,
which is based not on information but on ignorance. He
has forgotten that this item on the agenda concerns the
Palestinian question, and he has been doing a service
to the Government of Israel and its allies. Zionism and
Saudi Arabia are at the root of terrorism, fanaticism and
the culture of hatred in the world. It is the culture of

15-1116335/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The culture of
beheading is a culture from Jahili times; it is takfiri,
Wahhabi and it comes from Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabia’s policies have sowed the seeds of
sectarian sedition in the region. It will pay the price
for that mistake. The threats made by its representative
against my country and his claims that Saudi Arabia
is ready to help the Syrian people only confirm that
the hands of his country’s rulers are red with Syrian
blood and that they are deeply involved in funding,
harbouring and supporting Wahhabi terrorists. Saudi
Arabia sends mercenaries from all over the world to
Syria so that they can undermine its stability.
Saudi Arabia continues to be the centre of the
culture of hatred and sectarianism. It is very much like
Zionist Israel. If the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia really
has the authority to threaten my country as he just did,
then I shall test him now. I ask him, before all present,
to show us what he can do against my country. We will
cut off any hand that tries to hurt Syria; the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia will receive the punishment that it
deserves.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Carrera Castro (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of Guatemala
would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Jordan, Mr. Nasser Judeh, and to thank him warmly
for being so actively involved at the beginning of this
debate. We also wish to congratulate the delegation of
Jordan for its exemplary leadership and the work that
it has undertaken throughout the month of April in
exercise of the office of the presidency of the Security
Council. The Ambassador of Jordan is a great personal
friend, and we hope to be able to meet up with her again
on Thursday and Friday.
We also have taken due note of the statement made
by the Secretary-General on recent developments in
the Middle East, a region in which various countries
find themselves racked by instability and conflict. The
fallout of the violence in the region has been disastrous
for the civilian population, and, as my delegation noted
in this very Chamber last month, we are particularly
concerned by the plight of the many ethnic and religious
communities that are under serious threat.
The international community has borne witness to
how violence, fundamentalism, intolerance, exclusion
and the tearing apart of the very fabric of society have
36/67

21/04/2015

come to exemplify the characteristics of a political and
social model that is no longer viable. For that reason,
we must redouble our efforts to encourage leaders in
the region to respect human rights and forge a better
future for their peoples.
Since the suspension of the latest rounds of peace
talks in April 2014, we have seen a rapid deterioration in
the situation between Israel and Palestine, which means
that the desired two-State solution seems increasingly
difficult to achieve. For that reason, it is important that
we put together a political timeline that responds to the
legitimate needs of both peoples and that will lead to a
definitive and just settlement. It is for this reason that
the international community must play an active role in
supporting and promoting the peace process.
We acknowledge the value of the principle of
shared responsibility, and for that reason we believe
that the active participation of both the diplomatic
Quartet on the Middle East and the Security Council
in the peace process could generate new momentum,
so that the parties can take responsible steps towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
In this regard, we encourage a dialogue on the Arab
Peace Initiative, with its vision of a comprehensive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, and on the vital
role that could be played by the countries of the region
and the Security Council.
The parties must shy away from adopting measures
that would further hinder prospects for the relaunching
of meaningful talks. We believe that it is the parties to
conflict themselves that must make real and renewed
efforts that would include, inter alia, a complete lifting
of the blockade, a halt to the construction of illegal
settlements, and abstaining from provocative actions
and from the launching of rockets, with the objective
of meeting the legitimate security concerns of Israel.
It is essential that the parties build mutual trust
and commit to dialogue on peace and to the two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side
in peace and security, adopting measures aimed at
rebuilding mutual trust and confidence.
We welcome the announcement of an agreement
under which Israel has agreed to release tax revenues
collected on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, as this
is an important step towards the rebuilding of trust
between both parties. The withholding of that income
for more than four months has had a deeply destabilizing
effect on Palestinian institutions, particularly as
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

concerns their ability to pay salaries in the public sector
and provide essential services to the population.
Additionally, Guatemala strongly supports the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and in that context we deem positive the entry into force
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
for Palestine. We are firm advocates for the universality
of the Court and believe that this step reflects the full
commitment of the State of Palestine to work towards a
system of accountability and respect for human rights,
elements that can only serve to help pave the path to
peace for both parties.
The crisis in Syria, which is entering its fifth year,
continues in a spiral of violence and destruction. We
categorically condemn the human rights violations
committed by all parties. We are aware of the
tremendous efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
particularly through the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to respond
to the devastating impact of this conflict, but the
international community also has a role to play. We
reiterate the urgent need to rekindle the political process,
and we believe, therefore, that any effort towards a
peaceful settlement between the parties is valuable
and should enjoy our support. We also commend the
efforts undertaken by the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to deal with the Syrian conflict.
The international community, in particular the
members of the Security Council, must overcome their
differences and seek new ways of reducing violence,
alleviating the suffering of the population and creating
the necessary conditions conducive to the resumption
of negotiations.
We are particularly concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Essential services
such as health care, education and sanitation are at
a breaking point, and the current assistance being
provided to support these systems is not sufficient.
Any humanitarian aid that can be provided is vital for
restoring political stability in the region.
Against that backdrop, we would like to note the
invaluable support lent by the Governments and peoples
of those countries that have given refuge to thousands
of Syrian refugees, thus shouldering an undue and
heavy burden. Here we pay particular tribute to the role
of Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Egypt in that regard.

S/PV.7430

We condemn all attacks on refugee camps. It
is vital that all parties to the conflict protect the
civilian population and permit regular and ongoing
humanitarian access to affected populations. We are
firmly convinced that it is the State that bears the
primary responsibility to protect the civilian population
and that in no circumstances can it violate the rights
of said population, in particular through recourse
to violent means. It is necessary to ensure that any
serious crimes that have been committed from the very
beginning of this conflict do not go unpunished. The
Syrian people deserve accountability.
We are aware of the tremendous challenges that
the quest for a political solution poses to the parties
to the conflict, both nationally and internationally,
but this is the only option open to us. It is our political
and historical responsibility, as States members of the
international community, to support all of the steps that
might help us to achieve the goal of peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
Movement’s appreciation for the convening of this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, at this critical juncture for
Palestine, the Palestinian people and the international
community. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to once again reaffirm its long-standing solidarity with
the Palestinian people. It also reiterates its support for
the realization of the Palestinian people’s legitimate
national aspirations and inalienable rights, including
to self-determination and freedom in their independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
a just solution for the plight of the Palestinian refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III).
NAM stresses the urgency of achieving a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, and calls for the exertion of serious efforts by
all the parties concerned to realize this long-overdue

15-1116337/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

objective. A peaceful solution to the question of Palestine
remains a priority on the Movement’s agenda. The
year 2014, which had been proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, has passed, and yet the suffering
and injustice borne by the Palestinian people continues.
Israeli intransigence and illegal policies continue to
undermine the resumption of credible negotiations and
to obstruct the achievement of a just and lasting solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We express our grave
concern regarding the consequent deterioration of the
situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and stress that
the status quo is unsustainable. The situation requires
immediate attention by the international community.
Despite decades of good-faith participation in
peace efforts and a clear commitment by the Palestinian
people and their leadership to international law, which
was reaffirmed by the recent accession by the State
of Palestine to several international conventions and
treaties, including the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the Palestinian plight and predicament
have worsened on all fronts. That is due directly
to illegal Israeli policies and practices, which have
entrenched the occupation and undermined all peace
efforts to the point casting the viability of the two-State
solution into grave doubt.
The situation deteriorated dramatically, and the
brutalization of the Palestinian people reached a new
apex, when the Israeli military aggression waged against
the besieged and blockaded Gaza Strip in July and
August 2014. Israel has not been held accountable for
those crimes, despite the fact that the occupying forces
launched tens of thousands of missiles, bombs, artillery
shells and live ammunition against the defenseless
Palestinian civilian population. NAM continues to call
for accountability for all of those violations and crimes.
Moreover, we urge the international community to
fulfil pledges made at the Cairo conference on Palestine
to accelerate reconstruction in the Gaza Strip and to
provide the Palestinian people with the humanitarian
assistance urgently needed to alleviate their suffering.
We also reiterate the call for an end to the Israeli
blockade of Gaza and the inhumane isolation of the
Palestinian people there.
NAM also reiterates its strong condemnation
of Israel’s continuing and escalating settlement
construction throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around occupied East

38/67

21/04/2015

Jerusalem, in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and United Nations resolutions, including
of the Council. Those and other systematic violations,
including the demolition of homes, the forced
displacement of Palestinian civilians, the arrest and
detention of Palestinians, including children, and the
incessant violence, terror and provocation by Israeli
settlers and extremists, including at sensitive religious
Muslim and Christian sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, have worsened conditions on the ground,
inflicted grave hardships on the Palestinian people,
further fragmented their land and contributed to the
destruction of the viability of the two-State solution.
Moreover, all such illegal Israeli policies and practices
deepen the already serious doubts that prevail regarding
Israel’s claimed commitment to the two-State solution
and peace — claims that have been further undermined
by the blatant and shocking anti-peace, anti-two-State
solution declarations by Israeli officials, including in
the recent election campaign.
We have all acknowledged that the situation is
unsustainable and that this unjust situation cannot
be allowed to continue. The Security Council cannot
remain on the sidelines as the international community
continues to seek a just and peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine, especially when the situation
continues to deteriorate so dramatically and threatens
complete destabilization. NAM therefore urges the
Security Council to act forthwith, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, and to undertake
resolute action towards ending the Israeli occupation
and the decades-long injustice against the Palestinian
people.
We regret that, contrary to the overwhelming
international consensus in that regard, as reflected
in the vote of 181 Member States in the General
Assembly in support of the right of Palestinian people
to self-determination and freedom and the many
other declarations from around the globe, including
Government, inter-governmental and non-governmental
organization and parliament appeals for an end to
this prolonged conflict, in 2014 the Security Council
failed to shoulder its responsibilities and meaningfully
contribute to a peaceful solution in the Middle East.
NAM believes that the message is loud and clear
worldwide: it is time to end the abhorrent Israeli
occupation and impunity that has brought about so
much suffering, caused so many crises, sown so much
instability and anger throughout the Middle East, and

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that continues to undermine regional and global peace
and security. In addition to the annual resolutions of
the General Assembly, that message was also been
strongly reaffirmed in the recent Conference of High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention,
hosted by Switzerland in its capacity as depositary
State. That message has also been and continues to
be reaffirmed by the appeals launched by numerous
European Parliaments calling for recognition of the
State of Palestine, and the fact that 135 countries
already recognize the State of Palestine.
United Nations States Members have conferred
upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, and we
strongly urge the Council to act to uphold its own
responsibilities towards the question of Palestine with
full recognition of the implications that will have for
peace and security in the Middle East and beyond.
Today, NAM calls, and will continue to call, upon the
Security Council to act in accordance with its Charter
duties, and stresses the important role to be played in
that regard by NAM caucus members.
Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions against
its territory, followed by years of occupation and
aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese airspace and to intensify its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are blatant violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006), the
provisions of which should be implemented in a manner
that guarantees the consolidation of the foundations of
stability and security in Lebanon and prevents Israel
from undertaking its daily violations of Lebanese
sovereignty.
Finally, with regard to the occupied Syrian Golan,
the Movement condemns all the measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
which have intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian
crisis. The Non-Aligned Movement once again demands
that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders
of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.

S/PV.7430

Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me to join
others, Mr. President, in congratulating you and your
country on Jordan’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We also wish to thank
the President for convening this important debate.
For many years, South Africa has called for
increased engagement by the Council on the question
of Palestine, as we hold the view that the Council has
an obligation to step in to end impunity on the ground
and to move the stalled peace process forward. We
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his important
briefing. At this time, we wish to express our gratitude
to Mr. Robert Serry for his years of service and for
his work in trying to resolve one of the world’s most
intractable conflicts. My delegation welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as the new
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of Secretary-General to the
Palestinian Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority. We wish him every success in carrying out
his duties and assure him of our strong support for his
work.
Mrs. Kawar took the Chair.
South Africa associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In his last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7417),
Mr. Serry recalled that, during his tenure in office,
three United States-led peace initiatives remained
inconclusive and did not bring us closer to the urgently
needed peace agreement based on the two-State
solution. Moreover, all three stalled negotiations were
followed by wars in Gaza, leaving the Strip devastated
and worsening the humanitarian situation on the
ground. That led Mr. Serry to call for a new strategy to
be adopted by the United States and the international
community to prioritize the situation in Gaza. He
also urged the Security Council to take the lead and
to present a framework for the negotiations to the
parties. He expressed the belief that it would be the only
way to preserve and achieve the two-State solution.
Mr. Serry cautioned that the situation on the ground
was developing towards a one-State “solution”, which
is not a solution.
South Africa believes that the time to act is long
overdue. The illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza
Strip continues to inflict grave suffering to the lives

15-1116339/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of 1.8 million Palestinians, worsening the already
pervasive humanitarian crisis. We reiterate our deep
concern that the solution envisioned by the Oslo
Accords more than 20 years ago is being taken apart
piecemeal with every new settlement that is announced.
The settlements are not only illegal under international
law, but also remain a major stumbling block to the
achievement of sustainable peace.
Essentially, the Israeli settlement activities are
confiscating Palestinian territory essential for a future
State and aim to isolate East Jerusalem from other
main Palestinian cities, thus seriously threatening the
very achievement of the two-State solution in line with
the overwhelming call for the creation of a sovereign,
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
coexisting peacefully alongside the State of Israel on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. We again call on Israel to immediately
stop its settlement activities as an obligation under
various Security Council resolutions and international
law. Moreover, Israel’s actions in Gaza also constitute
a violation of international humanitarian law, including
article 23 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and violate
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and
1860 (2009).
To date, the Security Council has failed to hold
Israel responsible for its violations of Council decisions,
thereby enabling Israel’s impunity. The dire situation
is punctuated by provocations and attacks against the
holy sites in East Jerusalem, by the violent response
to peaceful protests by Palestinians and by attacks
by illegal settlers against Palestinian communities.
We recently witnessed the effect of those attacks,
with individual Palestinians retaliating. South Africa
reiterates its condemnation of all forms of violence,
including that perpetrated by individuals, as detrimental
to the teetering peace process.
South Africa welcomes the announcement by
Israel and Palestine on Saturday, 18 April, that an
agreement had been reached to release hundreds of
millions of dollars in tax revenues and customs duties
withheld from the Palestinian Authority since the
beginning of the year. We hope that the agreement
will be implemented without delay. We reiterate that
withholding tax revenue is illegal collective punishment
in response to Palestine’s accession to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court and to other
international agreements and organizations. We believe
that, as a State, Palestine has the right to join whatever

40/67

21/04/2015

organizations it pleases, and we will support Palestine’s
membership application to the United Nations, which
has stalled in the Council.
South Africa looks forward to the release of the
report of the Human Rights Council’s Commission of
Inquiry established to investigate war crimes committed
during the last Gaza conflict. We acknowledge the
difficulties the Commission has faced, but we hope that
it will not affect the impartiality or the thoroughness
of the report and that it will be a first step towards the
realization of justice for the many victims of the Gaza
conflict. We remain committed to a just, lasting and
peaceful solution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and we support international efforts aimed at the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State.
With regard to Syria, my delegation is deeply
disappointed that the Syrian conflict has been raging
for more than four years, with devastating humanitarian
consequences and with no prospect of abating. It is one
of the worst humanitarian disasters facing humankind,
with severe political and economic consequences for
the entire region. The only hope for the Syrian people
lies in the willingness of all the parties to the conflict
to immediately put an end to the violence and to
start engaging each other constructively and without
preconditions, with the aim of reaching an agreement
on a political transition in the spirit of reconciliation,
based on the Geneva communiqué of June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). South Africa supports the ongoing
diplomatic efforts of the Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to find a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
In conclusion, South Africa also deplores the
repulsive atrocities and human rights violations
committed against minorities by extremists in the
region. It is important for the international community
to work together to counter that threat and prevent it
further spread.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
thanks the Foreign Minister of Jordan for presiding
over this meeting earlier. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his perceptive briefing to the Council.
The Middle East is the cradle of human civilization.
Today, sadly, it appears to have become the cradle of
chaos — riven by conflict and regional rivalry, afflicted
by terrorism and extremism and enduring massive
human suffering. Unless this chaos, within and across
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7430

borders, is contained and controlled, it will endanger
global peace, security and prosperity.

Council must ensure action by those in a position to
contribute to restoring peace and order in Libya.

Each of the several conflicts in the Middle East
needs to be addressed simultaneously — if separately,
with long-term vision rather than short-term or partisan
perspectives. The proximate causes of each conflict are
different, yet there are some common threads: the failure
of Governments and governance to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the peoples concerned, unresolved issues
and the consequences of outside interventions, as well
as acts of omission by the international community.

In Syria, a Hobbesian war of all against all rages, with
cruelty and human suffering of a magnitude that calls
into question the very humanity of the perpetrators. The
situation in the Palestinian refugee camp in Yarmouk
defies description. ISIS must be defeated. But for peace
and order to be restored, a political solution will need
to be negotiated between those willing to make mutual
accommodations. The Geneva process, United Nations
mediation, the Russian initiative and all other avenues
should be utilized to evolve a political solution to that
difficult conflict. The first priority should be to end the
massive human suffering of the Syrian people.

In many ways — political, historic and
emotional — Palestine and the plight of its people
remain the root cause of the conflict and chaos that
now rages across the Middle East. Sadly, today the
prospect of a just solution to that perennial problem
is further away than at any other time. The recent
pronouncements by Israel have appalled even its closest
friends. Even if words can be retracted, the continued
spread of illegal Israeli settlements on Palestinian lands,
the blockade of Gaza, the provocations around the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque and the continued imprisonment of
Palestinians pose ever-growing obstacles to a twoState solution. Such actions are effectively foreclosing
the prospect of an independent, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The Security Council bears the responsibility to
act with vigour and unanimity to enforce its resolutions
demanding a just and durable settlement. The Council
should adopt a draft resolution establishing the
parameters of the Palestinian State, set a timeline for
ending the occupation and launch a new peace process
to take negotiations forward.
Wittingly or otherwise, the long conflict in and
around Iraq has exacerbated ethnic and sectarian fault
lines and given new life to Al-Qaida and birth to an
even more abhorrent terrorist entity, namely, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) — or Daesh — which
now rampages across Iraq and Syria and is gaining
adherents beyond, in Libya and elsewhere. In the cases
of Libya and Syria, the road to hell has been paved with
good intentions. The tragic outcomes are self-evident.
The Arab Spring has turned into a cold and forbidding
winter.
In Libya, tribal and regional rivalries have
combined with extremist militants, including ISIS
affiliates, to generate conditions of chaos. The Security

In Yemen, the parameters of international
legitimacy are much clearer. A rebel group, with the
aid of dissident leaders, has occupied large parts of
the country and forced out the legitimate Government,
including the country’s President. That situation,
created by illegal force, cannot be allowed to stand,
much less be accepted as the basis for negotiating a
settlement of the crisis.
Pakistan welcomed the adoption of resolution
2216 (2015) and called for its full and effective
implementation. We believe that the restoration of the
Government of President Hadi will be an important
step towards establishing peace in Yemen. The Council
has called on the rebels to cease hostilities and vacate
the areas they have occupied. That ought to be ensured.
That said, there is an urgent need for finding a peaceful
negotiated solution to the crisis through dialogue.
Several of the conflicts that have erupted across the
Middle East reflect the exacerbation of fault lines within
the Muslim countries concerned. The Islamic world
must not allow those fissures to tear apart the divinely
prescribed unity of the Ummah — the community of
all Muslims. Pakistan stands ready to do all it can to
promote peace and reconciliation within the world of
Islam.
Finally, Pakistan’s unwavering solidarity with the
people of Palestine is manifested by its support over the
decades. We urge the Council to act and take the lead
on that issue. The resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
will also help address the new conflicts that engulf the
Middle East. Urgency is essential.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union.

15-1116341/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union position on the Middle
East peace process has been clear, consistent and
unequivocal for many years and will remain so. The
only realistic way to solve the conflict is through an
agreement between the parties that ends the occupation
that began in 1967, that ends all claims and that fulfils
the aspirations of both sides. A lasting solution to the
conflict must be achieved that would see the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition. The
present regional context makes the urgency of such a
solution even more pressing.
Let me point out that, in the interests of time, I shall
deliver a shortened version of my statement. I draw the
attention of delegations to the full text, which will be
circulated.
The preservation of the viability of the two-State
solution must remain a priority. We are concerned
about developments on the ground that could make
the prospect of a two-State solution increasingly
unattainable. Israel should halt all new settlements
in the West Bank. We continue to urge the parties to
renew their commitment to the two-State solution, to
build trust and to resume meaningful negotiations with
the aim of achieving a comprehensive peace agreement.
The European Union also reiterates its call upon the
Palestinian leadership to use constructively its United
Nations status and not to undertake steps that could
lead further away from a negotiated solution.
The international community must assume its
responsibility in facilitating such a resumption of
negotiations. The Quartet must redouble its efforts
to facilitate a renewed peace process and, in doing
so, reach out to all stakeholders, in particular in the
region. In that context, it must be recalled that the Arab
Peace Initiative — the continued validity of which
was confirmed recently by Arab leaders— remains
of strategic importance for any future comprehensive
peace agreement.

42/67

21/04/2015

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace and security, including with
regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, We therefore
fully support continued efforts within the Council to
find common ground on a draft resolution that would
convey an authoritative message to the parties about
the framework within which to reach an agreement. We
believe that the EU position on final status parameters,
as set out in Council conclusions, can provide a basis
for rapidly steering such efforts towards consensus.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. Basic
infrastructure and services must be restored. Pledges
made by members of the international community
towards the reconstruction of Gaza need to be
honoured as a matter of urgency. We continue to call
for a fundamental change of the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, including the end
of the closure. The parties must urgently make progress
towards a durable ceasefire, based on their agreement
in Cairo on 26 August, and reach an agreement that both
ends the Gaza closure and addresses Israel’s legitimate
security concerns. The Palestinian factions should
put aside their rivalries in favour of a real national
reconciliation, restoring Governmental control by the
Palestinian Authority in the Gaza Strip, starting with
a re-opening of the crossing points and civil service
reform.
The European Union offers its full support to
the Secretary-General’s newly appointed Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov. Last week, the Council of the European
Union appointed Mr. Fernando Gentilini as EU Special
Representative for the Middle East Peace Process.
We reiterate our substantial offer to Israelis and
Palestinians of a special privileged partnership with the
European Union in the event of peace. The EU remains
determined to follow very closely developments on the
ground and their broader implications, and remains
ready to take further action to preserve the two-State
solution. Together, the parties, the neighbouring
countries and the wider international community must
do all they can to engage finally and decisively on the
path of a comprehensive solution to the entire IsraeliArab conflict. For its part, the European Union is
firmly intent on being present and engaged at all stages
of such a process.
The European Union remains committed to
achieving lasting peace, stability and security in Syria,

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Iraq and the wider region, as well as to countering the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). To that end, on 16 March, we adopted conclusions
on a detailed regional strategy focusing on these
priorities. We reiterate that a lasting solution urgently
requires a Syrian-led inclusive political process, and we
fully support Special Envoy de Mistura’s intention to
push for consultations with all the relevant domestic and
international actors, with a focus on the contents of the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). There is an
urgent need to revive the political process and advance
the prospects for achieving a political transition, based
on the Geneva communiqué and in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We deplore the ongoing violations and abuses
of international humanitarian and human rights
law. Perpetrators of such abuses need to be held to
account. Justice and accountability should therefore be
included in the political process from the outset. We
call on all Syrian parties to show clear and concrete
commitment to such a political process, and we urge
those with influence on the parties — and notably on
the Al-Assad regime — to put pressure on them to end
all violence and to engage constructively in the process.
We also call on all parties to respect their international
obligations to ensure the protection of civilians. The
European Union strongly condemns the escalation of
violence by the Al-Assad regime, whose brutal war
against its own people, massive human rights violations
and systematic obstruction of democratic reforms have
heavily contributed to the flourishing of ISIL in Syria.
The conditions in the Palestinian refugee camp
in Yarmouk have become critical and need to be
addressed with the utmost urgency. The ongoing
denial of humanitarian access to the refugees living in
Yarmouk by the Syrian regime and other belligerents
is unacceptable. All sides should cease their hostilities
in order to ensure immediate and unconditional
humanitarian access to those in need and provide safe
passage for all civilians who wish to leave the camp,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
As the European Union, we commend the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for the important work it
is doing. We will continue to work together with its
Commissioner-General, Pierre Krähenbühl, and all
other partners to help alleviate the suffering of people
in the greatest need.

S/PV.7430

We also note with serious concern that humanitarian
needs continue to increase, while access is being
hampered by an increasing number of constraints.
The European Union condemns the Al-Assad regime’s
continued intransigence on humanitarian access. We
reiterate our call on all parties, in particular the Al-Assad
regime, to comply with and immediately implement
in full the provisions of the relevant resolutions. We
will seek to accelerate the implementation of those
resolutions to deliver cross-border and cross-line
assistance in order to help those most desperately in
need.
Finally, the European Union is deeply concerned
about the allegations of the use of toxic chemicals in
barrel bomb attacks in the Idlib governorate between
16 and 31 March. If these alleged chlorine attacks
are substantiated, they would violate the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2209 (2015), which envisage further measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in
case of non-compliance. The international community
must ensure that impunity does not prevail.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Jordan for convening and participating in
today’s open debate. A look at recent events in the
Middle East serves to highlight the vital importance
that Mexico gives diplomacy and dialogue as key tools
for crafting long-term political solutions to conflicts
that affect the region.
The continuing humanitarian crisis in Syria, the
deplorable violence against civilians by extremist
groups in several countries in the Middle East, the
accelerating deterioration of the situation in Yemen and
the stagnation of the peace talks between Israelis and
Palestinians are a selective sample of the challenges
the international community as a whole is facing in
its attempts to achieve security, stability and higher
levels of development in the region. The loss of
innocent lives in each of those crises and the violations
of international law can no longer be the common
denominator of a region that has contributed so much
to modern civilization.
Since the suspension of the latest round of peace
talks between Palestine and Israel a year ago, we see
a process of political decay between the parties and
a worsening humanitarian situation for millions of

15-1116343/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians. The reconstruction and development
of the Gaza Strip depends not only on a political
process that reflects the will of the parties, but also
the unrestricted access of humanitarian assistance
pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009). We advocate for
the secure and ongoing implementation of the tripartite
mechanism established to monitor the entry of people
and supplies into Gaza, ensuring both attention to the
basic needs of the Palestinian people and the security
of Israel.
My delegation reiterates its support for a
comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict based on the recognition of the right of
existence of the State of Israel and the establishment of
a politically and economically viable Palestinian State
and which allows for coexistence in peace and security
within secure borders and internationally recognized.
Mexico believes that Israeli settlements on
Palestinian territory are a violation of international law,
and therefore constitute one of the main obstacles to
reaching a peaceful solution to the conflict.
We expect the new Government to reaffirm Israel’s
commitment to the two-State solution and that it take
measures to promote the atmosphere needed to restart
negotiations. We are also convinced that hatred and
discrimination will never lead to peace. We echo
the condemnations of all forms of racism, including
anti-Semitic attacks or demonstrations, wherever they
occur and whatever the pretext.
The international community cannot remain a
passive actor while the root causes of conflict persist.
Mexico reiterates its call for the Security Council to
fulfil its responsibilities under the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Its involvement, support
and leadership in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
is vital. We call for the resumption of peace talks as
soon as possible, and reiterate our commitment to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict and our willingness
to continue contributing to international efforts towards
that goal.
We take the opportunity of this open debate to
also express our profound concern over the rapid
deterioration of, and escalation of the crisis in, Yemen,
which has not only led to violence against civilians but
also turned into a severe humanitarian crisis owing
to the failure to provide people with access to their
basic needs in various parts of the country. I reiterate
the concern expressed by several previous speakers at

44/67

21/04/2015

the unfortunate loss of civilian lives as a result of the
violence. We call for dialogue between the parties and
the active mediation of the United Nations with a view
to reaching a political solution, not a military one, that
can allow us to reach a firm and lasting solution to the
Yemeni conflict.
Along similar lines, we are in favour of a political,
peaceful negotiated solution to the Syrian conflict that
guarantees respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. The gravity of the level of violence
in that country and attacks against the population are
unprecedented. We believe that the use of chemical
weapons is not only a violation of international law,
but also an unacceptable chapter in our contemporary
history. Once again, we condemn the use of prohibited
chemical weapons against civilians in Syria, by
whomsoever and under any circumstances.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the commitment of
Mexico to the efforts of the international community to
counter the spread of violent extremism. Human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law committed by the so-called Islamic State are
intolerable and unjustifiable.
It is important for the international community
to generate comprehensive preventive measures to
promote tolerance, respect for human rights, the
empowerment of the least represented groups and the
promotion of development opportunities for the most
affected communities.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
support the statement delivered by the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The situation in the Middle East region is a grave
concern to the international community. The Palestinian
people continue to fall victim to the aggression by Israel,
which occupies their lands, murders their children,
destroys their heritage and undermines their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination.
The statements by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu against the establishment of a Palestinian
State are unacceptable and deserve to be universally
repudiated.
The Security Council should categorically reject
such aggression and adopt, without further delay, a

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

draft resolution demanding that Israel immediately
halt the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territory and other Arab territories. Such a draft
resolution should also call on Israel to immediately lift
the blockade on the Gaza Strip, as well as to halt the
construction and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements
and the separation wall in occupied Palestinian
territories. It should also call for accountability for war
crimes and collective punishments committed by Israel
in the occupied territory.
The undemocratic right to exercise a veto in the
Security Council, which has allowed Israel to act with
impunity in the conduct of Israel, must cease. This
organ must comply with its obligation to promote a
negotiated solution that would bring about an end to
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and the
peaceful coexistence of two independent States on the
basis of the establishment of an independent, sovereign
and viable Palestine State. A just solution must also be
sought to the issue of Palestinian refugees, in line with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
Cuba reiterates its fervent condemnation of the
Israeli settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in East Jerusalem. We similarly
reject all measures, policies and practices associated
with this settlement campaign that also include the
construction and expansion of the illegal settlements,
as well as the separation wall, the destruction and/
or confiscation of Palestinian land and property, the
forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian families and the transfer of settlers to
occupied Palestinian territory, to mention just some
of the violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions.

S/PV.7430

The reconstruction of the Gaza Strip following the
horrific bombing campaign and massive destruction
inflicted by Israel in July and August 2014, which only
further exacerbated the difficult living conditions of
the inhabitants given the cruel and illegal blockade,
also deserves the attention and urgent support of the
international community in order to bring new hope to
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians suffering under
the yoke of destruction and war.
Peace in Syria will be possible only by respecting
the right of its people to decide its own destiny. A
political solution through dialogue and negotiation is the
only alternative to the conflict in Syria. Those fuelling
the conflict from abroad with the stated goal of regime
change are responsible for the thousands of civilian
victims whose lives have been lost over four years of
fighting. We reiterate our concern at seeing the loss of
innocent lives as the fallout of the Syrian conflict. We
once again condemn all acts of violence that have taken
place in that country targeting the civilian population.
However, the supposed protection of human life and
combating terrorism cannot serve as a pretext for
foreign intervention. Unfortunately, some States seek
to dissociate the phenomenon of terrorism from the
humanitarian situation in Syria in order to prolong the
crisis, when the main reason for the emergence of the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is the generalized terrorist
phenomenon that enjoys outside support.
Cuba reiterates its condemnation of all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism in all guises and
forms, wherever they take place and by whomever they
are perpetrated, including State-sponsored terrorism,
whether they occur in the Middle East or anywhere else
in the world .

We also condemn and demand an immediate halt
to violence, provocations and incitement to hatred and
terrorism on the part of Israeli settlers. We also call for
a halt to arbitrary detentions, mass imprisonment and
genocide against this people. We also call for an end
to reprisals and blackmail of the Palestinian National
Authority. There must be full respect for the agreements
as signed between this State and the State of Israel.

The United Nations should seek an immediate
ceasefire in order to pave the way to dialogue and
negotiation, and should also support all efforts along
this path, such as those being undertaken by the Russian
Federation and other international actors. The prestige
of the Organization should invariably be used to oppose
those seeking to stoke the conflict by importing arms
and mercenaries.

Cuba reiterates its unequivocal solidarity with the
Palestinian people and our firm and resolute support
for all actions aimed at promoting recognition of the
State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967 borders
with its capital in East Jerusalem.We also recognize the
right of the State Palestine to become a full Member of
the United Nations.

The Syrian Government has demonstrated its
willingness to establish peace. We reiterate our
acknowledgement of its decision to abide by the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the steps it has taken to
destroy its stockpiles and chemical-weapon production
facilities. We urge the international community, in
particular the States parties to the Convention, to

15-1116345/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support the Syrian Government and people in fulfilling
their obligations under the international legal regime.
The vast human, financial and material resources
that are currently consumed by wars in the region
would be better used to ensure health care and quality
education; to build infrastructure projects, which
generate progress; to protect and promote all human
rights, including the right to development; and to
eradicate poverty and promote social justice. These
should be our priorities as members of an Organization
that was founded 70 years ago to protect international
peace and security and uphold human dignity.
The Security Council plays a crucial role in
supporting the achievement of the well-being, peace
and development that all the peoples of the Middle
East deserve. The States members of the Council must
exercise a firm, effective and clear resistance against
the recourse to war and be advocates of peaceful
solutions without foreign interference that safeguard
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
preserve the life of the individuals involved in or
affected by conflict in the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Seck (spoke in French): The Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People is, first of all, pleased to have seen the Minister
for Foreign and Expatriate Affairs of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan preside in person over this meeting.
Allow me, on behalf of the Committee, to condemn
the attack perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant against the Palestinian refugee camp of
Yarmouk in Damascus. Like their Syrian brothers and
sisters in other communities, having seen their living
conditions deteriorate and their sufferings increase, the
Palestinians of Syria are now caught in violent clashes
that force them to endure appalling conditions and
suffer a second displacement. They certainly deserve
our attention and support.
The situation in Syria highlights once again the
precarious legal and humanitarian conditions in which
Palestinian refugees, one of the most vulnerable
communities in the region, have been living in since
1948. In that regard, I pay tribute to the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations

46/67

21/04/2015

entities that, despite the war, remain in Syria and in
other host countries to continue to provide basic
assistance to the victims of the conflict.
The war last summer against the people of Gaza has
left the coastal strip in a disastrous state. That is why,
on 31 March and l April, our Committee organized a
seminar at the United Nations Office in Vienna on the
theme of speeding up relief, recovery and reconstruction
in post-war Gaza. That event, which brought together
representatives of many States, international experts,
heads of United Nations agencies working in Gaza and
representatives of the State of Palestine, allowed us to
take stock of Gaza’s pressing needs, in particular in the
fields of water and energy. Although the pace of the
process is far too slow, we note the implementation of the
tripartite temporary Gaza reconstruction mechanism.
We underscore that, although the relief operations
under way are beginning to bear fruit, reconstruction
continues to be hampered by certain obstacles linked
to the delivery of vital construction materials and
essential humanitarian supplies. In this regard, the
international community has an obligation to meet the
most urgent basic needs of the people of Gaza and to
allow them to seek out new means for subsistence so
as to recover their full dignity and regain courage. The
participants at the Vienna seminar therefore called on
the international community and donors to quickly
disburse the promised funds and on Israel to lift the
blockade so that life in Gaza could resume and offer
fresh hope to its people.
On 1 April, Palestine became a State party
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, as it intends to achieve the full recognition
of its sovereignty and statehood through peaceful
means and legal means. The Committee notes with
satisfaction that Israel has reversed its decision to
withhold Palestinian tax revenues, which it will give
to the Palestinian Government in accordance with its
international commitments. In the same spirit, Israel
should cease taking punitive measures that exacerbate
the suffering and despair of thousands of Palestinian
families that rely entirely on Government salaries and
the benefits and funds of the international community.
Furthermore, the Committee cannot ignore the ongoing
settlement activities in the West Bank, the evictions of
Palestinians and the confiscation of their property in
occupied East Jerusalem, which are also an affront to
their rights and dignity and must come to an end as
soon as possible.

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7430

The Committee takes note of the recently held
elections in Israel and calls on the new Israeli
Government to return to the negotiating table in order to
engage with its Palestinian partner and the international
community to put an end to one of the most flagrant
situations of injustice in the twentieth century, which
deprives a whole nation of the opportunity to live in
peace, freedom and security on its ancestral lands.
A comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement to the
Palestinian question will allow us to create favourable
conditions for the advent of a new Middle East and will
pave the way for cooperation that will benefit all the
peoples of the region at a time when many threats loom
on the horizon.

of violence in a conflict that has cost the lives of
civilians, including women and children. We renew
our call on both parties to resolve the differences
that have long undermined the right of both peoples
to live in peace and security. In that regard, we urge
them to return to negotiations on the core issues of
the conflict, on the basis of ongoing obligations and
agreements previously reached between the parties,
backed by international law and the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, with the
aim of laying the foundations for direct negotiations
leading to the achievement of the objective of the
international community — the peaceful coexistence of
an independent Palestinian State and the State of Israel.

We commemorate this year’s seventieth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations and the
fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People. I take this opportunity
to reiterate once again that we must take action to
ensure that the Council’s resolutions on the question
of Palestine are effectively implemented in accordance
with a previously established deadline.

Costa Rica welcomes Palestine’s membership
as the 123rd State party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court on 1 April. As the Foreign
Minister of Costa Rica, Manuel González Sanz, said at
the time, for Costa Rica, a country that believes firmly
in the rule of law, the role of international bodies as
instruments for peaceful coexistence, is crucial. This
rings particularly true in relation to treaties the goal of
which is the protection of human rights, fundamental
freedoms and international humanitarian law as
embodied in the Rome Statute.

Finally, the Committee wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to the principle of a peaceful settlement to
the conflict providing for the existence of two States,
and its determination that the Palestinian people shall
be able exercise its legitimate rights in a sovereign,
viable and independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate the Jordanian delegation
on its accession to the presidency of the Council this
month. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan,
Mr. Nasser Judeh, for his statement.
Costa Rica decided to participate in this debate
because of the importance we attach to the situation
in the Middle East as a peace-loving country that
voluntarily disbanded its army more than 65 years ago.
We firmly believe in peaceful solutions to conflicts
between peoples and States in the framework of
international law and multilateral diplomacy.
Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we
reiterate our categorical condemnation of the escalation

On the current situation in Yemen, my delegation is
concerned about developments there and the escalation
of the conflict. The crisis represents a threat to the
security and stability of Yemen, the region at large and
international peace. A ceasefire is therefore urgently
needed. As the World Health Organization has reported,
some 650 people have already died in the conflict and
more than 2,000 have been wounded as a result of the
recent escalation in the conflict. The humanitarian
political situation is crucial at this time. The support
of the International Committee of the Red Cross has
been essential, but as its spokesperson has said, if the
war continues at this rate, we will need more resources.
On 14 April, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2216 (2015), which establishes an arms
embargo and affirms that a solution to the crisis must
be political. We must follow that path and not allow
Yemen to become a theatre for other nations proxy
wars. Likewise, we emphasize the call for the respect of
international humanitarian law; the need for all parties
to ensure the security and safety of civilians, including
those receiving assistance; and the need to ensure the
safety and security of humanitarian staff, including
United Nations and associated personnel, in order to

15-1116347/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/04/2015

prevent a recurrence of the sad events that took place
yesterday in Somalia, where United Nations staff were
killed in the line of duty.

to contribute to these very important deliberations on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.

Costa Rica believes that if we wish to prevent
the further deterioration of the conflict in Syria,
we must put an end to the armed conflict as soon as
possible and seek a political solution, as agreed in the
recent negotiations in Moscow, based on the terms
of the Geneva communiqué issued on 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex) by the Action Group for Syria,
which calls for the establishment of a transitional
Government that could offer a neutral environment in
which change would involve and be brought about on
the basis of the mutual consent of all parties, be they
members of the current Government, the opposition or
other groups.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We urgently call on the Syrian authorities to
respect their commitments under international law
and, in particular, under international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. Because the
Government bears the responsibility for protecting
its own population, it is urgent that the necessary
measures be taken to avoid further bloodshed and
human rights violations. This obligation falls mainly
on the shoulders of the country’s authorities, but it is
also the responsibility of the armed opposition and
any other country directly or indirectly involved in
the conflict. We stress that the decision of how Syria
organizes its Government and institutions is one that
the Syrian people alone can make, through a broad
and inclusive political dialogue based on respect for
diversity, tolerance, peace and democracy.
In light of all this, we hope that the Security Council
can fully exercise its mandate to maintain peace and
international security in the Middle East, and to ensure
the full exercise of international law and the rule of law
in the region. We hope to return to this Chamber in the
near future, not to call for negotiations and tolerance
between the parties, but to celebrate agreements and an
end to their conflicts, and discuss plans for a sustainable
and harmonious development among peoples.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Madam, on your country’s assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of April, and thank you for
organizing this very important debate, which affords
the wider United Nations membership an opportunity

48/67

The situation in the Middle East remains of great
concern to Namibia, as the occupation of the Palestinian
territories continues unabated and the people of
Palestine continue to live under subjugation. This debate
is taking place following the Israeli legislative elections
held on 17 March on the premise of not establishing a
Palestinian State. This debate is the second to be held on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine, following the failure of the Security
Council to adopt a draft resolution calling for Israel to
withdraw from Palestinian territories occupied since
1967 within three years, and for the parties to reach a
negotiated solution to the conflict within one year.
It goes without saying that the Security Council
holds the key to peace in the Middle East. The situation
remains fragile, with up to 80,000 families living in
houses that have sustained varying degrees of damage.
Tens of thousands of children continue to live with
injuries and psychological trauma, and tens of thousands
of people continue to live in overcrowded temporary
shelters with inadequate sanitation facilities. At the
same time, Israel, the occupying Power, increases its
demolition of Palestinian buildings, continues its
settlement expansion and hinders reconstruction
efforts in Gaza. The establishment and expansion of
settlements are at the centre of many of the ongoing
human rights violations, and such persistent settlement
activities could kill the prospects for peace. Namibia
calls on Israel, the occupying Power, to end its punitive
demolition of Palestinian homes in response to alleged
acts of violence by Palestinians in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory.
The Palestinian people and their leadership continue
to face an unrelenting barrage of repressive, illegal and
destructive measures from Israel, the occupying Power.
In addition to its ongoing colonization of the State of
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, gross humanrights violations, seizure and destruction of homes
and properties, arrest and detention of thousands of
civilians and the inhumane blockade imposed on more
than 1.8 million people in the Gaza Strip, Israel, the
occupying Power, has also resumed stealing Palestinian
tax revenues — which currently is at least under review
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and may enable legitimate, peaceful steps to be taken
by the Palestinian leadership in their ongoing pursuit of
justice and for the purpose of protecting the Palestinian
people and advancing the realization of their rights,
including the right to self-determination and freedom.
Namibia is further concerned about the fact that
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to maintain
that the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights does not apply to the occupied territories, as
well as about the need for accountability for alleged
human-rights violations committed during Israel’s
military operations in Gaza, the excessive use of force
by Israel’s security forces and the violence perpetrated
by Israeli settlers against Palestinians in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. We are also concerned
that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to deny
entry to the West Bank and Gaza to the Independent
Commission of Inquiry appointed by the Human
Rights Council in July and charged with investigating
violations of international humanitarian and humanrights law arising from Israeli military operations
carried out in the occupied Palestinian territories
beginning in June 2014. Namibia would like to remind
the Security Council of its responsibility to stop
Israel’s continued settlement expansion in the West
Bank, which undermines the prospects for attaining a
peace agreement, and to ensure that investigations into
war crimes committed during the Gaza onslaught are
impartial and those found accountable are prosecuted.
Namibia wishes to reaffirm its call for Israel’s
complete and unconditional withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and calls on the international community
to facilitate the creation of a Palestinian State on
the basis of the 1967 borders. We strongly condemn
all acts of violence and are concerned about the
increased tensions, which have affected both Israelis
and Palestinians. Namibia urges both sides to take
immediate steps to restore calm and encourages both
Israeli and Palestinian leaders and their citizens to
work together to lower tensions, reject violence, avoid
all provocation and seek a path to peace. In that regard,
Namibia calls negotiations to be resumed as soon as
possible and for donor funding, so as to accelerate the
reconstruction of Gaza, address the basic needs of the
Palestinian population and ensure stability.
Namibia will continue to support the people
of Palestine, who, despite suffering for so long
and continuing to bear this burden, have remained

S/PV.7430

steadfast and fully committed to achieving their
inalienable rights, justice and their legitimate national
aspirations, including self-determination, freedom and
independence, and to the pursuit of political, diplomatic,
peaceful and non-violent means for attaining those
objectives, for which there is overwhelming and longstanding international support. Namibia remains
convinced that our deliberations here can be fruitful
and contribute to the search for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution that will end the 1967 Israeli
occupation and enable the Palestinian people to
exercise their inalienable rights in an independent State
of Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Namibia’s
unwavering support for and solidarity with the people of
Palestine in their just cause of freedom, independence
and social justice, and our steadfast backing for
Palestine’s full membership in the United Nations and
its specialized agencies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for presiding over this important meeting, which is
even more important to us as a member of the League
of Arab States and adherent of Islam. It comes at a
significant juncture for the situation in the Middle East,
which we can only describe as extremely unfortunate.
Indeed, all we have seen is the absence of any political
solution to this major conflict, along with the expansion
of terrorism’s challenge to peace and security.
The negotiations relaunched in June 2013, through
the efforts of the United States and its Secretary of
State, John Kerry — who worked hard to convince the
Palestinian and Israeli parties to return to the negotiating
table to discuss a two-State solution — were, however,
doomed to failure thanks to Israel’s aggression in
Gaza, which resulted in the death of more than 2,000
Palestinians, including women, children and the elderly,
and in which numerous buildings were destroyed and
many people left homeless. In that regard, we would
like to pay tribute to the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) in supporting the victims of
the aggression, and in view of the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation for Palestinian refugees both
inside and outside Palestine, we would like to call on
the international community to help UNRWA in order

15-1116349/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to assist it in providing basic services in these difficult
circumstances and to bridge its financing gaps.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI of Morocco has
reiterated in various international forums that we must
end the spread of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories and that we should encourage all key players,
including the Pope, to help in that regard. We would
also like to inform the Council that Morocco chaired a
meeting in Marrakesh in January 2014, focusing on the
issue of Jerusalem and calling for a political solution.
In November of last year in Rabat, we hosted the focal
points of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation with
the goal of conveying a message to the international
community on the importance of defending the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and Jerusalem. That is because respect for the
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
the establishment of an independent State, is the only
way to reach a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
On 6 April, Morocco, as a member of the Arab
League, took part in the Arab Summit held in Sharm
el-Sheikh. The Summit was aimed in part at mobilizing
support for the Palestinian cause and putting an end
to the Israeli aggression within the framework of
an independent Palestinian State established on the
borders of 4 June 1967 and a final settlement based
on the Arab Peace Initiative. The only way to resolve
the Palestinian question is through the return of the
two parties to the negotiating table. They must work
towards a just settlement of the conflict based on the
two-State solution and international legitimacy as
well as the agreed terms of reference, with two States
coexisting peacefully side by side. This is the only
formula aimed at putting an end to this aggression that
enjoys international agreement. It is therefore high
time that the international community put an end to
this situation so as to promote cooperation and bring
prosperity to the region as a whole.
The situation in Libya is dire, especially given the
rise of terrorist groups there. I should like also to note
that 21 Egyptians and 28 Ethiopians were beheaded by
Daesh terrorists. Given the number of terrorist groups
in Africa, including Boko Haram, Daesh and others, we
would like to see stronger international efforts made to
uproot terrorism in the region.
We in Morocco are deeply concerned by the situation
in Libya, because the Maghreb is very important to us.
We have a common destiny with Libya as well as with
other members of the Arab Maghreb Union. We also
stress the importance of honouring the commitments
50/67

21/04/2015

made in the Marrakech treaty aimed at bringing about
peace and security in the region. We are committed to
helping our brothers in Libya to overcome their ordeal
and to establish national unity within the framework of
territorial integrity.
Therefore, based on the request made by the United
Nations last February, His Majesty King Mohammed
agreed to host a meeting of all Libyan factions in
Morocco, under the supervision of Mr. Bernardino
Leon, in order to support the efforts made by the United
Nations and based on our belief that a peaceful political
process is the only solution to the Libyan crisis.
Morocco is honouring its commitments with respect to
all factions in Libya, and our main concern is to find a
solution and look to the future.
The dialogue held today and last week brought
about progress that we warmly welcome. We did not
expect that all Libyan factions would come together
under one umbrella in Morocco in order to establish
a Government of national unity, and we hope that the
meeting of Libyan factions to be held in Libya, under
the supervision of the international envoy, will be
successful.
Let me stress that the Kingdom of Morocco
will make every effort to promote success in all
undertakings regarding Libya. We are working hard in
order to ensure respect for the rule of law in Libya in a
way that preserves its territorial integrity.
We express our concern at the deterioration of
the situation in Yemen, with the ongoing violations
of legitimacy as represented by President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, in violation of resolution
2201 (2015) and other relevant resolutions. Morocco
welcomes resolution 2216 (2015), which calls on all
parties to put an end to the attacks in Yemen and on
the Houthis to implement the resolution and allow
humanitarian access. We also reiterate our call to
preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Yemen.
The Syrian crisis is now in its fourth year, with no
solution in sight. In fact, the situation is deteriorating by
the day, and, as a result, the Syrian people are suffering
a great deal. We in Morocco are taking a dual approach:
supporting all the parties on the one hand, and trying to
help the Syrian refugees on the other. This is being done
through the hospital that was established in 2012 in the
Zaatari refugee camp and provides medical services to
thousands of Syrians.

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Morocco also took part in the international
conference for the reconstruction of Syria held on
31 March. We will make every effort to provide support
to our brothers in Syria and to help find a solution to the
Syrian crisis. My delegation deems it very important to
preserve the territorial integrity of Syria and to support
Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to convey
my deep appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Nasser
Judeh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Jordan, and to you, Mrs. Dina Kawar, for
having organized this debate on the situation in Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
The Palestinian issue is a long-standing issue in
the field of international peace and security, and its
resolution deserves top priority. All will agree with
me that the people of Palestine cannot live with this
uncertainty of life and livelihood forever.
We regret that the appalling human rights and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the repeated appeals of the international
community to improve the deteriorating conditions of
the Palestinian people remain unheeded. The people
in the occupied territories continue to suffer due to
Israel’s blockades, closures, confiscation of land and
demolition of houses. The illegal separation walls
continue to divide and isolate communities, destroying
livelihoods and preventing people from accessing their
jobs, families, markets, schools and hospitals. Let us
tear down these walls once and for all.
The Gaza borders have been subject to a regime of
closure that is without precedent anywhere. This closure
is tantamount to the strangulation of an entire population
in the form of collective punishment. The quality of life
of the Palestinians had already diminished to subsistence
levels; these systematic efforts at strangulation erupt
in periodic escalations of violence and lead to further
despair and destitution. Should we believe that Israel is
doing so purposefully to generate fear, fury and distress
among the Palestinians? We deplore these policies of
collective punishment — policies of forcing Palestinian
people off their land; detaining people for a long time
without charge; restricting freedom of speech, freedom
of movement and freedom of property ownership by
Palestinians; deporting Palestinian inhabitants; and

S/PV.7430

depriving people of their legitimate claim to natural
resources, including scarce water resources.
The Government of Israel has continued its
settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, with a particularly aggressive settlement
expansion in East Jerusalem. Those measures have
been soundly rejected by the international community
and confirmed as illegal, but they continue unabated.
All settlement construction, including so-called natural
growth, is illegal under international law and must be
halted immediately. Settlement activities constitute
grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
war crimes under article 8 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We appreciate the
decision of the Palestinian Authority to become a State
party to the International Criminal Court in order to
seek justice for the people of Palestine.
We are pleased that the Israeli Government has
finally announced the release of three months’ worth of
the tax revenue it collects from Palestinians on behalf
of the Palestinian Authority. However, the practice of
withholding tax revenue is a punitive measure used to
undermine the Palestinian Authority; therefore, that
practice must forever be stopped. We urge Israel, as
the occupying Power, to fulfil its legal obligation to
ensure that all inhabitants are safeguarded against all
acts of violence or threats; to cease the illegal detention
of Palestinian people, including children; to stop the
destruction of homes and land confiscation; to allow the
Palestinian people access to their lands, employment
and natural resources; to desist from transferring its
own population to the territories it has occupied; to lift
its embargo against Palestinians; to immediately open
all border crossings, allowing the free movement of
goods, persons and humanitarian aid; and to withdraw
all Israeli settlers from the occupied land of Palestine.
We express our total solidarity with the Palestinian
people and reiterate our full and unwavering support for
the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to a sovereign and independent State. At this
juncture, we demand an end to the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967, and look forward to a two-State solution
wherein the sovereign and independent Palestinian and
Israeli States live side by side, in harmony and peace, on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders. We also demand just
resolution of all final status issues and the mobilization
of international support for assistance to the Palestinian
people without delay.

15-1116351/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Nasser Judeh, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriate
Affairs, for presiding over this morning’s meeting,
thereby reaffirming Jordan’s deep involvement in
the question of Palestine and other matters related to
the Middle East. I would like to thank the delegation
of Jordan for the efforts it has made during their
presidency of the Council. I also thank the SecretaryGeneralBan Ki-moon for his briefing this morning, and
take this opportunity to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov as Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process. I would also like to express
our appreciation for his predecessor, Mr. Robert Serry,
for his efforts during his term.
Events in the Middle East continue to change
even as they pick up momentum. However, what has
not changed is the fact that there is still no solution
to the Israeli-Arab conflict. In the absence of such a
solution, there is international broad-based support for
the two-State solution, the enjoyment by the Palestinian
people of their inalienable rights, the establishment of
the State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and an end to Israel’s
occupation of all occupied Arab lands. There is also
recognition of the need to end settlement activity and
to dismantle existing Israeli settlements in the occupied
lands, which are illegal. It is further necessary to put an
end to the unjust blockade of Gaza and to work on the
reconstruction of Gaza so that all residents can live in
dignity. These are all givens, and have been reflected in
many General Assembly resolutions.
There has also been a significant amount of
recognition of the State of Palestine. We refer in
particular to Palestine’s joining the International
Criminal Court, and the recent Summit of the League
of Arab States in Sharm el-Sheikh, which affirmed the
Arab Peace Initiative and all its terms of reference.
However, it is unfortunate that Israel continues to take
action undermine those givens, as reflected in many
statements issued by Israeli officials. Today, we appeal
to Israel to shoulder its responsibility, take steps to
resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and achieve peace in
the region on the basis of the two-State solution, and
adopt a resolution to end Israel’s occupation of the Arab
and Palestinian lands since 1967 within a specified
time frame. We also call for the identification of

52/67

21/04/2015

mechanisms that would make such a resolution binding
on the occupying Power. We call on the international
community to support the building of Palestinian
institutions and to assist the Palestinian Authority
and the Government of National Consenus, including
through efforts to rebuild Government institutions and
the civil service in the Gaza Strip. This would help the
Palestinian people and enhance national unity.
In March, we commemorated the fifth anniversary
of the Syrian crisis. Where does the international
community stand vis-à-vis that crisis, which has claimed
the lives of 250,000 Syrians, led to the displacement of
half the Syrian population and threatened international
peace and security? The Syrian people took to the
streets in peaceful demonstrations to demand their basic
rights. They were an unarmed and defenceless, yet they
were met brutal killing and even aerial bombardment.
That has led to the current situation in Syria, which
threatens that country’s future and has led to the spread
of terrorism and extremism.
Most Syrians have been affected by the crisis;
however, the greatest impact has been on those living
in areas besieged by the regime and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and in remote areas. They
face death by starvation and the deprivation of medical
aid, in addition to explosive barrels. I refer to the report
of the Syrian American Medical Society Foundation,
entitled “Slow Death: Life and Death in Syrian
Communities under Siege”, which not only documents
the tragedy of besieged areas, but the true scope of the
tragedy, which goes beyond the current estimates.
With regard to the situation in the Yarmouk refugee
camp, in his recent report (S/2015/264) the SecretaryGeneral indicates that the humanitarian situation
there has greatly deteriorated, with camp residents
now facing the injustice of ISIL and the regime. There
must be an end to the suffering of the residents of the
Yarmouk camp, and the Security Council needs to
use the available tools under the Charter of the United
Nations to guarantee the implementation of its own
relevant resolutions. Continued silence vis-à-vis the
crimes of preventing the delivery of food and medical
aid allows the perpetrators of such crimes to feel that
they enjoy impunity. It also gives the green light for
more crimes.
There are more than 4 million Syrian refugees, half
of whom are children. About 2 million Syrian children
are not in schools, resulting in a lost generation. If those
children are unable to enjoy their right to education,
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

they will be used and recruited by extremist groups.
In that context, the State of Qatar, during the third
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
Syria, hosted by Kuwait last month, launched a fund
for education and vocational development for Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons that aims
to combat extremist ideology. I commend Syria’s
neighbouring countries for taking in such huge numbers
of refugees.
Given the adoption of resolution 2209 (2015) on the
use of chemicals and toxic material, it is exasperating
that such materials continue to be used. We call on the
Council to guarantee legal prosecution of those who
perpetrate those crimes and hold them accountable.
In conclusion, Qatar firmly believes that the
solution to the Syrian crisis should be based on a
political transition built on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), and that precludes any party
that has been involved in the bloodshed in Syria.
Such a solution should meet the aspirations of the
Syrian people, provide for accountability for the
crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in
Syria and guarantee the country’s sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity, as we have
continued to call for over the past few years.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, we would like
to express our appreciation to the Jordanian presidency
for organizing this important meeting.
The Middle East is experiencing a process of drastic
change. The consequences, which range from terrorism
to devastation and displacement, are affecting the entire
region and beyond.
The Palestinian question lies at the heart of the
challenges in the region and continues to undermine
the prospects for lasting regional and global peace.
The devastating effects of last year’s destruction in
Gaza persist. We continue to channel humanitarian aid,
including fuel, flour and medicine, to those in need.
The total value of our official humanitarian assistance
to Gaza since July 2014 has exceeded $19 million.
However, only long-term solutions can change the
tide in Gaza’s reconstruction. The continuous illegal
blockade and other restrictions in the ability of the
people in Gaza to sustain their daily lives undermine
international efforts for reconstruction and must be
lifted in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).

S/PV.7430

Further steps should be taken to alleviate the dire
situations, sustain the current ceasefire and support the
efforts of the Palestinian National Unity Government to
operate in Gaza.
The need to find a negotiated political settlement to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, achieving a two-State
solution and ending the longest occupation in modern
history, in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, remain urgent
priorities. The continuation of the status quo is not an
option. The historical injustice against the Palestinian
people, reinforced by the further expansion of illegal
settlements, forced displacements, house demolitions,
the excessive use of force against civilians, military
raids and incursions and attempts to change the
historical status of Haram Al-Sharif, is fuelling hatred,
alienation and radicalism in the region and beyond.
Palestinian unity is crucial to reaching a lasting
solution. In that regard, we should all support the
Palestinian National Unity Government. But first and
foremost, the Israeli side should prove its sincerity
about its commitment to a two-State solution. It is
high time for the international community to renew
its engagement in the solution of the problem. The
Palestinians should not be deprived any longer of their
basic right to live in an independent State. We need to
intensify our efforts towards the adoption of a Security
Council draft resolution that sets a time frame and
parameters for peace negotiations, based on the twoState peace vision. The Council should not miss another
opportunity to fulfil its primary responsibility vis-à-vis
international peace and security. Turkey will continue
its support to finding a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict and to the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The recent developments in the region demonstrate
how multiple crises are interlinked, and therefore
need to be addressed with a broader perspective, but
based on the same fundamental principles. The Syrian
crisis, which has provided fertile ground for the rise
of terrorist groups such as Daesh and caused the
deepening of sectarian fault lines in the region, has
become a source of distress for the Palestinians as
well. The humanitarian disaster, currently reaching its
climax in the Yarmouk refugee camp, has added a new
aspect to the ongoing Syrian tragedy. The suffering of
the Palestinian refugees, who had been living under the
brutal siege of the regime for years, was exacerbated

15-1116353/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

by Daesh barbarism, which is in fact a result of the real
problem.
The situation in Syria has gone from bad to worse.
Syrians from all backgrounds are together waging
a struggle for survival and for their future. Turkey is
gravely concerned by the humanitarian and security
impact of the crisis and its unprecedented devastation.
Turkey has now become the biggest refugee-hosting
country in the world. In the light of the enormity of that
challenge, I must reiterate that meaningful and genuine
burden-sharing is the collective responsibility of the
international community. The international community
still lacks a comprehensive strategy with political,
security and humanitarian pillars to re-establish
stability in Syria.
We must focus on addressing the root causes of
the problem through resolute action. The regime’s
indiscriminate attacks should not be overshadowed
by the appalling actions of Daesh. It is also important
to highlight the use of barrel bombs and the increase
of chlorine gas attacks by the regime’s forces. The
Security Council should remain seized of the matter.
A genuine political transition based on the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), through the
establishment of a transitional governing body with the
authority to exercise full executive powers, remains the
only solution in Syria. We cannot afford to lose further
time in soul-searching.
While we will continue to support any endeavour
to stop the bloodshed in Syria, we would also like to
highlight our support to the Iraqi Government in its
fights against Daesh and to express our concern about
the rise of sectarian-motivated attacks against civilians.
In that regard, the implementation of inclusive politics
to end the alienation of some segments of society and
the enhancements of efforts for national reconciliation
should be key for Iraq’s stability.
Last but not least, we are worried by the latest
events in Yemen. The worsening situation may
create serious regional consequences, and is a recent
illustration of the damage inflicted by sectarian policies
in the region. From the outset, Turkey has supported
the political transition process that began with the
Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative in 2011 and its
Implementation Mechanisms, as well as the outcomes
of the National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement, signed by all parties
in Yemen on 21 September 2014. However, a failure to
implement the agreement and unilateral actions derailed
54/67

21/04/2015

the transition process and reversed its achievements.
We welcome resolution 2216 (2015), which is a clear
and firm warning to the spoilers. We hope that the
resolution will contribute to laying the groundwork for
a meaningful, comprehensive dialogue that leads to a
political solution. The only way to contain, if not end,
the turmoil in the Middle East is a collective effort and
ownership by regional actors to engage in dialogue.
Yemen and Libya are no exceptions to that.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Turkey’s strong
commitment to the peace and security of the overall
region and our full and continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I will not read out my full
statement, but my delegation will circulate it.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains unresolved,
and recent developments give little cause for optimism.
Even so, our goal remains a two-State solution. There
is simply no other option and no time to waste. The
past year showed how destabilizing a lack of political
progress could be. The political process towards a
negotiated end to the conflict must be resumed.
Israel is forming a new Government. Norway
appeals to the new Government to make clear in words
and deeds its commitments to a two-State solution.
History has shown that negotiations are impossible
while a settlement-building programme on occupied
land is ongoing. The settlements are illegal.
Norway appeals to the Palestinian leadership
to form a unified and coherent Administration that
upholds the policy agreed with Israel under the Oslo
Accords to negotiate peacefully, reject violence and
respect Israel’s right to exist.
The international community should stand ready
to assist the Israelis and the Palestinians within
the framework of an adjusted peace architecture.
Stakeholders in the region and beyond must unite in
supporting the process, which must build on previous
Security Council decisions, the agreements the parties
have entered into and, indeed, the Arab Peace Initiative.
Norway encourages the Security Council to assume
responsibility and to provide constructive assistance in
the process.
The role of the Ad-hoc Liaison Committee is
to underpin political efforts to achieve a two-State
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution by supporting the development of sustainable
institutions in preparation for Palestinian statehood.
Since the last Committee meeting in New York, held
on September 2014, the financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority (PA) has deteriorated further.
That critical situation requires that the parties and the
donors redouble their efforts. It is simply not an option to
let the Palestinian institutions wither. The Committee’s
next meeting, scheduled for 27 May in Brussels, in
preparation for a ministerial meeting of the Committee
in New York in September, will address the fragile
financial situation of the Palestinian Authority and
take stock of the efforts to rebuild Gaza. The following
topics are still to be reviewed and examined by the
Committee: securing and maximizing the domestic
revenues of the PA, supporting institutional reforms
related to good governance and the efficiency of public
services, and providing incentives and facilitating trade
and private sector growth.
Another crucial issue, of course, is Gaza. We cannot
leave Gaza in its current condition in the aftermath of
the war — isolated from the world and abandoned. The
Gaza Strip is an integral part of the territory occupied in
1967 and is part of a future State of Palestine. Israel and
the donors have a shared responsibility, along with the
Palestinian Authority, to transform Gaza. Progress has
been far too slow. Although the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism has become more effective and more donors
have been honouring their pledges, it is now urgent
to start the implementation of a larger reconstruction
project. Regional and internal rivalry must be set aside
to facilitate the reintegration of Gaza into a single
legitimate governing authority for Palestine.
It is time to call for an end to the violence in the
region. By now it must be clear to everyone that there
can be no military solutions to the many conflicts — not
in Syria, not in Libya, not in Yemen. The regional and
international parties concerned must intensify their
efforts to find a political solution to the armed conflict
in Syria. Norway supports all efforts to that end,
particularly the activities of United Nations Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Norway also calls for full
and safe access for humanitarian actors to all Syrian
people in need.
In Iraq, we have seen important progress in the
fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). Nevertheless, there is a long way to go before
Iraqi Sunnis, Shiites and Kurds feel they are part of a
joint project to create a genuinely inclusive Iraq. We

S/PV.7430

encourage the Iraqi Government to step up reconciliation
efforts and to give all of Iraq’s constituent communities
a real stake in the future of the State.
The threat posed by ISIL, or Daesh, provides
an opportunity to seek resolution of the underlying
conflicts that have allowed jihadist extremists to
become a threat to everyone in the region and beyond.
A clear non-sectarian message should be sent to and
from all the regional capitals to counter the forces
fuelling sectarian fears and impulses both within and
between States across the region. One side alone cannot
bridge the gulf of mutual distrust.
To conclude, Norway welcomes the historic
framework agreement reached in Lausanne on 2 April
between Iran and the P5+1, which represents an
opportunity to resolve more than the nuclear issue alone.
That comprehensive agreement, yet to be finalized,
should set the region on a path towards cooperative
security for all.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I would like to express
my appreciation to the President for convening this
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We take
this opportunity to extend our support to the newly
appointed Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, in his efforts,
as well as to express our appreciation for the work of
the outgoing Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert Serry.
In his briefing to the Council last month (see
S/PV.7417), Mr. Serry said,
“It remains the primary responsibility of the
Council to play its role in developing a new peace
architecture for resolving the conflict at long last.”
(S/PV.7417, p. 5)
In pointing out that resolution 242 (1968), which
embodies the key principle of land for peace, was
nearly a half-century old, he rightly wondered whether
the time had not come for the Security Council to lead.
The question of Palestine is one of the longstanding issues before the Council and the international
community. While we reiterate our support to the
amicable resolution of the issue, we are concerned that
the Security Council has not been able to achieve the
objective of a peaceful solution. At best, the Council has

15-1116355/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

been a bystander and witness to the cycles of escalation
and relative calm that have come to characterize this
unresolved issue. The Council’s effectiveness has
consequently been brought into question. We therefore
join others in urging the Council to step up its efforts
and take the lead in resolving this problem.
India’s deep association with, and continuing
commitment to, Palestine is rooted in our own modern
history, which goes back to our own struggle for
independence. India’s position on the issue of Palestine
is very clear. India reaffirms its support for the cause of
Palestine and its solidarity with the Palestinian people
in their struggle for a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State within secure and internationally
recognized borders, living side-by-side at peace with
Israel, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Apart from political support to the Palestinian
cause, India continues to promote Palestinian
development and nation-building efforts by consistently
offering technical and financial assistance. It also
contributes $1 million annually to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. India has pledged $4 million in response
to the Palestinian National Early Recovery and
Reconstruction Plan for Gaza. Within the framework
of the India, Brazil and South Africa Trust Fund, with
our partners Brazil and South Africa, we are also
implementing development projects in Palestine and
have pledged $1 million for a new project to rebuild the
Atta Habib medical centre in Gaza.
India remains firmly convinced that dialogue
remains the only viable option for effectively addressing
the issue. We are particularly worried that last year saw
a downward tendency in the peace process. Efforts
for serious negotiations between the parties were
inconclusive. In addition, we faced the resumption
of the tragic, escalated conflict in Gaza. Subsequent
developments included unilateral actions by the parties,
which unfortunately moved them further apart. There
is a critical imperative for restraint in order to avoid
provocation and unilateral actions, and for a return
to the peace process. Diplomacy and statesmanship
must prevail over hatred and violence. There is no
other road to a lasting peace. We remain hopeful and
urge both sides to resume the peace process soon for a
comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian issue.
We express our deep concern about the activities
of proscribed militias and radicalized and extremist
groups in the Middle East, especially in the northern
56/67

21/04/2015

parts of Iraq and Syria, where such forces are
critically impacting regional peace and stability. The
violence perpetrated against civilians, in particular
against women and children, on the basis of religion
and ethnicity, along with sectarianism, strikes at our
common humanity. Efforts must be made by all parties
and stakeholders in the region to curb those dangerous
trends. We believe that the consolidation of political
processes and solutions and the establishment of
durable State institutions will be the most effective way
to address extremism and radicalism in the region.
We note that a proscribed terrorist group has twice
targeted United Nations peacekeepers from the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. We also regret
the death of a United Nations peacekeeper from the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Security
Council resolutions that proscribe terrorist groups
operating in that region need to be implemented.
The early and effective prosecution of such groups is
essential. Only such action, endorsed by the Council,
will deter such groups in other parts of the world from
committing acts of terror.
As a nation that took proactive and effective steps
by evacuating and safeguarding the lives of thousands
of our citizens, as well as those of many nationals from
48 other countries, including four of the five permanent
members of the Council, we urge all parties in Yemen
to return to the negotiating table forthwith. As I stated
earlier, dialogue remains the effective solution to
resolve all problems.
On Syria, we reiterate our support for a Syria-led
comprehensive political solution to the ongoing crisis,
in alignment with the Geneva communiqué of 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). The humanitarian crisis arising out
of the situation has to be addressed effectively. It is with
this conviction in mind that we pledged and contributed
$2 million to the United Nations 2014 Syria Response
Plan and pledged another $2 million during the third
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
Syria, recently held in Kuwait. We would like to urge
all parties to demonstrate the requisite political will,
exercise restraint and commit to seeking common
ground in accommodating their differences.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to express its profound appreciation for the
decision of Jordan’s presidency this month to hold

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

this open debate on the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
The Holy See is deeply concerned about the total lack
of progress in the negotiations between Palestine and
Israel. It is difficult not to share the frustration expressed
by the then United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, during
his last Security Council briefing, on 27 March (see
S/PV.7417). As was recognized on that occasion, Israel
has genuine and legitimate concerns for its security.
However, the Holy See believes that such security will
come not in isolation from its neighbours, but in taking
its place with them through a negotiated peace with the
Palestinians through the implementation of the twoState solution, which has the support of the Holy See
and of the international community in general. The
Holy See joins its voice once more with all the people
of peace in calling for serious and concrete negotiations
that will reinvigorate the peace process.
The Holy See does not cease to encourage the
leaders of Lebanon to resolve the impasse that has
prevented the election of a President since May 2014 by
putting aside narrow political interests for the sake of
the greater good of a unified Lebanon. That institutional
void makes the nation more vulnerable and fragile in
the face of the overall situation in the Middle East.
The international community must support Lebanon in
every way to regain institutional normalcy and stability.
It must also help it care for the huge number of refugees
in its territory, which has created a situation that carries
the danger of extremist infiltration among the hapless
refugees.
The conflict in Syria, as Baroness Valerie Amos
defined it in her Security Council briefing last 26 March
(see S/PV.7418), has reached breathtaking levels of
savagery. The indiscriminate destruction of basic
infrastructure, such as water and electricity facilities,
hospitals and schools, worsens the plight of civilians each
passing day. The fall of Idlib, just 37 miles south-west
of Aleppo, has sown panic among Aleppo’s population
of more than 1 million people. The ethnic and religious
minority groups are particularly anguished. The Holy
See calls on the international community to prevent
the enormous humanitarian disaster that a siege on,
and battle over, Aleppo will surely provoke. We must
do all we can to prevent yet another gross violation of
international humanitarian law and of fundamental
human rights.

S/PV.7430

The Holy See reiterates its condemnation in the
strongest terms of all attacks and abuses based on
ethnic, religious, racial or other grounds. Once again, it
wishes to point out that the disappearance of ethnic and
religious minority groups from the Middle East would
not only be a religious tragedy, but a loss of a rich
patrimony that has contributed so much to the societies
to which they belong. That those groups are threatened
with extinction causes unfathomable anguish and pain.
Last month at the United Nations Human Rights Council
in Geneva, 65 countries signed a statement supporting
the human rights of Christians and other communities,
particularly in the Middle East. That statement calls
attention to the fact that the instability and conflict in
the Middle East seriously threaten the very existence
of many religious communities, especially Christians.
It calls on all States to join together and address this
alarming situation.
When we call to mind those who have already lost
their lives or those who have already been driven out
of their homes, and even out of their own countries,
any action would already be coming too late. But from
now on, every action to spare even just one person
from persecution and from all forms of atrocities is not
only timely, but most urgent. Pope Francis calls on the
international community not to remain mute and inert
before such an unacceptable crime and not turn a blind
eye to this. To watch in complicit silence the horrors
of our fellow human beings persecuted, exiled, killed,
burned or beheaded solely because they hold a different
religious creed or they happen to belong to a minority
group can never be an option.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President for convening this open
debate, which allow us to keep track of the current
situation in the Middle East and to facilitate the process
of finding ways for settling conflicts and tensions in
the region.
While Ukraine has aligned itself with the statement
of the observer of the European Union, I would like to
add a few words in my national capacity.
Ukraine is committed to a balanced and impartial
position on the Middle East issue and is willing to
develop stable and constructive relations with both
Israel and Arab States. We have consistently support
the Middle East peace process, and we believe that

15-1116357/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace in the region can be achieved only if viable
mutual concessions are on the negotiating table.
Recalling recent efforts aimed at resolving the conflict,
such as convening another round of peace talks, we
cannot ignore the fact that significant progress in the
settlement of the situation in the Middle East has still
not been made. On the contrary, recent events testify
to the escalation of tensions between the sides, which
does not contribute to finding a way out of the political
deadlock.
My country’s policy is based on the official
recognition of the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and its aspirations to create an
independent Palestinian State. At the same time,
the proclamation of the Palestinian State should be
contingent on an outcome of the Palestinian-Israeli
peace settlement. In that respect, we fully support the
United States-led peace efforts, as well as respective
United Nations initiatives, and hope they will result
in comprehensive agreement between the parties to
the conflict. Therefore, we call on political leaders
from all sides to work together through visible actions
to de-escalate the situation. We believe that direct
negotiations between the parties is the only way to
reach a peaceful solution, and any unilateral steps will
not solve the key problems of the peace settlement.
Ukraine is convinced that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict can be solved only on the basis of the twoState solution. We reiterate our position that a IsraeliPalestinian peace agreement lies within the framework
of the unconditional fulfilment by the parties to the
conflict of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, including land for peace, the
road map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002.
With regard to the situation in Syria, Ukraine
reaffirms its commitment to the universal principles
and basic norms of international law, in particular strict
observance of human rights, territorial integrity, the
inviolability of borders and State sovereignty. Ukraine
strongly condemns the ongoing violence and systematic
human rights violations in Syria perpetrated in particular
by the regime and terrorist groups. The indiscriminate
and excessive use of force by the army against the
civilian population, as well as intolerable violence by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist groups operating on the ground, contributes
to the considerable human sufferings in Syria. In that
respect, we reiterate our full support for the mission
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
58/67

21/04/2015

Syria and other international initiatives brokered by
international organizations — such as the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons — aimed at
a strategic de-escalation on the basis of the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex),
including an inclusive political transition. We continue
to stand for an immediate end to the bloodshed and call
for the maximum use of political and diplomatic means
to resolve the conflict, in line with respective Security
Council resolutions, in order to maintain the country’s
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Ukraine remains deeply concerned about the
activities of ISIL and other associated terrorist entities
in the Middle East. The negative impact of their
presence in the region, violent extremist ideology and
destabilizing actions must not be tolerated and should
be duly addressed by the international community. We
strongly condemn the crimes and acts of mass violence
that ISIL commits against civilians, including the most
vulnerable minorities, which may amount to crimes
against humanity.
While fighting against foreign-backed terrorists on
its soil and facing direct foreign aggression, Ukraine
shares the view that activity of such terrorist groups,
as well as their violent ideology, constitutes a threat
not only to the Middle East region, but also to the
international community. We support all efforts aimed
at the decisive fight against terrorism regardless of
where and in what form it takes place.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Jordanian presidency for convening today’s open debate.
Kazakhstan is very much alarmed with the overall
situation in the Middle East, including in Palestine and
its occupied territories. Well-coordinated international
efforts are needed to stop the senseless bloodshed and
to find an inclusive political solution. Developments in
Palestine, such as the continuing settlement process in
the occupied territories, do not allow one to speak of
any improvement or mitigation of the situation, which
continues to threaten regional and international peace
and security.
Kazakhstan recognizes the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, the creation of
an independent State of Palestine peacefully coexisting
with Israel within the 1967 borders, and the achievement

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of full-fledged membership in the United Nations.
The two-State solution is the only viable option for a
durable peace reached through direct and meaningful
negotiations in full conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations, relevant Security Council resolutions
and other mechanisms, first of all the road map for
peace and the Arab Peace initiative. We call therefore
on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to show wisdom,
responsibility and political will to reach a historic peace
agreement that would meet the legitimate aspirations of
their peoples.
My country believes that the determined and
concerted efforts of all Member States and other
relevant stakeholders, together with the United Nations
in the leading role, is the only way to combat the violent
extremism so widely spread throughout the Middle East.
This needs the long-term, comprehensive approach of
the entire international community, built on greater
regional and global cooperation, in accordance with the
Charter and international law.
My country expresses concern over the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. The international community must give
its utmost attention to this crisis. Kazakhstan believes
that resolving the Syrian conflict is possible only
through peaceful means, and supports national and
international efforts to establish peace and stability
in the country. Kazakhstan is also gravely concerned
about the developments with regard to the Palestinian
refugees in Syria. This crisis reconfirms the extreme
vulnerability of the Palestinian refugees and calls for
its urgent solution in the context of reaching lasting
peace in the region.
We strongly believe that all peaceful means are
appropriate for conflict resolution. Besides politicians
and diplomats, spiritual leaders should be involved in
the process of the quest for peace. At this very moment,
the high-level event on tolerance and reconciliation
is being held at Headquarters. We commend the
tireless efforts and the active stance of the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly and the
High Representative of the Alliance of Civilizations
in promoting the ideals and values of tolerance,
understanding and mutual respect for attaining durable
long-lasting peace and stability.
Kazakhstan regularly convenes the Congress of the
Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, at which
leaders of Islam, Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism,
Hinduism, Taoism and many other faiths seek together
ways to promote peace based on spiritual values. This

S/PV.7430

June we will host the fifth Congress, aimed at enhancing
dialogue among religious and political leaders for peace
and development. In addition, I would like to inform
the Council that the capital of Kazakhstan, Astana, is
going to host the next Middle East media seminar in
May.
In conclusion, we again urgently call on all parties,
especially those with real political power and influence,
to draw on their political will to ensure lasting peace
and security in the Middle East, and freedom and
justice for all people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the brotherly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. I would like to welcome
Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister for Foreign and Expatriate
Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, for his
attendance at this meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
His Majesty King Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa, King
of the Kingdom of Bahrain, affirmed that while our
causes and challenges todays are complex and diverse,
our principles and positions remain unchanged. At the
top of those positions is the right of the Palestinian
people to build an independent State on its territory
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is
also important to put an end to the settlements and lift
the unjust and illegal blockade of Gaza.
The Kingdom of Bahrain consistently reiterates
its firm position with regard to the Palestinian issue,
which is based on the need to implement the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly and
to respect the pertinent international agreements. It is
essential to work assiduously to find a comprehensive,
fair and lasting solution to the issue of Palestine. This
can be done only with the complete withdrawal of
Israel of occupied Arab territories, the creation of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the decisions of the Quartet. It is also important to lift
the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms that Palesine’s
official membership in the International Criminal Court
is a historic event, an important step in the fight of the

15-1116359/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

brotherly Palestinian people and the result of tireless
diplomatic and legal efforts for the nation to recover its
full rights.
The path to solving the problem in the Middle
East requires the end of the Israeli occupation of Arab
and Palestinian territories since 1967, including East
Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan. It is also important for
Israel to relinquish Lebanese territories, in accordance
with the Security Council resolutions.
The Palestinian State must be created as a
sovereign State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with
Jerusalem as its capital. It is also important to reach
a fair settlement to ensure the return of Palestinian
refugees in accordance with resolution 194 (III). It is
also important to implement resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and to strictly
respect international law, in particular in the framework
of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which bans
the introduction of demographic changes in occupied
territories.
In conclusion, we must redouble the efforts to
support our Palestinian brothers to ensure that their
aspirations are realized and that they recover their
legitimate and inalienable rights.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to thank
the President for the month of April, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan for convening this important
meeting and take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
essential role played by Jordan towards the peace and
stability of the region. I would also like to thank His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing.
Japan notes with concern that the Middle East peace
process has fallen into a vicious circle of mistrust. While
negotiations have stalled, the sequence of violence and
provocative rhetoric has only deepened this rift. It is
evident that this situation is not sustainable. As the
international community has manifested time and time
again, a just, durable and comprehensive peace between
Israel and Palestine, based on a two-state solution,
is urgently needed. The window of opportunity is
narrowing. Developments on the ground, including
illegal settlement activities by Israel and violence from
both sides, are making it difficult to resume talks, let
alone reach an agreement. An environment conducive
to the resumption of talks must be recreated.
60/67

21/04/2015

Accordingly, Japan calls on the new Israeli
Administration to stand by its commitment to a twoState solution, both in words and deeds. We reiterate
our call on Israel to completely cease settlement
activities, which are illegal under international law
and undermine the prospects of a two-State solution.
Likewise, the withholding of tax revenues, contrary to
the Paris Protocol, has negatively affected the stability
of Palestinian institutions. In this regard, Japan
welcomes the announcement that an agreement has been
reached for the resumption of tax revenue transfers. We
call on both parties to refrain from unilateral measures
that could undermine efforts for the resumption of
peace negotiations. To this end, Prime Minister Abe of
Japan visited Israel and Palestine in January and called
directly on Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Abbas to resume peace negotiations.
Japan values the critical role that the United States
and the Quartet have played in facilitating the peace
process negotiations. Nonetheless, in light of the current
impasse, it is likewise evident that the international
community should also contribute to nurturing an
environment that is conducive to negotiations.
Japan believes that a multilateral approach that
calls for constructive contributions from countries with
the will and capacity to exert positive influence may
be propitious to advancing the peace process. As one
of the principal donors to the region with strong ties to
both sides, Japan stands ready to assume such a role.
Moreover, as my delegation stated at the previous open
debate on this item (see S/PV.7419), we believe that the
security Council can also play a constructive role, as
appropriate and when necessary.
Japan will continue to carry out providing
its distinctive support from a mid-to-long-term
perspective. We are convinced that fostering mutual
trust and creating a sustainable Palestinian economy
will facilitate negotiations and underpin the viability
of a two-State solution. To that end, in January, Prime
Minister Abe announced $100 million in aid, which was
all disbursed within three months. This brings Japan’s
assistance to Palestine and the peace process to over
$1.6 billion since 1993.
Through ongoing projects, such as the Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity Initiative and the Conference on
Cooperation among East Asian countries for Palestinian
Development, Japan remains resolute in helping lay
the groundwork towards the realization of two States
living side by side in peace and security. Japan believes
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that the day will come in the near future when we can
recognize Palestine as a State, in accordance with a
two-State solution through negotiations.
I would also have liked to speak today on the
situations in Syria and Yemen, however, due to the time
limits, I will leave my comments in the full text that has
been distributed in the Chamber.
In closing, I wish to emphasize that Japan is
conscious of the unique and constructive role it can
play in assisting countries of the region achieve peace
and prosperity. In the light of the difficult situation in
the Middle East, Japan stands ready, more than ever, to
continue our cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
expressing my delegation’s appreciation of the presence
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
and Expatriate Affairs of Jordan, Mr. Nasser Judeh,
who presided over the open debate this morning.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.
At the outset, allow me to highlight the incident
that took place yesterday in Sana’a, Yemen, as I believe
it demands the attention of the Security Council, in the
light of the resolution 2216 (2015), which was adopted
just last week. On Monday, a bomb attack struck
Sana’a, resulting in considerable physical damage
upon the premises of the Embassy of Indonesia. The
incident also caused physical injuries to two members
of our Embassy Staff and one other Indonesian citizen.
Indonesia condemns that bomb attack and any attacks
that result in casualties among civilian population and
damage to properties protected under international
law. The bomb attack is a clear example that the use
of violence will only result in civilian casualties. In
that regard, we re-emphasize that the best solution to
the situation in Yemen is through peaceful means of
diplomacy and negotiation.
We urge all parties to immediately halt violence
and abide by the prevailing international norms
and laws on the protection of civilians in times of
conflict. Indonesia also urges the Secretary-General

S/PV.7430

and all concerned parties to immediately implement
humanitarian pause to allow all civilians, including
foreign nationals, to evacuate Yemen as well as to
allow humanitarian assistance to enter the country.
While reaffirming the principle of the inviolability
of diplomatic and consular premises, we also urge all
parties to take all necessary steps to protect diplomatic
and consular premises against any intrusion or damage,
and to prevent any disturbance of the peace of these
missions or impairment of their dignity, as stipulated in
the resolution 2216 (2015).
On the question of Palestine, I want to highlight
that we are holding this meeting at a time of a neartotal absence of traction in the Middle East peace
process. Only last month, Israel held a general
election. During the election campaign, the world
was presented with various comments from Israel
disparaging the Palestinian people and demonstrating
contempt for the peace process as well as the prospect
of a Palestinian State. Needless to say, those comments
only strengthened our criticism of Israel and further
question its commitment to peace.
It is the belief of my delegation that only by a
return to the peace process and a demonstration of
goodwill and seriousness by the Government of Israel
can we find out if those comments were nothing more
than the convenient posturing of politicians. However,
as we know, nothing has changed. Israel continues to
commit the same grave and systematic violations of
international law that it has done for the past 60 years.
The establishment and expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories continues, along with
the associated restrictions on movement and access
to land. The excessive use of force by Israeli forces
towards the Palestinian people continues, in a climate
of impunity.
The Gaza Strip remains a tragic and empty husk,
shelled out last year and suffering from the effects of
the Israeli blockade. Israel has also continued to play
games with the Palestinian tax revenues, as a means
of blackmailing the Palestinian Government and seeing
to its economic collapse. In other words, the Security
Council today faces a challenge that is no different
from those of yesterday or years before. That challenge
is for the Council to act courageously to end the Israeli
occupation of Palestine and implement the two-State
vision. It is time that the Council honoured the Charter
of the United Nations and its mandate under it by

15-1116361/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refusing to be, in effect, a tool for the perpetuation of
decades of injustice and impasse in the Middle East.
A comprehensive, just and lasting settlement can
be achieved peacefully and on the basis of international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
road map of the Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We reiterate our position that the Council cannot afford
to play the part of just another actor, or worse still, the
role of a spectator, in the search for a comprehensive
solution to the question of Palestine. We also call on the
United Nations, as a member of the Quartet, to stand
with the children of Palestine and to restart the peace
process to ensure that they and the children of Israel
enjoy the peace and stability that has been denied to
their predecessors.
Before concluding my statement, I cannot fail to
bring to the Council’s attention the fate of the Palestine
refugee camp in Yarmouk, Syria. The camp’s takeover
earlier this month by a terrorist group has worsened the
lives of the refugees remaining there. This development,
along with the suffering inflicted on the refugees in
the more than two-year siege of the camp, adds to the
list of injustices being borne by Palestinian refugees.
Indonesia calls on the Council to act urgently to address
that tragedy and at the same time to work expeditiously
and without further delay towards reaching a political
solution to the conflict in Syria.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): The debate
over a two-State solution raised during the latest
elections in Israel reminded us all of the grim state of
affairs of the Middle East peace process. My delegation
believes that in order to preserve a two-State solution,
all actors must adhere to their previous commitments
and step up their efforts to restart the peace negotiations
with a view to establishing a more sustainable future
for future generations of Israelis and Palestinians.
We were encouraged by the news over the weekend
regarding the long-standing dispute over the transfer of
tax revenue from Israel to the Palestinian Authority. An
insolvent Palestinian Authority is in no one’s interests.
At the same time, the Republic of Korea remains
concerned about the expanded settlement activity and
the detrimental effect it has on the viability of a twoState solution. Settlements are not only illegal, they
are not in Israel’s long-term strategic interests and run
contrary to international peace efforts.

62/67

21/04/2015

Turning to the situation in Syria, the Republic of
Korea is deeply concerned about the unprecedented
scale of the violence as the conflict enters its fifth year.
The culture of unmitigated impunity and the systematic
violations of human rights and humanitarian laws are
particularly disturbing. In that regard, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 2199 (2015), aimed at cutting
off the major means of funding used by terrorists.
However, the international community must do more to
address this drawn-out conflict. In that regard, we are
encouraged by the outcome of the third international
humanitarian pledging conference for Syria, held in
Kuwait on 31 March. As we did at the time, the Republic
of Korea commends the host Governments of Jordan,
Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt and Turkey for their tremendous
efforts to lessen the suffering of the Syrian people. On
top of the $14 million in humanitarian assistance it
has given Syria over the past three years, the Republic
of Korea, heeding the call of the Council and the
international community, pledged another $10 million
at the March conference.
Regarding Yemen, my delegation is deeply
concerned about the continuously deteriorating
situation on the ground. In recognition of the urgent
need for humanitarian assistance, the Republic of
Korea recently pledged $500,000 in aid through United
Nations agencies. We welcome the Council’s adoption
of resolution 2216 (2015), which calls on the Yemeni
parties to resume the political transition process in
accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference, and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We urge all
the parties involved to focus particularly on protecting
civilians and facilitating the evacuation of foreign
residents from Yemen.
In conclusion, the continued instability of the region
is no longer a crisis for the Middle East alone. The
refugee situation is reverberating beyond the region,
as was witnessed by the drowning of more than 1,100
migrants in the Mediterranean just this past month.
We simply must do more to put a stop to violence and
re-start efforts to find a sustainable political solution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I would like to express
my appreciation to Jordan for convening this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including

15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the question of Palestine, at this critical time for the
Palestinian people. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful briefing and
Jordan’s Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs for presiding over our debate this
morning.
Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We wish to reaffirm our long-standing solidarity
and support for the Palestinian people’s realization of
their legitimate national aspirations and inalienable
right to self-determination and freedom in their
independent State of Palestine, living side by side with
the State of Israel.
The question of Palestine has been on the agenda
of the United Nations for more than 60 years now. Yet
despite decades of Palestine’s good-faith participation
in peace efforts, its plight continues to worsen on all
fronts. It is regrettable that the Security Council has
failed to contribute meaningfully to a peaceful solution
in the Middle East, even as the situation continues
to deteriorate and threaten the stability of the whole
region and of global peace and security generally.
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to undermine
all peace efforts, supported by some within the Council
under the guise of the right to self-defence. The Israeli
Prime Minister’s unfortunate statement, on the eve of
the Israeli elections, rejecting a two-State solution, and
his pledge to continue building settlements, confirmed
suspicions that he was never serious about negotiations,
casting the viability of a two-State solution into grave
doubt. We call on the Israeli Government to reaffirm its
commitment to a two-State solution and take credible
steps towards a peaceful solution.
Zimbabwe is seriously concerned about Israel’s
escalation of settlement construction throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, in breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and several United Nations
resolutions, including some of the Council’s. Those and
other systematic violations, including the detention
and displacement of Palestinian civilians, undermine
any prospects for peace. A lasting peace in the Middle
East can only be achieved through a two-State solution.
Any attempt to change demographic realities through
settlements or the use of force will only prolong the
suffering of the Palestinian people.

S/PV.7430

We continue to witness the suffering and persecution
of the people of Palestine at the hands of the occupying
Power, Israel. Zimbabwe strongly condemns, now
or in the future, the withholding of the much-needed
tax revenue owed to the Palestinian Authority. This
inhumane act has forced and will continue to force
the Palestinian Authority to adopt austerity measures
affecting the livelihood of the Palestinian people.
For these crimes, Israel should be held accountable.
Zimbabwe supports investigations into the alleged
war crimes committed during the last Gaza war, and
those found accountable should be prosecuted as
recommended by the Human Rights Council.
Limited progress has been made in the reconstruction
of thousands of homes, hospitals and schools damaged
or destroyed by the Israeli army in Gaza last August.
The critical situation in Gaza needs to be urgently
addressed so as to alleviate the humanitarian disaster
caused by the Israeli armed forces’ indiscriminate
bombardments. We urge the international community
to accelerate support for reconstruction to address the
basic needs of the Palestinian people. We also call on the
international community to address Gaza’s underlying
problems to ensure that the matter is dealt with in a
holistic manner so as to prevent future wars.
The Security Council cannot remain on the
sidelines in the quest to find a just and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine. Failure to resolve
this question continues to undermine the credibility of
our international system and the rule of law. Zimbabwe
urges the Security Council to take the lead and revive
the peace process in order to preserve the internationally
supported goal of a two-State solution. There is
unanimity that the status quo cannot be sustained.
The Security Council should act in accordance with
its Charter responsibilities and end Israeli occupation
and impunity, which has brought untold suffering to the
Palestinian people and sown so much instability in the
Middle East.
We wish to express our support for a resolution that
sets parameters for a final-status agreement on ending
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and this
decades-long injustice. A resolution delineating a time
frame for the independence of Palestine, in line with
the United Nations proposal on the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders, would restore hope to
the Palestinian people that their national aspirations
will soon be realized.

15-1116363/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Zimbabwe’s
unflinching solidarity and support for the Palestinian
people in their quest for a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in accordance with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): On behalf of the Republic
of Maldives, I wish to express our deep appreciation
to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council for the month of
April, for convening this timely debate in connection
with the agenda item on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We would also like
to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for
his briefing and his dedicated efforts to find a lasting
solution to the various conflicts that still plague this
region.
The Maldives takes this opportunity to express
once again its unyielding support for the people and
cause of Palestine and its support for bringing to an end
the violence in the region. It is with great sadness that
we bear witness to the continuing atrocities by those
who choose to promote violence, hatred and fear. Time
and again, the progress made has given way to conflict,
making it seemingly impossible to see lasting peace.
The report of the Secretary-General in particular notes
that the access of Palestinians to agricultural lands in
the West Bank has been denied. Agriculture is the main
source of employment and resources for Palestinians,
and this restriction severely limits the economic
security of the Palestinian people and the ability of the
Palestinian Government to provide basic services to its
people.
The Maldives reiterates its call for the full
realization of the right to self-determination of the
Palestinian people and the right of Palestinian people to
establish their own State, alongside Israel, on the basis
of the two-State solution, on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
Violence and oppression breed hatred. Children
currently living under occupation, oppressed, with
their basic rights denied, are growing up with hatred in
their hearts and revenge on their minds. Today we are
seeing this hatred manifest among young people from
every nation, race and creed, with immense security
implications for the Middle East and the entire world.

64/67

21/04/2015

It is that hatred, along with misguided views
and information, that fuel recruitment into terrorist
organizations, including the so-called Islamic State.
The so-called Islamic State poses one of the greatest
challenges facing the Islamic Ummah and the greatest
emerging threat to the global community. The atrocities
they commit in the name of Islam are inhumane and
un-Islamic. The Maldives stands with the international
community in strongly condemning their activities and
in strong support of the initiatives of the Council and
other Member States in this regard.
The situation in Syria is of great concern, too.
The fighting continues to escalate across the country.
Yesterday, Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), Pierre Krähenbühl, informed us
about the perilous situation in Yarmouk. We are deeply
concerned about this degrading humanitarian situation
and the fact that UNRWA did not have access to the
camp and needed secure conditions to deliver aid and
enable the evacuation of civilians. The protection of
civilians, especially those already trapped in vulnerable
situations, such as the refugees of Yarmouk, must take
priority.
We must be resolute in our efforts, as an
international community, to face the challenges of our
time head-on. We see encouragement in the nuclear
deal agreed between Iran and the P5+1. We see hope
in the many pledges of humanitarian assistance and the
many calls against violence and for action. We must
continue in our efforts to provide lasting solutions, to
stop the senseless cycle of violence and hatred, and to
bring lasting change for the security and peace of our
entire global community.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): I join other
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important debate. The Sri Lankan
delegation associates itself with the statement made
by Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My
delegation wishes to express our appreciation for the
dedicated service of Mr. Robert Serry, the outgoing
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, and to wish his successor, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, success in this key leadership role. Proactive
leadership in the international community is essential
in order to find a just and durable solution to the
question of Palestine.
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Successive generations of Palestinians have
suffered owing to a range of factors, in particular by
being dispossessed from much of their land. In recent
years, the continuing blockade of Gaza has added
to the difficulties experienced by the Palestinian
people. Restrictions on imports and exports due to
the blockade are stifling economic growth as well as
aggravating the humanitarian crisis. We are deeply
concerned at the situation in Gaza, where the basic
needs of the Palestinian population must be addressed
following the conflict last year, which resulted in
large-scale destruction and displacement. Continuing
the humanitarian and reconstruction assistance for the
devastated Gaza Strip should be a priority. In addition,
the pace of reconstruction needs to be accelerated to
address basic needs as well as to ensure stability.
The fulfilment of pledges made at the Cairo
conference for Palestine last year will be a lifeline for the
Palestinian people to rebuild their lives and livelihoods.
Also, the funding of United Nations agencies that carry
out vital operations in Gaza for both the refugee and
non-refugee populations must receive the highest
priority. Peace negotiations need to be resumed as soon
as possible with the goal of reaching a just and durable
solution consistent with the principles of international
law, and relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. Both parties to the conflict must
actively pursue every possibility for peace with a view
to ultimately establishing an independent State of
Palestine that exists peacefully, side by side with Israel.
A climate conducive to peace would be encouraged
by an approach of mutual sensitivity to each other’s
concerns.
We would also like to reiterate that the security
needs of the Israeli people must be respected. An
improvement in the conditions of the Palestinians would
contribute to improving the situation of the region
as a whole. The ongoing settlement activities, which
are illegal under international law, need to end at the
earliest for a sustainable solution. Sri Lanka supports
the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
concerning the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to statehood and the attainment of a two-State
solution on the basis of the 1967 borders. Sri Lanka
also supports Palestine’s application for admission to
full membership in the United Nations. We recognize
that the viability of the two-State solution will depend
on the political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people.

S/PV.7430

In conclusion, we hope that both Israel and Palestine
will utilize the opportunities presented during this year
to achieve a historic peace agreement in the interest of
their future generations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): A number of
delegations have requested the floor to make additional
statements. I ask that each delegation limit itself to one
additional statement.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I would like to take this
opportunity to respond to comments made by certain
delegations during the course of today’s meeting. First
of all, it comes as quite a surprise that the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), with members such as Zimbabwe,
Cuba, Indonesia and Malaysia, has the audacity to
hypocritically lecture Israel on international law and
human rights while many of its leading members,
such as Iran, Saudi Arabia and Syria, are the world’s
worst human rights abusers and oppressive regimes.
I was particularly surprised to hear the Indonesian
representative, who so conveniently did not mention
the barbaric beheading of two Indonesian nationals
by Saudi legal authorities only this week. I would
like to remind the Indonesian representative that such
brutality on the part of the Saudi State is one of the
central aspects of the situation in the Middle East today,
and that hypocrisy is a central character in NAM’s
statements in this institution.
With respect to the Syrian statement, I would
like to mention two things. The first is a fact — the
responsibility of that representative’s regime for the
death of more than 220,000 Syrians. No inflammatory
statements or lies can cover that truth. Blaming Israel
for the evacuation of United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) troops from the area of
separation is nothing more than revisionist history. The
truth of the matter is that the Syrian army fled in the
face of advancing Jabhat Al-Nusrah terrorists, leaving
UNDOF troops unprotected and at risk. Recognizing
that danger, Israel opened its gates and provided
UNDOF safe harbour, where they remain to this day.
Syrian lies cannot cover that truth.
I found it interesting to hear an Iranian
representative speaking about Israeli occupation of
Lebanese territory. I believe it is well known that, today,
Iran is the main occupier in the Middle East, including
in Lebanon. The Iranian Revolutionary Guard is a
Security Council-designated entity responsible for the

15-1116365/67

S/PV.7430

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

murder of tens of thousands of civilians in the Middle
East and terror attacks around the world. Iran is the
occupier of Arab territories and Arab capitals in our
region, in Lebanon, in Syria, in Iraq and in Yemen. In
Lebanon, Iran is the chief sponsor and supplier of illicit
advanced weapons to Hezbollah, a designated terrorist
organization. In blatant violation of resolutions 1559
(2004), 1701 (2006) and sanctions resolution 1747
(2007), Iran and its proxies, be it the Al-Assad regime,
Hizbullah, Hamas or the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, are
a threat to international peace and security. It is time to
address that threat.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Saudi Arabia has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): Israel
continues its desperate attempts to distort the truth in
order to divert the Council’s attention from what its
forces are doing to the Palestinian people. It does so by
attacking anyone who criticizes its oppressive policies
and actions, which contravene international law and
resolutions concerning Palestine. The statement
delivered by the representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia this morning explained very clearly and
in detail our position with regard to Israeli distortions,
claims and lies, whether they be the ones included in
their original statement or their subsequent statement.
The representative of the Syrian regime also
continues to repeat the same false claims against
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, an indication of his
own failure and inability to divert the attention of
the Council from the crimes the Syrian regime has
committed against the Syrian people.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has repeatedly
reaffirmed its condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. The defeat and eradication of
terrorism require that the root causes be addressed. That
includes the practices of the Syrian regime, specifically
the violations committed against the Syrian people. The
representative of the Syrian regime has gone so far as
to use methods, such as the amputation of hands, arms,
and so on, against those who opposed the Syrian regime
and aspired to freedom and dignity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I asked for
the floor to reply to the two meaningless statements
66/67

21/04/2015

of rhetoric made by the representatives of the Israeli
regime this morning and afternoon in the Council.
They were statements imbued, as always, with baseless
allegations and exaggerations against my Government
and now, it would seem, all members of the Non-Aligned
Movement. They were statements basically designed
to divert attention from the atrocities, agressions
and violations that Israel always commits against the
Palestinian population.
Recent bigoted statements by the Head of the Israeli
regime against the Arab residents of Israel and his
words about the so-called peace process and the twoState solution were of great importance, as they took
the mask off and bared their face for the whole world to
see. In that way, they fully showed their racist, bigoted
nature, on the one hand, and their nefarious intentions
in pretending to talk to Palestinians about peace for the
past two decades, on the other hand.
It is indeed very ironic and appalling that a regime
famous for its apartheid policies and war crimes, which
is well documented by different United Nations organs
and agencies, which has failed to comply with many
United Nations regulations and resolutions and has
for many decades occupied lands belonging to other
people, can allow itself to accuse other countries in
such a sinister way. It is also preposterous that the
same regime, with a well-known record of developing,
producing and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane
weapons, including nuclear weapons, ventures to falsely
accuse others of others trying to acquire the same type
of weapon.
While they always claim to be concerned about the
Iranian nuclear programme, which is fully peaceful and
under international supervision, we in the region and
across the globe are fully right to worry about the nuclear
weapons in the hands of this regime, which has shown
time and again its capacity and propensity for killing,
with the latest example being the rampage in July and
August 2014 against defenceless Palestinians. Can we,
or any other people, believe that the representatives of
Israel mean anything other than to divert international
attention away from the crimes that their regime is
committing against its neighbours with pyromaniacal
intensity?
The Israeli regime has always tried hard to sabotage
and disrupt the earnest and serious negotiations that
my Government has been engaged in during the past
two years to address any genuine concern that the
international community may have about the Iranian
15-11163

21/04/2015

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

nuclear programme. We have no doubt that not only
the progress achieved in these negotiations but also
Israel’s resounding defeat in obstructing the way to an
agreement are a severe cause of anxiety and distress
for them. The rant we heard today in the Council is

S/PV.7430

a nervous reaction to the rebuff they receive in this
respect.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

15-1116367/67
