II.

39

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
--

(e) To commission expert studies on all aspects of
apartheid and its international repercussions;
(/) To hold sessions away from Headquarters as
necessary;
4. Requests the Special Committee, with the assistance of the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat
and in co-operation with the South African liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity, to promote the international mobilization
against apartheid and to facilitate co-ordination of action among anti-apartheid and solidarity movements,
trade unions, churches and other religious bodies,
women's organizations, student and youth organizations and the mass media;
5. Requests the Special Committee to devote special
attention in 1981 to:
(a) Promotion of campaigns for the total isolation
of the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) Promotion of increased assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movement;
(c) Monitoring of the implementation of United
Nations resolutions on apartheid and exposing all collaboration with South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Centre against Apartheid with all the necessary means to
assist the Special Committee in this task;
7. Decides to make a special annual allocation of
$150,000 to the Special Committee, from the budget of
the United Nations for the biennium 1980-1981, for
special projects to be decided on by the Committee to
promote the international mobilization against apartheid, in particular:
(a) Co-sponsorship and assistance to national and
international conferences and seminars against apartheid;
(b) Assistance to enable national liberation movements to participate in such conferences;
(c) Promotion of the widest observance of international days against apartheid and of international
campaigns against apartheid;
(d) Expert studies on apartheid;
8. Requests all Governments, specialized agencies
and other institutions within the United Nations system
and other organizations to co-operate with the Special
Committee in the discharge of its responsibilities.

98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

Q
INVESTMENTS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34/93 Q of 12 December 1979,
Taking note of the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, n
Convinced that a cessation of all new foreign investments in and financial loans to South Africa would constitute an important step in international action for the
elimination of apartheid, as such investments and loans
abet and encourage the apartheid policies in that country,
Welcoming the actions of those Governments which
have taken legislative and other measures towards that
end,

--

Noting with regret that the Security Council has not
yet taken steps towards that end, as requested in
General Assembly resolutions 31 /6 K of 9 November
1976, 32/105 0 of 16 December 1977, 33/183 0 of 24
January 1979 and 34/93 Q of 12 December 1979,
Again urges the Security Council to consider the matter at an early date with a view to taking effective steps
to achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in
and financial loans to South Africa.
98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980
R
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, 7 ' to
which is annexed the report of the Committee of
Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,
Gravely concerned at the continued and increased repression of opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa and the institution of
numerous trials under arbitrary security legislation, as
well as continued repression in Namibia,
Reaffirming that increased humanitarian assistance by
the international community to those persecuted under
repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa
and Namibia is appropriate and essential,
Recognizing that increased contributions to the Trust
Fund and to the voluntary agencies concerned are necessary to enable them to meet the increased needs for
humanitarian and legal assistance,
I. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for
South Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian
and legal assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and
Namibia, as well as assistance to their families and to
refugees from South Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged in
rendering humanitarian and legal assistance to the victims of apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Appeals for generous and increased contributions to the Trust Fund;
4. Further appeals for direct contributions to the
voluntary agencies engaged in assistance to the victims
of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa
and Namibia.
98th plenary meeting
16 December 1980

35/207.

The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation in
the Middle East",
Taking into account the support extended to the just
causes of the Palestinian people and the other Arab
'' A/35/509

40

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

countries in their struggle against Israeli aggression and
occupation in order to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East and the full exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable national
rights, as affirmed by previous resolutions of the
General Assembly relating to the question of Palestine
and the situation in the Middle East,
Deeply concerned that the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since June 1967, including Jerusalem,
still remain under illegal Israeli occupation, that the relevant resolutions of the United Nations have not been
implemented and that the Palestinian people is still
denied the restoration of its land and the exercise of its
inalienable national rights in conformity with international law, as reaffirmed by resolutions of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible under the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles of international law and that Israel
must withdraw from all the occupied Palestinian and
other Arab territories, including Jerusalem,
Reaffirming further the necessity of establishing a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region,
based on full respect for the Charter and the principles
of international law,
I. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of
Palestinian and other Arab territories, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, the principles of international law and the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, and renews its call for the immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of Israel from all these
occupied territories;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that the question of
Palestine is at the core of the conflict in the Middle East
and that no comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
region will be achieved without the full exercise by the
Palestinian people of its inalienable national rights;
3. Reaffirms further that a just and comprehensive
settlement of the situation in the Middle East cannot be
achieved without the participation on an equal footing
of the parties to the conflict, including the Palestine
Liberation Organization as the representative of the
Palestinian people;
4. Declares once more that peace in the Middle East
is indivisible and that a just and lasting settlement of the
Middle East problem must be based on a comprehensive solution, under the auspices of the United Nations,
which ensures complete and unconditional withdrawal
from all the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since June 1967, including Jerusalem, and enables the Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable
rights, including the right of return, and the right to selfdetermination, national independence and the establishment of its independent State in Palestine under the
leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization, in
accordance with resolutions of the United Nations relating to the question of Palestine, in particular General
Assembly resolutions ES- 7/2 of 29 July 1980 and 35 / 169 A
of 15 December 1980;
5. Rejects all partial agreements and separate
treaties which violate the recognized rights of the Palestinian people and contradict the principles of just and
comprehensive solutions to the Middle East problem to
ensure the establishment of a just peace in the area;
6. Further reaffirms its strong rejection of Israel's
decision to annex Jerusalem, declare it as its "capital"
and alter its physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and status, considers all

these measures and their consequences null and void, requests that they should be rescinded immediately and
calls upon all Member States, specialized agencies and
other international organizations to abide by the present resolution and all other relevant resolutions, including General Assembly resolution 35 / 169 E of 15 December 1980;
7. Strongly condemns Israel's aggression against
Lebanon and the Palestinian people as well as its practices in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, particularly the Syrian Golan Heights, including
annexation, the establishment of settlements, assassination attempts and other terrorist, aggressive and repressive measures which are in violation of the Charter and
the principles of international law;
8. Calls for strict respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized boundaries;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council periodically on the development of the
situation and to submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session a report covering the developments
in the Middle East in all their aspects.

98th plenary meeting
/6 December /WW
35/227.

Question of Namibia7h
A

SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 77 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 78
Reculling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of
27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council relating to Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of
21 June 1971,'" delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the Council in its resolution 284 ( 1970)
of 29 July I 970,
Recalling also its resolutions 3111 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973, and 31/146 and 31/152 of 20
December 1976, by which it. inter alia, recognized the
South West Africa People's Organization as the sole and
authentic representative of the Namibian people and
granted observer status to it,
Taking into consideration the Algiers Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia at its extraor"See also sect.I, foot-note 7: sect. X.B. l, decision 35/442: and
sect. X.8.5, decision 35/451.
71
Official Records vf the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 24 (A/35/24 and Corr. I and 2).
"Ibid.. Supplement No. 23 (A/35/23/Rev.l), chaps. 1-V and VIII.
'' Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 ( 1970 i. Advisory Opinion. I.CJ Reports I 971. p. 16.
