S/2015/368

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2015
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present, fifteenth, report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security
Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165 (2014)
and paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014), in which the Council requested
me to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of those resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground and reports from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and from open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their
humanitarian deliveries are reported for the period 1 to 30 April 2015. More recent
data have been included, when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in April. Indiscriminate aerial bombardment, including the
use of barrel bombs, by government forces and indiscriminate shelling by non -State
armed groups and extremist and listed terrorist groups 1 continued, resulting in the
death, injury and displacement of civilians, as well as destruction of property and
infrastructure. Parties to the conflict continued to disregard their obligations under
international humanitarian law and for the protection of civilians.
4.
Fighting between government forces, non-State armed groups and listed
terrorist groups in the north of the country continued to result in the death and
injury of civilians. In Idlib Governorate, the fighting continued to escalate during
the reporting period. Government forces continued with intense shelling and aerial

__________________
1 On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Nusra Front were designated as

terrorist groups by the Security Council under resolution 1267 (1999). The two groups operate
in the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-07960 (E)

220515

*1507960*

S/2015/368

bombings, including the use of barrel bombs, on areas under the control of
non-State armed groups. For example, on 13 April, three civilians were killed when
government missiles hit the centre of Idlib city. On 14 April, nin e civilians were
killed when government forces fired two missiles at a market in the city. The Syrian
Arab Red Crescent offices in the Carlton Hotel in Idlib city were hit by an air strike
on 17 April, destroying ambulances and vehicles and curtailing the provision of first
aid services in the city. Non-State armed groups continued to fire on the two largely
Shia majority villages of Al Foh’a and Kafraya, where an estimated 20,000 people
live.
5.
Fighting between the parties also moved south-west from Idlib city towards
the Sahel al-Ghab valley in north-west Hama Governorate. The fighting reportedly
resulted in civilian casualties and affected access routes for humanitarian
organizations in the governorate. On 25 April, Jaish al -Fateh seized control over Jisr
al-Shoughour in rural Idlib, cutting the main supply routes to and from Latakia
Governorate. Following the takeover of Jisr al-Shoughour, government and
pro-government forces withdrew to positions south and east and carried out heavy
shelling and aerial attacks on the town as well as other areas in rural Idlib, including
Binnish, Darkoush, Kafr Nubl and Ma’arrat Al-Numan. For example, on 26 April,
an aerial bombardment of the central market in Darkoush reportedly killed between
40 and 50 people and wounded more than 100 civilians.
6.
There were reports of an alleged chlorine attack in Saraqib, Idlib, on 2 May.
Further alleged chlorine attacks were reported in Janoudieh, Kansafrah and Kafr
Batiekh on 7 May.
7.
In Aleppo Governorate, indiscriminate attacks b y government forces and
non-State armed groups in Aleppo city continued to cause civilian deaths,
destruction of property and interruption to essential services. Sources of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) reporte d
that at least 100 civilians, including 22 children, were killed during the second half
of April as a result of attacks by government forces on areas of Aleppo city held by
non-State armed groups. On 14 April, an air strike on the Jamil Qabani School in t he
Ansari neighbourhood reportedly led to more than a dozen civilian casualties. On
3 May, local education authorities declared a suspension of all education activities
in eastern Aleppo following an attack on an education centre in Saif Al Dawla. In
terms of destruction to property, an analysis of Aleppo city carried out by the
Operational Satellite Applications Programme of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research (UNITAR-UNOSAT), using satellite imagery collected on
26 April, indicated more than 40 structures destroyed or heavily damaged. That was
probably caused by air strikes or barrel bombing between 15 December 2014 and
26 April 2015 in the Handarat, Rasafeh and Balayramun neighbourhoods.
8.
Non-State armed groups launched several attacks inside Aleppo city, including
on government-controlled residential neighbourhoods, reportedly resulting in
around 100 civilian deaths in April and early May, as well as many more injured and
substantial damage to residential buildings. For example, at least 14 civilians were
reportedly killed and 60 injured when non-State armed groups attacked the Midan
area with indiscriminate mortar shelling and improvised explosive devices made of
gas cylinders. OHCHR representatives spoke to residents who described the
difficulty of living under sustained attack from mortar shells, with schools in the
areas being shut down. While continuing to maintain a presence and operations in

2/12

15-07960

S/2015/368

Aleppo city, United Nations organizations have temporarily suspended all
non-critical missions to and from the city in response to the significant escalation in
armed conflict there and the increased insecurity along the Salamya -Aleppo road.
9.
During the reporting period, the Kurdish People’s Protection Units and the
Free Syrian Army continued joint advances in areas in Aleppo Governorate under
the control of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), reportedly taking over
Dafiye, Arne, Qerat and some hills overlooking Serrin, to the south of Kobane/Ayn
al-Arab.
10. According to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, on 1 May, some
64 people were reportedly killed in Ber Mahli, to the north-east of Aleppo city, in
air strikes carried out by the international anti-ISIL coalition.
11. Heavy fighting continued in and around Damascus in April, with non-State
armed groups carrying out several mortar attacks, resulting in civilian casualties and
damage to civilian property. For example, on 21 April, several mortar attacks on the
Abbasiyeen and Adawi neighbourhoods killed a child and injured f ive civilians. One
of the mortars reportedly hit the playground of the Martyr Issam Saffiya primary
school in al-Adawi. Also on 6 April, two other mortars hit close to a medical centre
in al-Adawi, injuring a civilian. On 22 April, non-State armed groups attacked the
neighbourhood of al-Tadamoun in Damascus city with several mortars, resulting in
the death of a woman.
12. Clashes between government forces, non-State armed groups and listed
terrorist groups continued in the vicinity of the Al Zabadani, Jobar and Al Qaboun
areas of Damascus. On 16 April, the Free Syrian Army and Jaish Al -Islam
coordinated an attack against ISIL affiliates in the Barzeh, Al -Qaboun and Tishreen
neighbourhoods in Damascus, reportedly resulting in many deaths and injuries. On
21 April, non-State armed groups in Jobar, east of Damascus city, along with the
Nusra Front, declared the beginning of the battle to liberate Jobar, with fighting
subsequently reported in Al-Tebah neighbourhood.
13. Following the infiltration of Yarmouk camp in Damascus by ISIL early in
April, the situation in the camp deteriorated significantly, putting the lives of 18,000
people, including 3,500 children, at increased risk. The escalation of violence
continued inside and around the camp almost daily. On 28 April and 1 May,
government forces reportedly carried out air and missile attacks on the camp. Local
sources claimed that at least 12 civilians were killed as a result of those strikes.
Before the attacks, a UNITAR-UNOSAT analysis of satellite imagery showed one
destroyed and two severely damaged buildings within Yarmouk camp, possibly
caused by air strikes or barrel bombing between 5 and 17 April 2015, and two
severely damaged buildings and three impact craters in the adjacent Falesteen camp
area. While no precise, verifiable figures are available, it is estimated that thousands
of civilians remain inside Yarmouk and thousands have fled Yarmouk to
neighbouring communities. The continued absence of protection and the
deteriorating humanitarian conditions in Yarmouk remain extremely worrying.
14. Fighting also continued in rural Damascus during the reporting period, with
government forces carrying out multiple attacks on eastern Ghouta. For example, on
15 April, government forces carried out several attacks on Zibdin village, including
the use of at least 100 improvised gas cylinders filled with explosive materials,
which killed 8 civilians and injured 50. On 22 April, government forces reportedly

15-07960

3/12

S/2015/368

carried out eight air strikes with guided missiles on a residenti al area in the town of
Douma, killing six civilians, including two children. Also on 22 April, government
forces carried out six air strikes on the town of Harasta, killing four civilians,
including two women. On 6 May, a Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteer was killed
when a Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy was hit by mortars en route to deliver
supplies to Douma; four others were injured. Additional civilian casualties were also
reported.
15. In the Qalamoun area, the situation remains fluid following an int ensification
of fighting after government and pro-government forces launched an attack to retake
the area from the Nusra Front early in May. Some media reported on the advance of
pro-government forces, backed by Hizbullah, who took control of Assal Al -Ward
and Joroud Al-Jiba. Opposition sources denied that the advance had taken place and
claimed the killing of more than a dozen Hizbullah fighters, including high -ranking
field commanders. Fighting also took place between the Nusra Front and ISIL in
al-Qalamoun.
16. In Hasakeh Governorate, fighting between government forces and ISIL
resulted in civilian deaths and injuries. Following a multi -pronged attack by ISIL on
three government checkpoints on the outskirts of Al-Hasakeh city, government
forces reportedly carried out aerial bombardments of ISIL strongholds in the
province. On 15 April, at least 10 civilians were reportedly killed and dozens of
others injured as a result of the aerial bombardment by government forces of the
ISIL-controlled city of al-Shaddadi in rural Al-Hasakeh. According to human rights
defenders from the area, the attack hit a hospital and a busy local market in the
centre of the city.
17. Fighting also continued between government forces and ISIL in Deir ez -Zor
Governorate in April. Reports indicate that ISIL launched a new offensive to take
the remaining areas of Deir ez-Zor city, attacking the eastern perimeter of the city
and the government military airbase. Government forces carried out shelling and
aerial bombardments against ISIL-held areas, including Deir ez-Zor city and
al-Mayadin. For example, according to OHCHR sources, on 23 April, 10 civilians
were reportedly injured in al-Mayadin as a result of an aerial bombardment.
18. ISIL continued to launch attacks during the reporting period. For example, in
Homs on 15 April, ISIL attacked government positions in the vicinity of the oil
fields in Shaer and Jazal in rural Palmyra. Government forces reportedly regained
control of part of the oil wells in the Jazal area, while ISIL reportedl y maintained
control over part of the Shaer oil field.
19. In the Waer neighbourhood of Homs city, there were reports of increased
sniper activity resulting in the death and injury of civilians. Three civilians were
reportedly killed by government snipers on 28 April, while two civilians were
reportedly seriously wounded by sniper fire coming from the same location on
27 April. Government forces also continued to shell the neighbourhood; on 25 April,
aerial bombardment by government helicopters reportedly resulted in the death of a
woman and her child.
20. Heavy clashes between the Government and non-State armed groups continued
in the southern part of the country. In Dar’a Governorate, government forces
conducted aerial attacks on civilian-populated towns and villages, including with
barrel bombs. On 14 April, government helicopters reportedly dropped barrel bombs

4/12

15-07960

S/2015/368

on the village of Eastern Karak, killing three children. Further government aerial
attacks on eastern Karak and on Dael killed 14 people on 19 Ap ril. The Nasib border
crossing continued to be closed as at 2 April. During the reporting period, a
delegation of tribal leaders and businesspeople worked with the Government and
non-State armed groups to reach an agreement to open it. A meeting between
representatives of the opposition and tribal leaders was held in the United Arab
Emirates in the final week of April.
21. On 1 May, two peacekeepers from the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force sustained minor injuries owing to shrapnel from an airbu rst and on
4 May three explosions hit Camp Ziouani, seriously wounding two more
peacekeepers.
22. Civilian infrastructure continued to be affected during the reporting period.
For example, 228,000 people living in the besieged neighbourhoods of Deir ez -Zor
city continued to be without electricity following deactivation by ISIL of the Tayem
power plant in late March. On 22 April, reportedly after three months of water cuts,
the Government resumed pumping water into the Assali suburb in southern
Damascus, where some 5,000 people live.
23. Thousands of people continued to be displaced by fighting and insecurity
during the reporting period. In Idlib, further displacement to surrounding rural areas
and the neighbouring governorates was reported, including 4,000 people to
Al-Suqylibiah in Hama following the fighting in Jisr Al -Shoughour. In Al-Hasakeh,
some 20,000 people were displaced from Tal Hmis and Ras Al Ain to various parts
of Raqqa Governorate. In Dar’a, nearly 4,000 people were displaced again as a
result of armed clashes, while 5,000 people fled from As-Salamiyeh in Hama as a
result of an ISIL attack; most have since returned after government forces regained
control of the village.
24. On 5 May, my Special Envoy launched the Geneva Consultations — a series
of separate bilateral discussions between the Special Envoy and a broad spectrum of
Syrian parties, as well as regional and international actors. The consultations are
aimed at exploring ways to operationalize the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012.
They are expected to last initially for five to six weeks, after which the Special
Envoy will report to me as to where relevant parties stand vis -à-vis proposals to end
the Syrian conflict through a political solution.

B.

Human rights
25. During the reporting period, OHCHR continued to receive allegations and
document cases of arbitrary detention, torture and death of persons in government
detention centres run by the Syrian security forces in Damascus and Homs.
Allegations were received of ill-treatment and torture in Al-Khatib State Security
Branch (Damascus), Harasta Air Force Intelligence complex (Damascus) and Air
Force Intelligence Branch (Homs). On 18 April, Syrian security forces reportedly
raided the offices of the Syrian National Youth Party (a pro -government party),
physically assaulted its Secretary-General and allegedly arrested a female member.
Her whereabouts remain unknown. OHCHR sources reported that, on 21 April,
government security forces carried out arrests in the Rukn el Din area in Damas cus,
arbitrarily arresting several young men in their homes. Their whereabouts remain
unknown.

15-07960

5/12

S/2015/368

26. On 10 April, ISIL reportedly kidnapped around 50 civilians from Sunni and
Ismaili communities after attacking the village of al -Mabouga. The kidnapped
civilians were taken into areas controlled by ISIL further east of Hama.
27. Syrian cultural heritage sites continued to be destroyed and damaged owing to
fighting, as well as looting and illegal excavations. On 5 April, the Virgin Mary
Church in Tell Nasiri was destroyed. Human rights defenders from the area blamed
ISIL, which has been in control of the village since February 2014. On 29 April, the
Forty Martyrs Armenian Orthodox Church in Aleppo was destroyed and at least six
other cultural heritage sites, including the ancient Noréas waterwheels in Hama,
were also damaged during the reporting period.

C.

Humanitarian access
28. Some 12.2 million people remain in need of humanitarian assistance in the
Syrian Arab Republic, including more than 5 million chil dren. About 7.6 million
people are internally displaced, and nearly 4 million people have fled to
neighbouring countries and North Africa.
29. The continued efforts of United Nations agencies and partners
notwithstanding, the delivery of humanitarian assistance remained challenging
during the reporting period. As in previous months, a combination of factors
continued to impede access to some areas, including insecurity and shifting conflict
lines, deliberate interference by the parties, restrictions on acce ss and onerous
administrative procedures that constrained the timely delivery of assistance.
30. In April, insecurity and shifting conflict lines, along with interference with
operations, continued to constrain the delivery of assistance to several governo rates
in areas controlled by ISIL. For the eleventh month in a row, the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) was unable to send water treatment supplies to Deir
ez-Zor and Raqqa Governorates, owing to the difficulty of delivering humanitarian
supplies through areas controlled by ISIL. In addition, the World Food Programme
(WFP) continued its suspension of food deliveries to ISIL-controlled areas. That
affected some 600,000 people in Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor Governorates. Elsewhere,
active fighting in Idlib Governorate halted the implementation of the measles
vaccination campaign in April.
31. The closure of the Nasib border crossing with Jordan, following its takeover
by non-State armed groups early in April, disrupted humanitarian deliveries into the
southern part of the country. For example, UNICEF had been delivering on average
500,000 litres of water treatment material through the crossing on a monthly basis.
United Nations agencies are making alternative arrangements to ship assistance into
the Syrian Arab Republic, including the use of Latakia port and other border
crossings. The closure of the Nasib border crossing has also affected the quantity of
commercial goods, including basic staples, coming into the country.
32. No major changes in the administrative procedures required by the
Government were reported in April. The administrative procedures currently in
place continued to delay or limit the delivery of assistance by United Nations
agencies in April.
33. A total of 387 visa applications (requests for new visas or visa renewals) for
United Nations staff were submitted between 1 January and 30 April 2015. Of those,

6/12

15-07960

S/2015/368

286 visas have been approved (74 per cent) and 27 requests have been rejected. That
compares to 28 requests for visas rejected in 2014. As at 30 April, 74 visa requests
remained pending: 37 within the limit of 15 working days and 37 exceeding the
limit.
34. In April, an international non-governmental organization informed the
Government of its intention to withdraw from the country. As at 30 April,
15 international non-governmental organizations had been approved by the
Government to work in the Syrian Arab Republic. International non -governmental
organizations continued to face administrative hurdles and restrictions that had an
impact on their ability to operate. For example, they remain restricted in their ability
to partner with national humanitarian organizations, open sub -offices, conduct
missions, join inter-agency convoys and undertake independent needs assessments.
However, five visas were approved for staff members of international
non-governmental organizations in April, including two submitted during the
reporting period. Four visas remain pending.
35. During the reporting period, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested the
United Nations to stop working with three national non-governmental organizations
in Idlib, owing to the security situation there. Two of those organizations are still
authorized to operate in other governorates. One new national non -governmental
organization, working in Lattakia Governorate, was added to the list of national
non-governmental organizations authorized to partner with United Nations agencies.
As at 30 April, 117 national non-governmental organizations had been authorized to
partner with the United Nations through 172 branches. Authorized national
non-governmental organizations continue to operate under complex procedures to
enable them to partner with United Nations agencies.
36. The level of funding for humanitarian activities continued to be outpaced by
the scale of needs. The Strategic Response Plan for 2015 was 17 per cent funded as
at 10 May.
37. Access challenges continued to make the delivery of assistance extremely
difficult. The difficulty of delivering assistance to the 4.8 million people in hard-toreach areas is particularly concerning. United Nations agencies and their partners
reached 277,550 people with food in hard-to-reach locations; 49,880 with core relief
items; approximately 410,000 with health supplies; more than 530,000 with wa ter,
sanitation and hygiene supplies; and nearly 50,000 with education supplies.
38. Two inter-agency cross-line convoys to hard-to-reach locations took place in
April and one in May. On 14 and 21 April, the second and third phases of the inter agency convoy to Rastan, Homs, were completed, delivering aid to some 81,000
people. Despite having obtained the approval of the local authorities, medical
equipment and supplies were removed from both convoys by local security forces.
On 28 April, an inter-agency convoy reached Yalda, Babila and Beit Sahm to
respond to the influx of people temporarily displaced from Yarmouk, as well as
vulnerable host communities. Humanitarian assistance sufficient for more than
110,000 people was delivered through the convoy. On 13 May, an inter-agency
convoy, organized through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, delivered multisectoral
assistance to 50,000 people and health supplies for almost 140,000 people to Big
Orem in Aleppo Governorate.

15-07960

7/12

S/2015/368

39. Between 15 December 2014 and 14 May 2015, the United Nations requested
permission to run 44 inter-agency convoys. Of those, 5 have been completed (to Al
Waer; Talbiseh; Ar Rastan; Yalda, Babila and Beit Sahm; and Big Orem), assisting
more than 290,000 individuals. The Government has approved in pr inciple 14
additional convoys. The United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent are
currently making plans to reach the approved locations. Five requests have been put
on hold by the United Nations, given current security conditions. There was no
response to six requests, which were resubmitted as new requests after three
months. Fourteen requests await approval.
40. The challenging operating environment notwithstanding, the United Nations
and its partners continued to reach millions of people in need in April from within
the country and across borders pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
WFP delivered food assistance for more than 4 million people in 12 of the
14 governorates. The World Health Organization (WHO) distributed medicines and
supplies for 3.3 million treatments in 10 governorates. UNICEF provided
multisectoral assistance for more than 1.6 million people in 10 governorates. In
addition, deliveries of chlorine provided some 15.6 million with access to safe
water. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) reached some 285,000 people with core relief items and protection
services in 11 governorates. The International Organization for Migration reached
more than 230,000 people with multisectoral assistance in 9 governorates. The Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) supported 27,966 people
with agricultural support in 3 governorates. The United Nations Population Fund
supported its partners to deliver reproductive health services and services related to
gender-based violence to 107,540 women in 9 governorates. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
continues to provide support to 480,000 Palestine refugees on a monthly basis. This
is not enough, however, given that millions of people rema in without any help or
support.
41. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014). As at 10 May, the United Nations and its partners had sent
117 shipments — 77 from Turkey and 40 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab
Republic. Those shipments included food assistance for almost 2.4 million people;
non-food items for around 1.3 million people; medical supplies and treatments for
nearly 1.3 million people; and water and sanitation supplies for 847,000 people. In
line with resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), the United Nations notified the
Government in advance of each shipment, including providing details of their
contents, the destination district and the number of beneficiaries.
42. The United Nations monitoring mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations in Jordan and Turkey. In April, it monitored 15 United
Nations humanitarian shipments, confirming the humanitarian nature of each. The
mechanism continued to benefit from excellent cooperation with the Governments
of Jordan and Turkey. Operations in Iraq remain pending, owing to continued
insecurity.
43. United Nations agencies continued to use the Nusaybin/Qamishly crossing
with the consent of the Governments of Turkey and the Syrian Arab Republic. WFP
completed the transportation of 46,000 food rations, sufficient for 230,000 people,
through that corridor in April. However, delays in obtaining facilitation letters from

8/12

15-07960

S/2015/368

the relevant authorities significantly slowed down operations in the governorate. As
a result, only 12,000 food rations for 60,000 people, or 26 per cent of the planned
assistance, could be delivered to partners for distribution. UNICEF also completed
the transportation of supplies across the border in April, including 330,000 litres of
water, midwifery kits and sanitation and hygiene kits. Distribution of the assistance
has commenced, including to those recently displaced in Hasakeh Governorate.
44. Both international and Syrian non-governmental organizations continued to
deliver multisectoral assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic in April, including
through the provision of ongoing services. Non-governmental organizations reached
some 1 million people during the month, including providing aid to some 450,000
people in Aleppo, nearly 150,000 in Idlib, some 110,000 in Quneitra and more than
50,000 people in Dar’a Governorate. The ability of non -governmental organizations
to operate in parts of the north of the country was hampered by the escalation of the
conflict in the Idlib and Aleppo Governorates.
45. On 17 April, WFP and the Government signed an agreement to conduct a
household food security survey that would enable the food security sector to plan
and sustain operations more effectively in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 23 April,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs approved an education needs assessment, the key
findings of which will provide evidence of the needs in the education sector.
Training the enumerators for the education survey has begun. It is hoped that the
agreements in two key sectors will pave the way for similar agreements in other
areas and provide the building blocks on which initiatives for strengthening
resilience can be developed for Syrian communities.
Besieged areas
46. Of the 4.8 million people in hard-to-reach areas, some 422,000 remained
besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic. They included 167,500 people besieged by
government forces in eastern Ghouta and Darayya, Rural Damascus; 26,500 people
besieged by non-State armed groups in Nubul and Zahra; and 228,000 people
besieged by ISIL in the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Deir
ez-Zor city. Early in April, Yarmouk experienced an escalation of violence,
infiltration by ISIL and the subsequent flight of several thousand Palestine refugees
and Syrians to adjacent communities to the south-east of the camp. With the
facilitation of the Syrian authorities and local community leaders and despite an
environment of high risk, United Nations agencies and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent provided humanitarian assistance to the displaced and their host
communities. While no precise, verifiable figures are available, it is estimated that
thousands of civilians remain inside Yarmouk. No humanitarian acc ess has been
granted directly to the remaining civilians inside Yarmouk, whose condition remains
critical.
47. The parties to the conflict continued to restrict access to besieged areas in
April, with no United Nations assistance reaching any besieged area during the
month.
48. In eastern Ghouta, some 163,500 people remain besieged by government
forces. No United Nations assistance reached besieged locations in eastern Ghouta
in April. However, on 6 May, WHO contributed medical assistance sufficient for
2,000 people, including two dialysis machines and renal failure medicines, to a
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy to Douma. WHO had requested permission to

15-07960

9/12

S/2015/368

send 2,000 renal failure medicines with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy;
however, permission was granted for only 250. The convoy was hit by a mortar in
Douma, resulting in the death of a Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteer and injury to
three others.
49. In Darayya, about 4,000 people remain besieged by government forces. No
United Nations assistance reached Darayya in April. People in the area have not
been assisted by the United Nations since October 2012.
50. In Nubul and Zahra, about 26,500 people remain besieged by non -State armed
groups. No United Nations assistance reached the two areas in April. Un ited Nations
agencies have not been able to deliver humanitarian assistance to the villages since
8 May 2014.
51. In the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Deir ez-Zor city,
some 228,000 people are besieged by ISIL. No United Nations assistanc e reached
the area in April. People in Deir ez-Zor city were last reached by the United Nations
in March 2015, when FAO delivered 140 sheep. As at 8 May, the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and the International Committee of the Red Cross had airlifted 106 tons o f
food assistance and 15 tons of medical aid into the besieged parts of Deir ez -Zor
city. Meanwhile, the United Nations team is making arrangements to conduct
emergency airlifts to the besieged government-held districts of the city. The airlifts
will be conducted from Damascus using commercial air freight. The Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator is currently awaiting approval from the
Government.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
52. In April, WHO and its implementing partners dispatched medicines and
medical supplies from within the Syrian Arab Republic for nearly 3.3 million
medical treatments 2 to local health authorities, non-governmental organizations and
private medical facilities in 10 governorates. Of the total, s ome 400,000 treatments
were delivered in hard-to-reach locations and via cross-line deliveries in the Aleppo,
Dar’a, Deir ez-Zor, Homs and Rural Damascus Governorates. That included some
1,000 medical treatments delivered by a local partner to areas in Deir ez-Zor city
controlled by ISIL. Early in May, following approval by the Government, WHO
contributed medical assistance sufficient for some 2,000 people, including two
dialysis machines and renal failure medicines, to a Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy to Douma in eastern Ghouta.
53. Access to medical supplies and equipment continued to be restricted by
insecurity and constraints imposed on humanitarian operations by parties to the
conflict. For example, in April and despite obtaining approval from the loca l
authorities, all injectable medicines, surgical supplies and medical kits were
removed from a United Nations inter-agency convoy to Ar-Rastan in Homs by the
security forces. Consequently, people were deprived of 10,459 treatments. In
addition, approval from local security was not obtained to send three surgical kits
and intravenous fluids to eastern Aleppo city, depriving 33,115 people of medical
treatments. WHO has supplies in warehouses in Aleppo ready to be delivered to
Nubul and Zahra, but continued fighting has prevented access.
__________________
2 One standard treatment course is considered to be a treatment for one person. Treatment courses

are determined for each medicine distribution on the basis of international WHO standards.

10/12

15-07960

S/2015/368

54. In terms of requests to deliver to hard-to-reach locations, as at the end of
April, WHO had 10 pending requests to deliver assistance in the Dar’a, Deir ez -Zor,
Aleppo and Damascus Governorates since the beginning of 2015, including 4 made
in April.
55. The first nationwide measles immunization campaign in 2015 was conducted
between 19 and 30 April with support from UNICEF and WHO. Preliminary results
show that the campaign reached more than 1.5 million children in 11 gover norates
out of a targeted 2.6 million children. In Raqqa and large parts of Deir ez -Zor, ISIL
did not permit the campaign to be conducted, except for the vaccination of 1,000
children on 29 April in Raqqa through local partners. Active fighting in Idlib ha lted
the implementation of measles vaccination in that governorate. Elsewhere, some
children located in areas of active fighting or under siege in the Hasakeh, Homs,
Aleppo and Rural Damascus Governorates could not be reached. The final results of
the campaign will be announced in the second week of May.
56. Attacks on medical facilities, ambulances and medical personnel continued
during the reporting period. In April, Physicians for Human Rights documented
14 attacks on medical facilities, all by government forces. Five of the attacks
occurred in Idlib, four in Aleppo, two in Damascus and one each in the Deir ez -Zor,
Hama and Hasakeh Governorates. Seven attacks were with barrel bombs, six with
missiles and rockets and one with mortar fire. Physicians for H uman Rights also
documented the deaths of seven medical personnel in April, three of whom were
targeted. All seven were killed by government forces. Five died from shelling and
bombing, and two were shot. Three of those deaths occurred in Rural Damascus,
two in Aleppo, and one each in Damascus and Dar’a Governorates.
Safety and security of staff and premises
57. On 10 May, two projectiles landed close to a Syrian Arab Red Crescent
warehouse in Jisr Al-Haj, Aleppo, causing minor physical damage.
58. On 6 May, one Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteer was killed when a Syrian
Arab Red Crescent convoy was hit by a mortar in Douma, Rural Damascus.
59. On 17 April, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent offices in the Carlton Hotel in Idlib
city were hit by an air strike. No casualties were reported, but ambulances and
vehicles were destroyed. As a result of the damage, the capacity of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent-Idlib to provide first aid services and deliver humanitarian assistance
was severely curtailed.
60. On 11 April, UNHCR received information about the detention of one of its
local staff in Homs, who had been on the way to Al Waer to retrieve household
items. UNHCR immediately communicated the incident to the Governor of Homs
and the staff member was subsequently released.
61. A total of 32 United Nations staff members, 26 of whom are UNRWA staff,
continue to be detained or are missing. The total number of humanitarian workers
killed in the conflict since March 2011 is 76. That includes 17 staff members of the
United Nations, 45 Syrian Arab Red Crescent staff members and volunteers,
8 volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 6 staff
members of international non-governmental organizations. Of the 76, 9 have been
killed since 1 January 2015.

15-07960

11/12

S/2015/368

III. Observations
62. Parties to the conflict continue to behave with impunity and total disregard for
the basic tenets of humanity and international humanitarian law. Thousands of
innocent people have been killed, injured or displaced in civilia n areas and
neighbourhoods. Housing, essential services and vital infrastructure have been
destroyed or rendered unusable. It is difficult to believe that those who drop barrel
bombs or launch mortar rounds and artillery shells do not realize the immense h arm
and suffering that their actions are causing to civilians. The deliberate targeting of
civilians is a war crime and those responsible must be held accountable.
63. The number of attacks on medical facilities in April was the highest monthly
total on record in my monthly reports since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014). Attacks on such facilities have a multiplier effect, not only
killing and injuring, but also leaving many people unable to get the treatment that
they need. The cumulative impact on the Syrian people and on the health-care
system has been devastating, with many Syrians unable to obtain the most basic
levels of care. The protection and provision of medical assistance and health care to
the wounded and sick in all circumstances is at the heart of humanitarian action and
clearly enshrined in international humanitarian law.
64. Lack of, and restrictions on, access remain a major concern. The valiant efforts
of humanitarian organizations to continue to assist people in need notwithstanding,
millions of people are still left with no or insufficient assistance, in particular those
living under siege in intolerable conditions. The lack of access is the consequence
not only of continuing insecurity and fighting, but also of activ e obstruction by the
parties to the conflict, in particular the Government, of the work of humanitarian
organizations. I emphasize once again that the arbitrary withholding of consent to
relief operations is a violation of international humanitarian law.
65. The level of carnage and devastation throughout the Syrian Arab Republic
should shock the collective conscience of the world. The Syrian people are losing
hope. They cannot afford to wait. A political solution must be found. The
international community, and particularly the Security Council, must take action
without delay to end the daily violations of international law and the killing of
civilians.
66. I renew my call upon all those engaged in the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic to show vision and leadership and come together to work to end the
violence and engage in efforts to reach a sustainable political solution. The conflict
will end with a political settlement, not with a military solution. The sooner that that
is recognized by all those engaged in the conflict, the better it will be for the Syrian
people and the more lives will be saved. As my Special Envoy has launched the
Geneva Consultations, I urge all involved to engage positively in the process. I
count on the wisdom and humanity of all Syrian, regional and international actors to
take the steps necessary to resolve this conflict.

12/12

15-07960
