S/2004/53

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 January 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 20 January 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I am attaching for your consideration and for the consideration of the members
of the Security Council a letter dated 13 January 2004 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor Meron.
In his letter, President Meron recalls that the current term of office of the
permanent judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia will come
to an end on 16 November 2005. He states that a considerable number of trials that
are currently under way are likely to continue beyond that date, as are several that
are due to start during the course of this year or early in 2005. He states that, if
permanent judges adjudicating in those trials are not elected to a new term of office,
there is a substantial risk that those trials will have to start anew, with a completely
fresh team of judges. This would significantly impair the ability of the International
Tribunal to implement its Completion Strategy, as set out in Security Council
resolution 1503 (2003) of 28 August 2003.
President Meron goes on to state that the rules which are currently available to
address this problem, and likewise the expedients and procedures which have
hitherto been employed by the International Tribunal and by the Security Council
and the General Assembly, are likely to prove insufficient to the task or else
wasteful of financial and human resources.
President Meron further notes that the term of office of the ad litem judges of
the International Tribunal will come to an end on 11 June 2005. He states that there
are certain trials currently under way in which ad litem judges are adjudicating that
are likely to continue beyond that date. He recalls in this connection that, under the
Statute of the International Tribunal as it currently stands, ad litem judges are not
eligible for re-election.
President Meron states that the judges of the International Tribunal wish to
bring these difficulties to the attention of the Security Council for its consideration
and possible action. He emphasizes that the judges do not wish to recommend any
particular solution to these difficulties. Mention is made, however, of the possibility
that the Security Council might decide to amend the Statute of the International
Tribunal so as to extend the terms of office of both the current permanent judges and
the current ad litem judges. President Meron also outlines two alternative ways in
which the Security Council might decide to effect such as extension.

04-21790 (E)

230104

*
0
4
2
1
7
9
0
*

S/2004/53

I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its attachment to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2004/53

Annex
Letter dated 13 January 2004 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council
My fellow Judges have unanimously requested that I bring to your attention
certain potential areas of improvement in the Tribunal’s operation that, following
our own internal discussion, we believe merit consideration by the Security Council.
As you may recall, by its resolution 1503 (28 August 2003), the Security
Council called on the Tribunal to “take all possible measures to complete
investigations by the end of 2004, to complete all trial activities at first instance by
the end of 2008, and to complete all work in 2010” (the “Completion Strategy”). In
accordance with resolution 1503’s direction that the Tribunal “take all possible
measures” to meet the resolution’s goals, the Judges of the Tribunal have discussed
various steps that would ensure that trials take place with maximum efficiency. In
the course of discussions, the implications of certain structural provisions of the
Statute of the Tribunal have come to light.
Under the Statute of the Tribunal, the four-year term of the current permanent
Judges of the Tribunal expires on 16 November 2005. The Statute then envisions an
election for another four-year term of office, beginning 17 November 2005 and
ending 16 November 2009. Past practice would suggest that the Secretary-General is
likely to begin preparations for the election, including sending Governments the
invitation for nominations, during the course of this year.
The approaching end of the mandate of Judges currently serving on the
Tribunal raises serious concerns for trials that are likely to spill over from the
current mandate into the next. A considerable number of ongoing trials, as well as
several that will start in 2004 and early 2005, are unlikely to be concluded before 16
November 2005. If current Judges are not re-elected, there is a substantial risk that
trials on which they are sitting will have to stop and start all over again with new
Judges. Restarting and retrying long cases would be costly and wasteful and would
make implementing the Completion Strategy highly unlikely. Of course, Rule 15 bis
of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence allows two Judges to continue proceedings
with a substitute Judge without the consent of the accused. However, because the
substitute Judge must certify that he or she has familiarized himself or herself with
the record of the proceedings — a provision that is not a mere formality but a
requirement of fairness — Rule 15 bis cannot be used in cases in which a lengthy
trial is significantly under way. Moreover, Rule 15 bis by its terms does not address
the situation in which two Judges on the same case are not re-elected.
On occasion, when it was clear that the length of a trial was going to spill over
into a new term, this problem was addressed by deferring assignment of Judges to
the case in order to avoid the possibility that the trial would have to start over again
if new Judges were elected. This method naturally delays trials that are ready to
begin and slows the pace of the Tribunal’s work. The option of the Council
extending the mandate of individual Judges to finish a particular case is not an
efficient one, as the new Judges elected in their place would take up their functions

3

S/2004/53

and be remunerated but would not be able to start trials or other significant judicial
work because of the lack of available courtrooms, offices and staff. The option of
adopting a general rule akin to Article 13 (3) of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, pursuant to which Judges who are replaced nevertheless finish
cases they have begun, likewise leaves the problem of cost-effective employment of
newly elected Judges unresolved. Moreover, new Judges could only be employed in
groups of three, the number necessary to form additional benches.
The situation is exacerbated in the case of ad litem Judges, as they cannot be
re-elected at all. The mandate of all ad litem Judges is scheduled to expire on 11
June 2005. Certain major trials involving ad litem Judges are already likely to
extend beyond that date. Such trials would automatically require the assignment of
new Judges, again running the risk of having to start entire trials all over again.
While the Council could choose to extend the mandate of individual ad litem Judges
in particular cases or to permit ad litem Judges to run for re-election, a simpler
option might be for the Council to extend the term of office of the ad litem Judges
elected on 12 June 2001.
The holding of elections in 2005 as envisioned by the Statute is therefore
likely to lead to delays in some cases and to a restarting of entire trials in others. In
the view of the Judges of the Tribunal, action in early 2004 is needed to provide the
Tribunal with the continuity, stability and certainty necessary for the efficient and
effective planning of trials.
In the past two months, I have raised this matter informally with
representatives of various Members of the Security Council in New York and at The
Hague. Possible solutions to the problem were mentioned during those
consultations. One suggested possibility was to extend the mandate of both
permanent and ad litem Judges by a period coinciding with resolution 1503’s target
for the end of trials. Another suggestion was to institute a system whereby the
mandate of Judges is automatically extended on a periodic basis (e.g., annually)
unless the Security Council affirmatively decides to discontinue the extensions. The
latter scheme would allow the Council an opportunity to assess the situation
periodically.
Such extensions of the mandate of Judges could be accomplished through
amendment of the Statute. Alternatively, and perhaps more simply, the Council
could, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter, temporarily suspend the application
of the relevant provisions of the Statute and adopt “transitional” arrangements for
the composition of the Chambers during the Completion Strategy period.
The decision whether and how to address the implications of the electoral
structure is a policy matter that rests with the Security Council. The Judges are
therefore reticent to express a preference for either of the above options and merely
note that both would address the concerns raised. The Council may well conceive of
different measures that are equally responsive to the situation. We accordingly do
not recommend a particular solution, but merely wish to bring the problem to the
Council’s attention for consideration and, if the Council deems appropriate, for
timely action. In that context, the matter may also be brought to the attention of the
General Assembly.
I and my colleagues at the Tribunal welcome the opportunity to consider ways
in which to improve the efficiency of the Tribunal. We will continue to examine the

4

S/2004/53

Tribunal’s functioning and to seek out changes that will improve the Tribunal’s
ability to meet the goals set out in resolution 1503. Delays and interruptions in trial
and appeals work must be avoided to the maximum extent possible in order for the
Tribunal to implement the Completion Strategy and fulfil its historic mandate.
I remain, of course, ready and available to provide the Council with any
additional clarifications.
(Signed) Theodor Meron

5
