General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Senion

30

5 December 1967 entitled "Treaty for the •Prohibition
uf Nuclear Weapons in Latin America",
Recognizing that conditions and procedures for the
creation of such zones differ from region to region,
Recognizing further that, in appropriate regions and
by agreement among the States concerned, the creation
of nuclear-weapon-free zones could promote the cause
of general and complete disarmament under effective
international control,
Considers, therefore., that the initiative for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the appropriate
region of Asia should come from the States of the region concerned, taking into account its special features
and geographical extent.
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

B
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the right of States to harness nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes and as an instrument of
development and progress,
Realizing, at the same time, the dangers of diversion to military purposes inherent in the development
of nuclear energy,
Recalling its resolution 2456 B (XXMI) of 20 December 1968 concerning the establishment of zones
free from nuclear weapon~s,
Expressing the conviction that the establishment of
such zones in various regions of the world is one of the
measures which can contribute most effectively to halting the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to promoting progress towards nuclear disarmament as a
step towards general and complete disarmament under
effective international control, with the ultimate goal
of total destruction of all nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery,
Believing that the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones will strengthen the security of regional States
against nuclear threat,
Recalling the Antarctic Treaty of 1959, 46 the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity in 196447 and the Declaration adopted by the Foreign Ministers of the Association of South East Asian Nations in 1971,
Bearin,? in mind that the establishment of a nuclearw-:apon-free zone would, inter alia, entail:
(a) Commitments by the States concerned to use
exclusively for peaceful purposes nuclear materials
and facilities under their jurisdiction and to prevent the
testing. use, manufacture, production, acquisition or
staragc of any nuclear weapons or nuclear launching
devices.,
( h) An equitable and non-discriminatory system of
v•:ri!ication and inspection to ensure that nuclear progr;u11mes arc in conformity with the foregoing comrnitP1cn t,,

Undertakings by nuclear-weapon States not to
threaten to use nuclear weapons against the
'>t:1i :·; uf tll\' region,
i c')

,. , _,

(1[

;,; Unilcd Nations, Treaty SC'ries, vol. 402, No. 5778, p. 72.
See Ofj,, ial Records of the Ge11('1·a/ Assl'mhly, Twentieth
1·
;,. •
4•11'""'" .,,.e.,,h it,·m 1(\~ do,:nmcnt A '5975.
H

Having considered the question of the establishment
of a. nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia without
prejudice to the extension of the zone to include such
other regions of Asia as may be practicable,
Desirous of preventing such a zone or any wider
area as contemplated in the preceding paragraph from
becoming involved in a ruinous nuclear arms race,
Considering that the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America48 could serve as a
model to be emulated with advantage by other regions,
1. Takes note of the affirmation by the States of
the region not to acquire or manufacture nuclear weapons and to devote their nuclear programmes exclusively
to the economic and social advancement of their
peoples;
2. Endorses, in principle, the concept of a nuclearweapon-free zone in South Asia;
3. Invites the States of the South Asian region and
such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon States as
may be interested to initiate, without delay, necessary
consultations with a view to establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone and urges them,, in the interim, to
refrain from any action contrary to the achievement
of these objectives;
4. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, will lend their full cooperation for the effective realization of the aims of
the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to c!onvene a
meeting for the purpose of the consultations envisaged
in paragraph 3 above, to render such assistance as may
be required for the purpose and to report on the subject to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Declaration and
establishment of a nuclear-free zone in South Asia".

2 309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3332 (XXIX). Implementation of the Dttlaration
on the Strengthening of International Se•
curity
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled ",Implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of ,International
Security",
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security49 and recalling the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the
implementation of the Declaration,
Noting with grave concern the continuing existence of
focal points of crisis and tension in various regions, endangering international peace and security,
Emphasizing that acts of aggression, the threat or
usc of force, foreign occupation and alien domination,
and in particular attempts to interfere in the internal
affairs of other States, as well as the existence of colonialism, neo-colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid, remain the main obstacles to the strengthening of international peace and of the security of all
States,
4 s United

Nations,

Treaty Series,

p. 326.
49 Resolution

2734 (XXV).

vol.

634, No. 9068,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Finl Committee

31

5. Takes rwte of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;52 requests him to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session a report on the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security and decides to include in the
provisional agenda of .its thirtieth session the item entitled "·Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of ,International Security".

Welcoming, however, encouraging trends in relations
between States at the bilaterat regional and multilateral
levels aiming at promoting peaceful coexistence and
settlement of international disputes in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations,
Emphasizing the close link existing between the
strengthening of international security, disarmament,
decolonization, economic development and the need
for a more intensive international effort to narrow the
widening gap between the developed and the developing
countries, and stressing, in this connexion, the importance of the resolutions adopted at its sixth special session,

2322nd plenary meeting
17 December 1974
3333 (XXIX). QueBtion of Korea

Deeply convinced of the need constantly to strengthen
the peace-keeping and the peace-making role of the
United Nations,

The General Assembly,
Desiring that progress be made towards the attainment of the goal of peaceful reunification of Korea on
the basis of the freely expressed will of the Korean
people,

Convinced also that the United Nations should play
a more positive role in promoti~g improvement of the
international situation and a lessening of threats to
international peace and security,, and that it can become
a useful forum of universalization of positive achievements in relations among States,

Recalling its satisfaction with the issuance of the
joint communique at Seoul and Pyongyang on 4 July
1972 and the declared intention of both the South and
the North of Korea to continue the dialogue between
them,

l. Solemnly reaffirms all the principles and provisions contained in the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security and urgently appeals to all
States to implement and adhere to all the provisions
of the Declaration unswervingly and without delay, to
broaden the scope of detente to cover the entire world,
to stop the arms race, as well as to take practical steps
to reduce armaments, and to reaffirm the principles contained in the Declaration on friendly relations among
States50 as the basis of relations among all States;

Aware, however, that tension in Korea has not been·
totally eliminated and that the Armistice Agreement
of 27 July 1953 remains indispensable to the maintenance of peace and security in the area.,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
regarding the maintenance of international peace and
security, the United Nations has a continuing responsibility to ensure the attainment of this goal on the
Korean peninsula,

2. Reaffirms also that all States have the right to
participate on a basis of equality in the settlement of
major international problems in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations so that
peace and security will be ba~ed on effective respect for
the sovereignty and independence of each State and
the inalienable right of each people to determine its
own destiny freely and without outside interference,
coercion or pressure;

1. Reaffirms the wishes of its members, as expressed
in the consensus statement adopted by the General
Assembly on 28 November 1973, 53 and urges both the
South and the North of Korea to continue their dialogue to expedite the peaceful reunification of Korea;
2. Expresses the hope that the Security Council,
bearing in mind the need to ensure continued adherence
to the Armistice Agi,eement and the full maintenance of
peace and security in the area, will in due course give
consideration, in consultation with the parties directly
concerned, to those aspects of the Korean question
which fall within its responsibilities, including the dissolution of the United Nations Command in conjunction with appropriate arrangements to maintain the
Armistice Agreement which is calculated to preserve
peace and security in the Korean peninsula, pending
negotiations and conciliation between the two Korean
Governments leading to a lasting peace between them.

3. Reaffirms that any measure o.r pressure directed
against any State while exercising its sovereign right
freely to dispQse of its natural resources constitutes a
flagrant violation of the right of self-determination of
peoples and the principle of non-intervention, as set
forth in the Charter, which, if pursued, could constitute
a threat to international peace and security;
4. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples under alien domination to achieve self-determination and independence and appeals to all States to
implement the Declaration on the Granting cf Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 51 and the
other resolutions of the United Nations on the total
elimination of colonialism, raci~m and apartheid;

2322nd plenary meeting
17 December 1974
s2 A/9696.

resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
GI Resolution 1514 (XV).
GO See

ft3 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/9030), p. 24, item 41.

•

•

•
