S/PV.7410

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7410th meeting

Thursday, 19 March 2015, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Yong Zhao
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2015/172)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2015/173)

15-07621 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1507621*

S/PV.7410

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2015/172)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region (S/2015/173)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/172, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/173, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler (spoke in French): I would first like to
congratulate France on its assumption of the presidency

2/10

19/03/2015

of the Security Council for the month of March. It is
as always an honour to appear before the Council to
present the latest developments in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
In the coming days the Council will adopt a
resolution that will give MONUSCO its new mandate. I
thank you, Mr. President, for having given us the means
to fulfil our mission, as I thank you, Sir, for also having
understood and supported us in difficult times.
(spoke in English)
The mandate renewal consultations are a welcome
opportunity to look back on what has been achieved
over the past year, whether MONUSCO is still well
placed to fulfil its mandate and what adjustments could
be made in the year to come to work more efficiently.
First of all, I would like to thank the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in particular
its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Tshibanda, with
whom we have always cooperated in an open and frank
spirit. MONUSCO is a temporary guest in his country,
a service provider for the Congo, and at the same time a
firm advocate of the values of the United Nations. In the
presence of Foreign Minister Tshibanda last Saturday,
I had the chance to discuss with President Kabila the
current state of affairs in the country, in particular the
relationship between the Government and MONUSCO.
We agreed on a structured dialogue to discuss issues of
concern.
I will now update the Council on four points. First,
I will discuss the upcoming elections of 2015 and
2016. Secondly, I will brief the Council on the security
situation in the country, including the implementation
of the United Nations human rights due diligence
policy. Thirdly, I will address stabilization efforts and
the restitution of State authority. Fourthly, I will discuss
how to return to a constructive relationship with the
Government by establishing an atmosphere of trust.
My first point is the upcoming elections. I welcome
the publication of the global electoral calendar on
12 February, which shall lead to the holding of
presidential and legislative elections in November
2016. As demonstrations in Kinshasa, Bukavu, Goma
and Lubumbashi in January have shown, the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo care about
the holding of timely elections. These elections will

15-07621

19/03/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

be a pivotal moment in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
If so requested, MONUSCO is ready to support
the elections logistically, technically and with its good
offices. We are determined to support peaceful elections
within the framework of the Constitution. In addition,
the Secretary-General spoke on the constitutionality of
elections at the twenty-fourth African Union summit in
January.
As resolution 2147 (2014) has spelled out, all relevant
parties are responsible for maintaining an environment
conducive to the holding of free, fair, credible,
inclusive, transparent, peaceful and timely elections,
which includes a free and constructive political debate,
freedom of expression, freedom of assembly, equitable
access to media, including State media, safety and
freedom of movement for all candidates as well as for
election observers, journalists, human rights defenders
and actors from civil society, including women. This is
what I mean when I speak of defending the values of the
United Nations.
I am concerned about the arrest of several dozen
civil society actors the other day. Political space for
civil society is a prerequisite for credible elections.
Coming to my second point, security, when the
United Nations Observer Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) arrived in the
country some 15 years ago, the country was socially,
economically and politically shattered. When MONUC
arrived, the country was at civil war. Today, the country
is unified. There is a clear, shared and celebrated
Congolese identity. It is no longer at war, nor is it in
transition. It is a proud nation.
Over this period, the Congolese Government has
striven to restore security to its people. It has succeeded
in freeing much of the territory from the terror of
armed groups. The presence of armed groups is limited
to the eastern provinces of the country today. However,
the overall security situation is still not stable, nor is
whatever stability there is irreversible. Many still live
in fear of rape, of attack, of being robbed of already
meagre possessions. This fear affects nearly every
aspect of daily life in the east — fear to walk to school,
fear to go to the market, fear to tend to the fields.
With more security in more places, the time will
come for MONUSCO to begin its gradual drawdown.
MONUSCO will not stay in the Democratic Republic

S/PV.7410

of the Congo forever; we look forward to the day when
it can leave the country, with continuing development
support transferred to our colleagues in the United
Nations country team. Yes, the Congo has more security
than before. Yes, it is on the way to stability. However,
more must be done to reduce the threat from armed
groups and violence against civilians to a level that can
be effectively managed by Congolese institutions. More
must also be done to achieve stability by establishing
functional, professional and accountable State
institutions and strengthening democratic practices.
The drawdown should be aligned with progress
in those areas. Any exit by MONUSCO should be
gradual, progressive and tied to specific targets to be
jointly developed by it and the Government. We should
therefore aim to consolidate peace and leave behind a
peaceful Congo on the path to prosperity.
In the area dominated by the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), the terrorist attacks — torture,
mutilations, beheadings — have been reduced. Recently,
in and around Beni, almost 300 people, including
women and children, even toddlers, were mutilated as
they died in terrorist attacks. As I speak to the Council
now, the ADF rebels, hiding in the jungles of Kamango,
are being pursued by brave soldiers of the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC),
supported by MONUSCO. They have eaten together,
lived together and fought together to protect Congolese
families. Our combined efforts against the ADF, like
the operations against the Mouvement du 23 mars two
years ago, have forged a bond between the FARDC and
MONUSCO soldiers. Their cooperation was truly an
example of best practices, and demonstrated that when
we are united we are strong. I hope it will remain so in
future.
The greatest threat to peace and security in
the Great Lakes region still remains the Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda (FDLR).
That is why the Council mandated MONUSCO to
support the Government in neutralizing it, a mandate
that we should be executing in support of the FARDC.
We should not be divided on it. Our operations were
jointly planned. We worked with the commanding
generals for months in an excellent and constructive
partnership. They were, however, replaced by officers
who had formerly commanded units with a credible
history of human rights violations. We were therefore
compelled to suspend our support to the operations
under their command.

15-076213/10

S/PV.7410

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

All other fields of operations — against the ADF,
the Forces de résistance patriotiques de l’Ituri and the
FDLR in South Kivu — can continue with our support,
in full accordance with the human rights due-diligence
policy. The decision to suspend support was based
on indisputable values enshrined in the protection of
human rights. We want to support the fight against the
FDLR and also to implement our human rights policy.
We do not want to choose between fighting the FDLR
and upholding human rights. We owe that to the people
of Democratic Republic of the Congo and to ourselves.
Safeguarding human rights is fundamental and cannot
be compromised. We are guided by that clear compass.
And if I may speak personally, I am proud to work for
the United Nations and its Secretary-General, with his
clear Human Rights up Front policy. I know — and
President Kabila himself has confirmed it to me — that
the Congolese Government shares the same zerotolerance policy regarding human-rights violations. I
am confident that it will take appropriate measures to
remedy this unfortunate situation. However, to avoid
any potential misunderstanding, I should say that
MONUSCO is fully committed to fighting the FDLR.
It is also committed to respecting the human rights
due-diligence policy.
There is no purely military solution to the problem of
the FDLR. It must be followed by effective non-military
initiatives, including a well-functioning demobilization
and repatriation process and effective extension of State
authority, if we want to have sustainable solutions. In
that regard, I still cannot be satisfied with progress so
far. Surrendered FDLR elements are still in the camps
of Kanyabayonga, Walungu and Kisangani, where they
maintain an intact and functioning military structure.
A few FDLR combatants have disarmed, yes, but even
their demobilization has not started yet, let alone their
repatriation.
I now turn to my third point, the stabilization and
restitution of State authority. For peace to be sustainable,
we need more than military action. Understanding and
addressing the root causes of the conflict is essential
to disrupting persistent cycles of violence. I would
like to update the Council on recent developments.
MONUSCO has recently created an natural-resources
crime task force with the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region. In addition to
helping to safeguard the natural wealth of the country
for future generations, the Mission, within the limits

4/10

19/03/2015

of its mandate, will explore ways to contribute to
addressing the underpinnings of conflict in Congo.
We are no longer dealing only with armed
groups, but also with well-organized criminal gangs.
The exploitation of natural resources in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is valued at more
than $1 billion per year. Part of it is illegally smuggled
out of the country, and an estimated 98 per cent of
the net profits from the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, mainly gold, charcoal and timber, goes
to transnational organized criminal networks. Rebel
groups retain only 2 per cent of the profits from illegal
smuggling. How many hospitals could be built if illegal
trade became legal? How many kilometres of roadways
rehabilitated? How many teachers paid? The objective
is clear — gold should be turned into taxes, taxes into
schools and schools into a prosperous future.
(spoke in French)
I would like to end with a fourth point, and here
I will also direct my comments to His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Tshibanda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On
15 February, President Joseph Kabila expressed his
opinions about MONUSCO’s actions and results. If
we are to achieve better cooperation, we must create
an atmosphere of trust. We should not forget that
the Government and MONUSCO are on the same
page when it comes to our goals — the well-being of
the people, the end of violence in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and also the
Mission’s departure. We are here to serve the people,
and we are therefore also here to provide our services to
the Government. Our willingness to leave the country
is real and unequivocal, and we know the Government
desires it too. MONUSCO’s departure must be tied to
results and concrete improvement of the situation on the
ground. Until then, we need to start finding concrete
ways to improve the situation and relations right now.
I therefore propose to the Government that we reset
cooperation on a basis of mutual trust.
Finally, as always, I should commend those of my
colleagues who have recently distinguished themselves.
I would like to pay tribute to all the officers of
MONUSCO and UNICEF’s child protection sections.
Every day, hand-in-hand with the FARDC, they free
children from the armed groups’ grasp. More than
1,000 were liberated in 2014. In the first three months
of 2015, more than 160 child soldiers have managed to

15-07621

19/03/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

escape the FDLR and find refuge with MONUSCO.
That is a true success story.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to the Security Council for the support it has
always given us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kobler
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour to
present the sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2015/173). I am pleased to do so
under the presidency of France, whose support and
contributions to achieving the aims of the Framework
Agreement, together with those of the other members of
the Council, I welcome.
Two years on from the signing of the Framework
Agreement in Addis Ababa, which breathed new
life into efforts seeking to stabilize the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and lay the groundwork for
regional cooperation, the region remains at a crossroads.
The crises that have broken out in the Central African
Republic and South Sudan serve to remind us that the
region as a whole remains vulnerable to factors of
instability. Despite the significant progress made in
establishing an atmosphere of peace and security, major
challenges remain to be overcome in order to achieve
the objectives of the Framework Agreement.
Those include, first, the neutralization of the armed
groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. These negative forces continue to commit
violence against the civilian population, particularly
against women and children, to illegally exploit natural
resources and to fuel a climate of mistrust among the
countries of the region. Since taking office, I have made
it a priority to mobilize the countries of the region and
other stakeholders around that goal. I have encouraged
the military operations conducted by the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo against the
Allied Democratic Forces with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
and I went to Beni with my colleague Martin Kobler
and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the Commission of the African Union, Mr. Boubacar
Diarra, to encourage collaboration.

S/PV.7410

My Office has also worked together with the
stakeholders to implement the Nairobi declarations,
including for the repatriation of the former combatants
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) from Rwanda and
Uganda. To date, a small number of them have agreed
to return to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as part of the repatriation plan agreed with Uganda,
while the repatriation process has yet to commence
with Rwanda in follow-up to the visit of the delegation
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Kigali in
February. Everything must be done to turn the page
definitively on the chapter of the M-23 rebellion so that
all energies can be focused on the other negative forces.
At the same time, I joined in efforts encouraging
the launching of military action against the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
following the passing of the deadline of 2 January 2015.
I took part in the series of consultations organized by
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) towards the end of last year. I
welcome the consensus that eventually emerged on this
sensitive issue. I take this opportunity to congratulate
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its armed
forces on the military operations they launched against
the FDLR. I encourage once again the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
to resume their full cooperation in the framework of
operations against the FDLR and to strengthen their
partnership through a structured strategic dialogue.
During my meeting with President Kabila on 13 March,
he assured assured me of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s readiness for such
dialogue.
Secondly, in my various interactions in the region,
I encouraged efforts and called for initiatives aiming to
improve relations among the countries of the region with
a view to resolving misunderstandings and suspicions
and building the level of trust needed for progress in
the Framework Agreement process. I want to thank
President Dos Santos, in his capacity as Chairman of
the ICGLR, and other leaders of the region for their
commitment in that regard. I reiterate my readiness
to support these efforts at reconciliation among States
so as to promote a climate that is more conducive to
cooperation. In that context, I welcome the intention of
President Kabila to convene a summit of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries.

15-076215/10

S/PV.7410

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Finally, aware that the region was embarking on an
election cycle that would be crucial for strengthening
democracy and stability, I sought, in liaison with my
United Nations colleagues in the region and the group
of Special Envoys, to provide my contribution to
efforts aimed at encouraging the holding of inclusive,
transparent and peaceful elections. We will continue to
make efforts to help the countries of the region to make
of those elections opportunities to strengthen their
democratic achievements and stability, in accordance
with the spirit of the Framework Agreement.
Beyond those crucial actions, we must tackle
the other underlying causes of the instability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region, as per our commitments under the Addis Ababa
Framework Agreement. To that end, in liaison with the
ICGLR and all stakeholders, my Office will contribute
to the initiatives — already under way or planned — in
order to create conditions conducive to the return of
refugees, reconciliation among local communities and
lasting solutions to the complex issues of citizenship
and land. That area of work and others, such as the fight
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
the promotion of regional judicial cooperation, are
among the priority actions of my road map.
In terms of economic development, I am pleased to
note the many development and cooperation initiatives
launched in recent years, in particular the various
regional development corridors. My Office is working
to support those commendable efforts, including
by organizing this coming July — in collaboration
with the World Bank, the European Union and the
African Union — a conference for partners focusing
on regional development issues in the Great Lakes
region. Moreover, following the regional consultations
held in Luanda in December 2014, which endorsed the
investment opportunities document, my Office and
the ICGLR, with the support of other partners, began
making preparations for the conference on private
sector investment in the Great Lakes region, to be
held in Kinshasa in the last quarter of 2015. That first
conference of its kind aims to promote investment and
job-creation opportunities, strengthen public-private
partnerships and create a platform for exchange among
investors. The conference will enhance the prospects
for peace through investment opportunities in the
region.
The participation of civil society and women’s
organizations in efforts aiming to end instability

6/10

19/03/2015

and facilitate the implementation of the Framework
Agreement is essential. In that regard, efforts are
under way to establish a regional coalition of civil
society, with the joint support of my Office and ICGLR
Executive Secretariat. We are likewise working closely
with the ICGLR to strengthen initiatives in favour of
women that contribute to peace in the Great Lakes
region. In that respect, the Women’s Platform for the
Framework Agreement, launched by Mary Robinson,
continues, under my auspices, to support the political
and economic empowerment of women, including
through the financing of socioeconomic activities. I
am pleased to inform the Council that the first round
of grants from a special trust fund established by my
Office to support the Women’s Platform was awarded
in November 2014 for women’s organizations from
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda. I want to thank the Governments
of the Netherlands, Ireland and Norway, which
contributed to my Office’s special trust fund.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, let me say a few words on the
governance structures and monitoring mechanisms of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The
current regional context calls for the strengthening of
these structures and mechanisms in order to maintain
momentum to effectively deliver national, regional
and international commitments through proactive
engagement within the Regional Oversight Mechanism
and an enhanced role for the Technical Support
Committee. In the weeks ahead, I will consult with
the leadership of the African Union and the other
co-guarantors of the Framework Agreement, the
ICGLR and SADC, on the best ways to improve the
Framework’s governance structures and monitoring
mechanisms.
Let me also put on record my appreciation for
the cooperation I am receiving from the signatory
countries and the excellent collaboration developed
with my colleagues in the region, especially Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and
Special Envoy Uteem, as well as the United Nations
system in the Great Lakes region. I wish to express my
appreciation for the good cooperation we have forged
with the African Union, as the co-promoter of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework process,
and the other co-guarantors of the agreement — ICGLR
and SADC. I would like to also thank my fellow Special
Envoys, including Russ Feingold, who recently left his

15-07621

19/03/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

position after 18 months of brilliant service, for their
support and contribution.
Sustaining the momentum of the Framework
agreement lies in the continued commitment of the
signatory countries and concerned stakeholders.
I wish, in this regard, to continue to count on the
continued engagement and support of the Council. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region have made considerable progress in overcoming
the tragedies of the past, but they have yet to achieve
irreversible progress for lasting peace. I reiterate my
commitment to working tirelessly and joining hands
with regional and other stakeholders towards delivering
the promises of the Framework agreement and assisting
the region in fulfilling its aspirations for shared peace
and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I think Mr. Djinnit
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Tshibanda N’tungamulongo (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month of March, and to
tell you how honoured we are to see France, a friendly
country, guiding the Council’s deliberations today.
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak
before the Council at this meeting on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of Congo, an issue that is of
paramount importance to my country.
Allow me to take this opportunity to express once
again to the Council the gratitude of the people and
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the efforts undertaken by the United Nations in order
to maintain the sovereignty and territorial integrity our
country and to guarantee its peace and stability. Finally,
I would like to pay a heartfelt tribute to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for the tireless concern he has
always demonstrated and for his personal involvement
in seeking and consolidating peace in my country.
Relations between the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo go back to when
my country gained international sovereignty nearly
55 years ago, since when the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have achieved so
many memorable things together. We are convinced

S/PV.7410

that history will show this much better than we are
able to do in just a few minutes today. These relations
have almost always been good, often excellent, if not
exemplary. Unfortunately, today we must recognize
that they are going through some difficulties. Our
greatest wish is that this difficult period should pass as
quickly as possible. The history of our country and our
common political will do not allow us to take any path
other than that of conciliation.
How could we not be convinced of this when we
know that it is specifically due to the partnership
between the United Nations and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of my country have been safeguarded, in
spite of all the covetousness and aggressions, be they
direct or by proxy? We see that peace, which is often
interrupted, has each time been re-established and then
consolidated, both in my country and throughout the
African Great Lakes region. We see each day a greater
consolidation of the State’s authority and respect
for human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, while free elections, the guarantors of strong
and credible institutions, are closer to becoming a
reality each day as the only way to access and preserve
public authority in my country. All the while, the
United Nations has reminded Member States of their
obligations under the terms of its Charter, including full
respect for democratic principles and the sanctity of the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States.
We believe that in order to consolidate these gains,
we, the United Nations and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, have the duty to
continue to work as a team and, to that end, to perpetuate
the spirit that has always characterized this partnership
and been a key factor of its effectiveness. It is a spirit
of dialogue and mutual respect, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter, including respect at all times
and in all circumstances of the intangible sovereignty
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For its part,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo affirms loud and
clear it has always been and will always remain true to
that spirit.
There are four current sticking points in the
relations between the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are, first, the
strategic review and the logical consequences following
therefrom, especially with regard to the transfer of
responsibilities from the United Nations Organization

15-076217/10

S/PV.7410

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the pace of the drawdown
of United Nations troops in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; secondly, the forced disarmament of
the Rwandan rebels of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR); thirdly, the development
of the presence of Ugandan rebels of the Allied
Democratic Forces—National Army for the Liberation
of Uganda (ADF-NALU) in the north-east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and, fourthly, the
political consequences of the end of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) rebellion.
In order to inform Council members, please
allow me to clarify the viewpoint of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on these points in view of recent
developments in the security, political and economic
situations in the field. I note that the current situation
on the ground is improving daily. In terms of the
strategic review, I recall that the Organization has been
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at our
request, since 1999, first in the form of a peacekeeping
mission and then as a stabilization mission. It has
deployed there and maintains about 20,000 troops,
including 3,000 of the Force Intervention Brigade,
which is specifically charged with supporting the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) in neutralizing the negative forces in the east
of the country. We would also like to recall that, since
the very beginning, it has been agreed that the United
Nations contribution would be progressively reviewed
in view of a reduction as and when the security threats
were diminished and the FARDC achieved a level of
performance that enabled it to ensure the country’s
security themselves.
When the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo arrived, almost
half of the country was living in insecurity and was
outside the effective control of the national authorities.
The country was divided into as many semi-autonomous
territories, administrations and armies as there were
rebel groups. Given the almost complete disintegration
of the State, the massive violations of human
rights — in particular the recruitment of child soldiers,
rape and other sexual violence — had reached a level
that shocked the human conscience.
Today, there are certainly still some pockets of
insecurity maintained by the Ugandan terrorists in
and around the town of Beni and North Kivu and by
Rwandan rebels of the FDLR in certain small areas of

8/10

19/03/2015

North Kivu and South Kivu. However, everywhere else
in the country peace and security reign, including in
Ituri and to the north of Katanga. The few incidents
of disorder that have sporadically caused concern for
citizens, brought about by the activism of some lost
sheep, are law-and-order issues that have been brought
into line in one way or another.
Moreover, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
today there is a functioning State whose authority is
effectively exercised throughout almost all the national
territory. There are legitimate and effective institutions,
as evidenced by our economic performance, which
includes a 9.5 per cent growth in our gross domestic
product in 2014, which, in the opinion of credible
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund,
could reach 10 per cent in 2015; an inflation rate close
to zero; a stable exchange rate for the national currency;
steadily increasing international reserves and foreign
direct investment; the implementation of several
important reforms, as a result of which the country
has been ranked one of the top 10 reformer countries
in the world by the World Bank; and the rehabilitation
and construction, in less than 5 years, of more schools,
hospitals and kilometres of roads than over the previous
50 years.
There is an army that is actively being rebuilt and
whose continued increase in power is unquestionable.
The defeat of the M-23, the almost complete
neutralization of ADF-NALU and the ongoing
military operations against the FDLR are just some
of the irrefutable pieces of evidence to that effect.
Democracy is being established, with the first truly
free and democratic elections in our history held in
2006, legislative and presidential elections held on
time in 2011, the effective implementation of measures
for decentralization and local, municipal, urban,
provincial, senatorial, parliamentary and presidential
elections planned to be held in 2015 and 2016.
In view of this non-exhaustive list, any objective
observer must acknowledge that enormous work has
been done. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
is grateful to the United Nations for its invaluable
support in the pursuit and achievement of those results.
However, it also believes that the time has come for
it to fully shoulder its responsibilities with respect to
its security and that of its people. It therefore calls for
the Council to respond to this legitimate aspiration,
which is inseparable from the very notion of national
sovereignty.

15-07621

19/03/2015

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In that regard, I wish to bring to the attention of
Council members the considerable efforts made by my
Government in terms of security sector reform. Those
efforts extend beyond officially defining a military
doctrine; developing a comprehensive reform plan;
Parliament adopting and the Head of State promulgating
all laws required for the army and national police;
appointing to command positions, in line with the new
architecture of both elements; and creating a quick
reaction force, which the Council wants and expects
and is already well under way.
It is in that context that one must view the
training and equiping of the following three brigades:
the 11th Brigade, which is famous for its victorious
operations against M-23 rebels and the ADF, under
the command of the late General Mamadou Ndala.
That Brigade is made up of three battalions that were
trained under a Chinese cooperation programme; the
21st Brigade, which is made up of three battalions
trained by South Africa and currently deployed in
Katanga; and the 31st Brigade, which is made up of
three battalions and whose soldiers were trained under
a Belgian cooperation programme, served in earlier
pacification operations in North Kivu and will soon be
deployed as part of the efforts to pursue the FDLR in
the Congolese forest.
In terms of the implementation of resolution 2147
(2014), on the forced disarmament of Rwandan FDLR
rebels, I would start by deploring the incident that
caused MONUSCO to not participate directly in that
disarmament, even though that was among the tasks that
our Organization was to accomplish in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On this subject, I would like
to state that this situation did not arise because of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which did nothing
but note MONUSCO’s decision to suspend its support.
What is more, the Congolese authorities were not
informed, before their nomination to their posts, of the
fact that the officers in question were designated “red”
by the MONUSCO service.
I would like to further state that our country is
involved in all United Nations efforts for the promotion
and respect of human rights, so that is not at issue
here. Eloquent proof of that is the fact that at least a
third of the population in prisons in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is made up of elements from
the defence and security forces, officers and enlisted
men alike. That would not have been the case if we had
been complacent about them. That said, like any United

S/PV.7410

Nations Member State and in accordance with the
Charter, the Democratic Republic of the Congo wants
to maintain full autonomy in appointing its civilian
and military cadres. Only obstacles that have actually
been documented can, in full sovereignty, be taken into
account when appointments are made.
Despite MONUSCO’s withdrawal of support, and
as it cannot shirk its responsibilities, the FARDC has
launched and is currently carrying out military operations
against the FDLR. To date, significant progress has
been made. Almost 200 combatants — including,
unfortunately, 91 child soldiers — have been arrested
or have given themselves up. Former strongholds such
as Mulenge, Kitoga, Kigogo, Kangova and Kashindaba
in South Kivu, and Kahumbu, Katemba, Kisoro and
Mulembe in North Kivu have been liberated. The
remaining rebel troops have plunged into the deep forest,
thus getting further from the Rwandan border, where
they sought to create insecurity in that neighbouring
country. Our troops are hot on their heels, and our
determination to eradicate that harmful force is such
that we will not cease operations until we achieve that
final result, whatever the cost in time and resources,
whether human, financial or material.
Regarding the evolution of the presence of Ugandan
ADF-NALU rebels in the north-east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I would like to state that
MONUSCO and FARDC have cooperated positively
since the rebels scattered and became lawless terrorists
with no other strategy than surprise attacks on isolated
villages, where they burn down huts and decapitate
their inhabitants before fleeing. We are currently in
the search stage. Everyone recognizes that Congolese
troops behave so as to bring honour to our country in
those operations.
I now come to the subject of the elimination of the
M-23 rebellion. That rebellion came to an end under
the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and the conclusions of the Nairobi talks.
In accordance with the Framework agreement and the
conclusions of Nairobi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has begun a process of political dialogue
through national consultations and has, in this respect
and following those consultations, declared amnesty
for acts of war, in particular those committed by former
M-23 rebels. Indeed, of the 1,678 former rebels who are
on the run and have taken refuge in Uganda and the
453 other refugees in Rwanda, 777 have at this stage

15-076219/10

S/PV.7410

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

taken advantage of the amnesty law and 182 of those
have voluntarily returned to the country. Those who
remain in the two neighbouring countries are not there
because the Democratic Republic of the Congo will not
receive them or has not facilitated that process enough,
but rather because, as this repatriation is voluntary, that
decision must be made by the former M-23 combatants
themselves. Some of them, at this point, seem to prefer
to stay where they are. We are actively seeking to
convince them to return to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and we are counting on the international
community, and in particular the special envoys, to
help us achieve that.
To give the full picture of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would like to
reiterate my Government’s determination to adhere
more strongly than ever to the culture of democracy.
Therefore, after an open and rich debate, the national
independent electoral commission published a
comprehensive timetable for the upcoming elections.
At the same time, it set the budget necessary to hold
all elections in the election cycle. This demonstrates
our commitment to holding transparent, credible
and peaceful elections. We are confident that the
friends of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
support us in this exercise in learning and deepening
of democracy in a climate of peace by avoiding any
interference that could add fuel to the fire. Their

10/10

19/03/2015

financial support — offered in a timely manner and not
at the last minute — will contribute equally to that end.
In conclusion, we are ready to launch a strategic
dialogue with the United Nations on all the issues I have
raised today, with a view to achieving consensus before
the Council makes its decision. I wish to reiterate that
the FARDC’s current high level of performance offers
an objective demonstration of our desire to negotiate
the gradual reduction of MONUSCO troops. We know
that our concept for this drawdown is shared by the
Organization and that it is only its scope and pace that
are up for discussion. We are convinced that when we
return on Monday, as scheduled, we will undoubtedly
be able to reach agreement and offer a consensual
proposal to the Council.
Finally, I reaffirm that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has always enjoyed exemplary cooperation
with the United Nations and that it shall continue to do
so. We count on the United Nations to do its share to
that end.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Minister
Tshibanda N’tungamulongo for his statement.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

15-07621
