8. Requests the President of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to keep this question under
review and report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the Council within an appropriate period
and at the latest within six months;
9. Declares that, in the event of failure by Portugal
to comply with the provisions of the present resolution,
the Security Council will meet to consider the initiatives
and steps that the situation requires;
10. Decides to remain seized of the question.

5. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to take
immediate effective measures:
(a) So that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Senegal shall be fully respected;
( b) To prevent acts of violence and destruction
against the territory and the people of Senegal, in order
to contribute to the safeguarding of peace and security
in the region;
6. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to respect
fully the inalienable right to self-determination and
independence of the people of Guinea (Bissau);
7. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to take
without further delay the necessary measures, so that
this inalienable right of the people of Guinea (Bissau)
shall be exercised;

Adopted at the 1601st meeting by 14 votes to none, with
1 abstention (United States
of America).

COMPLAINT BY GUINEA20

1. Affirms that the territorial integrity and political
independence of the Republic of Guinea must be
respected;
2. Decides to send a special mission of three members of the Security Council to Guinea to consult with
the authorities and to report on the situation immediately;
3. Decides that this special mission be appointed
after consultation between the President of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General;
4. Decides to maintain the matter on its agenda.

Decision

At its 1573rd meeting, on 3 August 1971, the
Council decided to invite the representative of Guinea
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled "Complaint by Guinea: letter dated 3
August 1971 from the Permanent Representative of
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/10280) ". 21

Adopted unanimously at the
1573rd meeting.

Resolution 295 (1971)
of 3 August 1971

The Security Council,
Taking note of the letter addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the Permanent Representative
of Guinea, 22

Decisions

At its 1576th meeting, on 26 August 1971, the
Council approved the following statement, expressing
the consensus of the Council on the question of the
implementation of paragraph 2 of resolution 295
(1971):

Having heard the statement of the Permanent Representative of Guinea, 23
Bearing in mind that all States Members of the
United Nations must refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes
of the United Nations,

"It is the consensus of the Security Council that
the Special Mission called for in resolution 295
( 1971) should be composed of two members of
the Council instead of three. The Special Mission
will proceed to Conakry to consult the Government
of the Republic of Guinea on its complaint and
will report back to the Council as soon as possible."

20 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1969 and 1970.
21 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twentysixth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1971.
22 fbid., document S/10280.
2 3 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Year, 1573rd meeting, paras. 8-23.

At the same meeting, the President announced that
the President of the Security Council and the Secre4
