S/PV.8882

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8882nd meeting

Monday, 18 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani/Mrs. Toroitich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2021/867)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-29300 (E)
*2129300*

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

I would like to begin by thanking Council members
for their continued attention to the situation in the
Central African Republic and their unanimous support
to MINUSCA in carrying out its work.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2021/867)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the
Central African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mankeur
Ndiaye, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic;
His Excellency Mr. Bankole Adeoye, Commissioner
for Political Affairs, Peace and Security of the African
Union; His Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; and Ms. Pamela Audrey Derom, President of
the Conseil National de la Jeunesse Centrafricaine.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/867, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ndiaye.
Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General and the members of the Security
Council for the honour today to present to the Council
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2021/867), in line
with the request set out in resolution 2552 (2020) — the
last such report before the end of the current mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) on 15 November.
2/23

18/10/2021

I also very much welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President
of the Central African Republic, who is kindly taking
part in this meeting. I think him for being here. I believe
the Council will listen to him with great interest in
describing developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I also welcome the presence of the Central
African Republic’s international partners, including
the European Union, with which we have an excellent
working relationship when it comes to implementing
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the European Union with regard to peacekeeping
and managing crises. I also welcome the participation
of the African Union. And I would like to make special
mention of the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS). The African Union and ECCAS are
co-guarantors of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. As
well, I welcome the very important contribution of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and of the civil society representative participating in
this meeting.
I would especially like to commend the Council
on the recent visit, from 10 to 15 September, by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) on the lifting of sanctions on the Central African
Republic. We welcome the fact that such a visit, which
MINUSCA robustly supported, will contribute to
a constructive dialogue on the progress made by the
Government of the Central African Republic towards
achieving the benchmarks related to lifting the arms
embargo currently in place. It was also a political
opportunity of great significance to understanding the
challenges faced by the Government and to explore with
it relevant solutions with a view to achieving lasting
security, along with the support of MINUSCA and the
Central African Republic’s international partners.
With the conclusion of the presidential and
legislative elections, in a complex security environment,
and the inauguration of the new Government on
23 June, the Central African Republic took a notinsignificant step towards institutional stability.
It also underscored its adherence to the process of
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

democratization, while also responding to the profound
aspiration of the population, who braved significant
security challenges, sometimes at the cost of their
lives, in exercising their right to vote. Sustaining that
positive momentum requires the Council’s extension of
MINUSCA’s mandate for electoral assistance in order
to further foster the process of decentralization via
the holding of local elections, the last of which took
place back in 1988. In addition to being a democratic
milestone towards inclusive governance, those local
elections are the result of a major political compromise
that underpins the critical balance in the power-sharing
regime enshrined in the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
Consequently, any delay or failure to hold the elections
could undermine the integrity of the agreement and
endanger the peace process.
The ceasefire declared by President Touadera
on 15 October is another example of progress that
merits the Council’s attention. We would like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the President and
his Government for that major step in the dialogue.
The declaration of the ceasefire should launch the
operational phase of the joint road map to revitalize the
peace process in the Central African Republic, adopted
under the auspices of the President of Angola, Mr. João
Lourenço, on 16 September, by the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. I would like
to commend the vitality of the regional momentum
that managed to reinvigorate the peace process with a
road map that provides an opportunity to revitalize the
essential provisions of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation. I also commend the very important
and decisive role played by President Lourenço.
The positive complementarity of the joint road
map and the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed on 6 February 2019, facilitates the pooling of
the efforts of the guarantors — the African Union
and ECCAS — and of the States of the subregion, as
facilitators, to inject synergy into their interactions to
relaunch its implementation.
It is therefore essential that, without exception, all
the armed groups and their leaders genuinely adhere to
the peace process by fulfilling in good faith all their
obligations pursuant to the agreement of 6 February and
the joint road map. MINUSCA intends to remobilize all
its partners and make optimal use of its good offices and
its force to increase the contribution of international

S/PV. 8882

partners to the peace process and ensure, together with
all stakeholders, the credibility and the integrity of
the agreement.
It should be said that the success of the revitalization
process of the 6 February agreement and the
implementation of the new joint road map will depend
upon strict respect by all parties and the capacity of the
guarantors and the facilitators, including MINUSCA,
to create an effective framework for accountability that
avoids violations without consequences, as we saw in
the recent past.
The reason for our keenness in the effectiveness of
the ceasefire declaration of 15 October is that it could
potentially contribute to the creation of an environment
conducive to the smooth holding of the inclusive
“republican dialogue” that the Government intends to
launch with the political parties and the key forces of
the Central African Republic.
The political class and civil society have a role
to play, with the Government and the support of the
international community, in the promotion of national
ownership of that important process in the search
for lasting peace, stability, security and national
reconciliation. We hope to see those two processes
contribute to the creation of an environment that better
protects the civilian population and that is conducive to
the effective implementation of our mandate throughout
the territory of the country, given the correlation
between the safety and security of United Nations
civilian and uniformed personnel and the performance
and implementation of their tasks.
Security challenges remain in some parts of the
country, with military operations being conducted in
response to the operations by members of the Coalition
des patriotes pour le changement armed groups. In that
regard, we have seen the displacement of persons and
tensions among communities, in particular in the west
and centre of the country. Moreover, certain armed
groups have tried to retake their former strongholds
in the north-west, the centre and the south-east of the
country, the consequences of which have been felt by
civilians, who are the primary victims of that violence,
including an increase in a host of human rights violations
and other violations of international humanitarian law.
We therefore encourage the Government to
accordingly provide the judicial follow-up necessary
with regard to the conclusions of the special
investigation commission established on 4 May to

21-293003/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

investigate allegations of human rights violations. In
that regard, the United Nations system as a whole is
following with great hope the investigations of the
Special Criminal Court and will continue to provide its
support to the judicial system as a whole in its efforts
to combat impunity. We particularly look forward to
attending the first trial of the Special Criminal Court
and the setting up of the Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation, which undoubtedly will
be an irreversible step towards putting an end to the
cycle of impunity, including realizing victims’ right
to truth, justice and reparation, which are essential
elements of genuine lasting national reconciliation.
Furthermore, we will need to go beyond the fight
against impunity to make it possible for the Government
to better ensure the effectiveness of its role as protector
of civilians and in promoting human rights with
professional and effective defence and security forces.
To that end, along with all our international technical and
financial partners, we will have to continue to support
the Central African authorities in implementing the
recommendations of the strategic review of the security
sector that is under way. We believe that optimizing
our support for the reform of the security sector will
depend on our capacity to invest more in three strategic
areas, that is, governance with a view to performance,
ensuring accountability and coordination to ensure
coherence and complementarity. No investment in
security sector reform will be too much given the
security situation, which has become more complex with
an increase in incidents involving explosive devices, in
particular in the west of the country. That contributes
to the continuing deterioration of the security situation,
which impacts the protection of civilians, the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and the safety and security
of Blue Helmets and threatens the implementation
of MINUSCA's mandate. I therefore call on Council
members to duly take that concern into account in the
process of renewing the mission’s mandate.
It is regrettable to note that, despite humanitarian
workers' courage and determination and the efforts in
the framework of the political process and the extension
of State authority, the Central African Republic has not
overcome its humanitarian crisis. Since 2014, there have
been an unprecedented number of internally displaced
persons, and 63 per cent of the population, some
3.1 million people, need urgent humanitarian protection
and assistance. There is therefore a need to fund the
humanitarian response plan — only 60 per cent of its
4/23

18/10/2021

budget is funded — in order to provide vital assistance
to some 1.8 million people and avoid a deterioration of
the social fabric, which would be damaging to efforts
to achieve peace and stability. The same applies to the
economic situation in the context of the coronavirus
disease, which requires budgetary measures to protect
the security and stability of the country.
Among the emerging challenges are the continued
violations of the headquarters agreement, with
41 documented violations reported between 1 June
and 1 October. Those violations can be overcome. For
that reason, we have maintained our dialogue with the
Government in order to provide lasting solutions, as
such violations undermine the confidence, partnership
and peaceful coexistence between conventional forces,
national authorities and MINUSCA. I welcome President
Touadera's commitment to put an end to that situation,
which is particularly deplorable, as MINUSCA never
had to face such incidents on a regular basis before the
deployment of the bilateral forces and the emergence of
the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement.
The structural responses to all those security,
humanitarian and operational challenges requires
that the political and peace process be credible by
revitalizing the 6 February agreement and holding of
the “republican dialogue”. Indeed, it will be necessary,
with our international partners and the support of
all members of the Security Council, to engage both
separately and collectively with all essential regional
and Central African actors to make an immediate
cessation of hostilities and ceasefire a reality.
Compliance with all those preconditions by all
parties can lead to a gradual restoration of trust among
all the actors and maintaining an environment conducive
to implementing effectively a multidimensional
mandate in the interest of the protection of civilians,
humanitarian assistance, the holding of local elections
and lasting solutions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, which are objective
indicators of progress towards the definitive return to
peace in the Central African Republic.
We are also aware of the critical role that the
mandate and the robust posture of MINUSCA is
playing in making the political process credible. We are
therefore counting on optimizing its use with the arrival
of additional troops and resources deployed through
the authorization of the Security Council to improve
performance related to the tasks of protecting civilians,
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

supporting the provision of humanitarian assistance,
providing our good political offices and securing local
elections in close cooperation with the Government of
the Central African Republic.
In order to maintain the momentum of resolution
2566 (2021), I call on Council members for their
support to enable MINUSCA to achieve its goals in
strengthening its uniformed personnel as soon as
possible. In that regard, I commend contributions
already announced by troop- and police-contributing
countries, and I stress the imperative need to accelerate
the deployment of military and police personnel
to support MINUSCA operations and the smooth
implementation of its mandate.
At the same time, I would like to highlight
and condemn the resurgence in incidents related to
sexual abuse and exploitation. Such unacceptable and
unjustified acts can unfortunately ruin the reputation
of the Organization and jeopardize the legitimacy of
our mandate — hence the imperative to enforce the
zero-tolerance policy of the Secretary-General, which I
am implementing on the ground, and to recalibrate our
global and integrated strategy of prevention and victimcentred response to sexual abuse and exploitation, which
I am personally currently carrying out. Nevertheless,
we are counting on Council members and the effective
cooperation of the troop- and police-contributing
countries to end that scourge by strict compliance with
the obligations incumbent upon all of us.
Lastly, the renewal of the MINUSCA mandate,
the engagement of the international technical and
financial partners of the Central African Republic,
national ownership of political and peace processes
and the strong political determination of the
Government — I am convinced — are key to the
adoption and the implementation of lasting political
solutions. With the support of all Council members,
we will commit ourselves to making constructive
use of our good offices to promote a transparent,
coordinated and coherent approach in order to make the
contributions necessary for resolving the crisis in the
Central African Republic.
The President: I thank Mr. Ndiaye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Adeoye.
Mr. Adeoye: Everyone will agree with me that
the situation in the Central African Republic remains
volatile and highly unpredictable. That is despite

S/PV. 8882

the progress made following the successful general
elections and the inauguration of President Touadera
and the legislature in accordance with constitutional
timelines. A series of bloody attacks has continued to
contribute to the precarious situation.
I must say that the African Union is particularly
concerned about the renewed and unrelenting clashes
between the fighters of the Coalition des patriotes
pour le changement (CPC) and other armed groups.
The African Union takes this important opportunity
to strongly condemn the CPC and its affiliated groups.
We call for an immediate ceasefire and the return to
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. It is also important
that we particularly warn all belligerents in the Central
African Republic that they will be held accountable for
the safety and the security of peacekeepers and their
assets. We call on the Government to ensure that such
hostile acts immediately cease and that perpetrators be
held accountable.
At this juncture, allow me to underscore that
the African Union fully welcomes and supports
the 16 September call for a ceasefire made by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. I
want to assure the Council that the ceasefire declared by
President Touadera, if effective, will be a game-changer.
In the same vein, the African Union welcomes
the preparations for the “republican dialogue”, and
we emphasize that its success will depend on its
inclusiveness and ownership. It is important that
all stakeholders, including armed groups that have
renounced violence, opposition political parties, civil
society, women, youth and religious leaders all over the
country, should be allowed to participate and given a
chance to build trust and confidence for a lasting peace
in the Central African Republic.
Equally, special attention should be paid to
addressing the widespread humanitarian situation,
knowing full well the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) in
that respect.
As a guarantor of the peace agreement, it is
important that the African Union continue to be
active in providing institutional assistance, promoting
the implementation of and support to the activities
of the Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation

21-293005/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

18/10/2021

Commission and assisting in preparations for the
“republican dialogue”.

this meeting. All actors, without exception, should
immediately cease armed actions.

Furthermore, the African Union will be ready to
deploy human rights observers as soon as possible,
knowing full well that we have already deployed
military observers in furtherance of the transitional
security arrangements under the peace agreement.

Today I would like to share our assessment of
the progress made, as well as recall some worrisome
developments that have persisted in the country since our
previous briefing to the Council in June (see S/PV.8802).
We have seen some positive political developments,
and it is important that they be built upon to create
a conducive environment for the critical processes
that are unfolding A new Government committed to
reforms has been appointed, and the electoral cycle was
finalized in July. Those are two important milestones
for the consolidation of democracy in the Central
African Republic.

Let me assure the Council that MINUSCA and its
leadership have been doing a tremendous job that we
commend highly, and we continue to look forward to
its greater effectiveness and to support for additional
personnel and equipment.
Finally, I want to recommend to the Council, on
behalf of the African Union, that MINUSCA should be
supported to continue carrying out its valuable work
in the Central African Republic by having its mandate
extended and, of course, being given all the tools
necessary for it to work towards continued, sustainable
peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
The President: I thank Mr. Adeoye for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I am sure that Security Council
members will not hear much discrepancy between my
briefing and the one given on behalf of the African
Union, given how closely we cooperate in this regard.
I want to start by congratulating you, Sir, and
Kenya for presiding over the Security Council.
As all know, the European Union (EU) is a longstanding and trusted partner of the Central African
Republic. We have mobilized all our available political,
humanitarian, development cooperation, security and
crisis management instruments through a dedicated
security and defence mission whose role is explicitly
recognized in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We have also supported peacebuilding activities and
the democratic development of the Central African
Republic. Our unique engagement has also included
a substantive contribution to ensure credibility in the
various recent electoral processes.
First of all, let me emphasise that we encourage
all regional efforts to achieve lasting peace in the
Central African Republic, in particular the adoption
of the Luanda road map. In that context, we welcome
the important political gesture by President Touadera
in announcing a ceasefire last Friday. And I want to
acknowledge the presence of President Touadera at
6/23

With regard to reform priorities, we specifically
note that the Government programme envisages
concrete steps in the field of justice and the fight
against impunity and corruption. There is recognition
of the benefits of opening up the economy, revitalizing
the peace process and fostering investments in human
capital. We will need to see if those pledges lead to
visible, concrete progress. Many challenges and high
expectations among the population remain. In that
regard, we encourage continuous Government support
for the Special Criminal Court and the Commission on
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation.
We also welcome the installation of the organizing
committee for the “republican dialogue” on 1 September.
The dialogue itself has to be credible and inclusive, and
set permanent structures to ensure long-term contact
between the parties; that is the only way to bring about
a lasting solution to the crisis. The participation of all
relevant stakeholders, including the opposition, civil
society, minorities, women and youth, is essential for
that dialogue to be successful. The European Union
is ready to continue to provide advice, support and
expertise as part of our mediation support.
Finally, we welcome President Touadera’s
commitment to the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
which is the only common and viable framework. The
effective implementation of the recommendations
made during its evaluation is of utmost importance.
That process involves all the signatories and requires
close coordination with the guarantors, facilitators and
partners. The road map adopted at the Luanda minisummit, including the swift implementation of the
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

ceasefire provisions and the recognition that this is a
shared obligation, will be especially important.
Maintaining a positive and conducive environment
for peacemaking will be crucial. While we have seen
those positive political developments in the country,
since the most recent briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.8802) we have also witnessed some developments
on the ground that remain particularly worrying.
In the last few months, we have received several
reports of not only violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law but also targeted abuse
and stigmatization of ethnic and religious minorities
committed by armed groups and national armed
forces as well as so-called instructors. Such actions
are unacceptable. The special commission of inquiry
has an important role to play in that regard if its initial
findings are taken forward appropriately. That is a
first positive signal in the fight against impunity; we
now expect concrete follow-up and legal action against
those responsible, including from outside the country.
We are also deeply concerned by the human rights
and international humanitarian law violations and
abuses, including conflict-related sexual violence,
attacks on the Fulani community and the increased
use of explosive-ordnance devices and mines.
International partners such as the European Union,
France and MINUSCA have also been the victims of
repeated attacks, aggressive campaigns, hate speech
and disinformation, as we just heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
Further, the EU firmly condemns all violations
of the status-of-forces agreement against MINUSCA,
including limiting the freedom of movement of its
troops, which prevents the Mission from fulfilling its
mandate. We express our full support to MINUSCA.
We remain concerned by the presence of
bilaterally deployed and other security personnel
with unclear objectives and targets. Full transparency
and coordination between partners in the country
is necessary. The authorities of the Central African
Republic have to ensure that all stakeholders work in
the same spirit and in the same direction, with clear and
transparent rules of engagement.
Those strong concerns and expectations were
expressed on many occasions to the authorities of the
Central African Republic during EU high-level visits
in the last months. Together with our international and

S/PV. 8882

regional partners, we expect quick and concrete signals
and strong guarantees from the authorities to pursue
our engagement in the country.
The Central African Republic remains an extremely
fragile country facing an acute humanitarian crisis,
with 2.8 million persons in humanitarian need and
712,000 internally displaced. The entire international
community must therefore remain mobilized and united
and continue to provide an urgent and appropriate
response to the pressing humanitarian needs of the
country and its people.
The restoration of security in the country is
a priority for us; the progressive reinforcement of
MINUSCA should make it possible to make a lasting
and long-term contribution to securing the territory of
the Central African Republic.
However, a lasting solution to the crisis cannot be
solely military. Dialogue between the parties and the
re-engagement and willingness of armed groups to
return to the process after renouncing violence is also
crucial. That will need to be accompanied by greater
inclusion and a greater role for civil society, especially
women, youth and political parties. In that regard,
we support the renewed efforts of our partners in the
region, the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We particularly
welcome the organization of the summit on the Central
African Republic in order to find a lasting solution, and
we encourage the harmonization of ongoing initiatives.
In the framework of ongoing programming for our
next cooperation period, EU engagement will be based
on a renewed and strengthened framework of mutual
engagement, in a spirit of full transparency, reciprocal
trust and commitment. The EU has been, is and will
remain one of the closest partners of the Central African
Republic. Through our multidimensional action, we are
committed to accompanying the country on the path of
reform in the service of the population. We will act in
full transparency and expect the same from all friends
of the Central African Republic.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Derom.
Ms. Derom (spoke in French): My name is Pamela
Audrey Derom, President of the National Youth
Council of the Central African Republic. I am speaking
as a young person with the same aspirations as a

21-293007/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

young person in Europe, America, Asia or Oceania. I
am speaking on behalf of the young people who have
been relegated to the sidelines. I am speaking today
on behalf of Central African youth, who were ignored
during the major consultations and forced to conform
to the context imposed on them.
I thank the Security Council for providing this
framework for interaction. The methodological
approach it has adopted suits us because what is done
without us is done against us. When the realities and
intentions of young Central Africans, their eyes shining
with dreams and hopes, are discussed, the debate is a
real one.
In February 2019, I and my team at the National
Council of Central African Youth were given the
mandate to represent all youth leaders, making me
the first woman to occupy this representative position
with a sovereign mission to defend the interests of
youth in the political context in which we are living
at the moment, which is, as Council members know,
consequential. Since independence, public discourse,
including slander, is intensifying in a development
routine that has caused my country to waver. The
media have projected a crisis that will last 50 years and
promote the idea of an “incapable youth” that is unfit to
ensure its own destiny.
These analyses and observations are frightening
and unmotivating when it comes specifically to projects
in the Central African Republic. Notwithstanding
those atrocious views, the Central African Republic
is changing and changing considerably. Indeed, these
changes will be the eternal legacy of the youth of my
country. Central African young people have decided
to take charge of the change they want, and this has
occurred as a result of the commitment of the National
Council of Central African Youth to being involved
in the peace process. Also worth mentioning are the
outreach message of 500 youth activists dedicated to
raising awareness on coronavirus disease, the vigilance
of a young girl who was one of 800 youth observers
during the December 2020 elections and the “no”
of young Central Africans during the preliminary
consultations for the next “republican dialogue”. Many
other actions could be listed to show that Central
African youth are part of a paradigm of change.
Let me assure the Council that these changes
are real and visible. Within the framework of youth
participation and integration into active life, we have
8/23

18/10/2021

assisted more than 50 young interns in the Ministries
and other institutions of the Republic. We have
organized intergenerational dialogues, which have been
an excellent opportunity to bring the governing class
and the governed together in more than six prefectures
of the Central African Republic. This initiative will
result in proposing a law specific to Central African
youth, which is where the commitment of the National
Council of Central African Youth lies.
In figures, the need for education is an emergency
for young people, and especially for Central African
girls. According to the humanitarian report published
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in 2020, the Central African Republic has
1.3 million people in need and requires $36.1 million in
financing to meet basic education needs. Today 70 per
cent of the working population are young people with
dreams and ambitions for developing their country.
My organization has over 44,000 elected members
throughout the Central African Republic, which makes
us a consequential sovereign body. These figures
constitute a kind of pressure and a warning for the
years to come.
In my capacity as guarantor of youth, I can assure
Council members that we will live up to our responsibility
to meet the challenges of the Central African Republic.
What is important is to engage young people in a real
process of transformation — not to consider them as
passive actors of change, but as active ones, no longer
as beneficiaries but as partners in the implementation
of development projects and programmes.
Central African youth is calling for the Security
Council to completely lift the arms embargo. This
will allow the State authorities to truly establish State
authority and guarantee national integrity.
I would conclude by saying that the Central African
Republic needs multilateralism to face the development
challenges of this era. The youth of the Central African
Republic are counting on the Security Council for
peace in their country.
The President: I thank Ms. Derom for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the President of the Central
African Republic.
President Touadera (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by expressing my gratitude for the interest
that all members of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations are showing
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

in the situation in the Central African Republic. This
interest is evident in the increase in troops and assets
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) authorized by resolution 2566 (2021)
and in the recent mission, from 11 to 15 October, of
members of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) with regard to the sanctions
regime, in order to better assess progress made in
relation to security, political and economic challenges
in my country.
There were challenges when we least expected
them. As we were all focused on the implementation
in good faith of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation of 6 February 2019 and the preparation
of presidential and legislative elections, the arrival on
the scene of the Coalition of Patriots for Change (CPC),
with its plan to destabilize constitutional institutions
and sabotage the electoral process, resulted in a
sudden and almost general deterioration of the security
situation through systemic violence. Properly sizing up
this situation and taking into account the constitutional
powers conferred on me for safeguarding territorial
integrity and protecting the institutions of the Republic,
people and property, I decided to call upon Russian
instructors and Rwandan bilateral forces within the
framework of our bilateral agreements — and thanks to
the authorization of the Security Council.
Accordingly, I would like to reiterate the thanks
of the Central African people, because the arrival of
the bilateral forces allowed us to readjust our security
options around two major strategic axes, which proved
conclusive in the light of the results observed. With
these strategic options, we were able to optimize
the protection of civilian populations, support the
provision of humanitarian assistance and the secure the
presidential and legislative elections, with the help of
MINUSCA forces, on the one hand, and bilateral forces
and the Forces armées centrafricaines, on the other,
which, together with the support of instructors from the
Russian Federation and forces from Rwanda, invested
in operations designed to curb the threats of the CPC
and reclaim portions of territory under occupation, so
as to restore the territorial integrity and authority of
the State.
This division of labour was the best way for
us to take into account the specificity of the rules
of engagement and the mandate of MINUSCA and
optimize the complementarity of the forces involved.

S/PV. 8882

However, it has never been our choice to pursue an
exclusive military approach indefinitely. That is why
the doors to a “republican dialogue” with the political
parties and negotiation with the leaders of the armed
groups of the CPC have never been closed.
Our military posture, the effective implementation
of the MINUSCA mandate and our openness to dialogue
remain the mix that has enabled us to implement
the electoral calendar. Just after the presidential
election was held, in conjunction with finalizing the
legislative elections, I therefore initiated consultations
for an inclusive “republican dialogue” with all the
political stakeholders of the Central African nation.
We also supported the initiative of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), which,
with the direct involvement of the President of Angola,
Mr, João Lourenço, and the support of the States of the
region, whom I thank in passing, led to the adoption
of the joint road map for peace in the Central African
Republic by the Heads of State and Government of the
ICGLR on 16 September. The joint road map, which is
part of revitalizing the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
refocuses critical priorities around the following six
strategic factors.
The first priority is the commitment by armed
groups to an immediate cessation of hostilities, the
withdrawal of their leaders from Central African
Republic territory and engagement in the country’s
peace process.
Secondly, the Government must declare a ceasefire
to reduce the suffering of civilians, restore confidence
among the parties and facilitate the free movement
of people and goods, as well as enable the necessary
security conditions for the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Thirdly, the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration (DDRR) process must be implemented,
with an emphasis on the socioeconomic reintegration of
former combatants and mobilization of the necessary
resources, with the support of the ICGLR and the
Economic Community of the Central African States.
Fourthly, security sector reform (SSR) must take
place to support the establishment of a professional
national army and continued efforts to lift the United
Nations arms embargo.

21-293009/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

Fifthly, a border security strategy must be developed
to ensure that Central African Republic territory is not
used as a haven for illegal activities in the region.
Sixthly, there must be a political process and a
focus on restoring State authority and supporting the
“republican dialogue”.
On 15 October, I declared a unilateral ceasefire and
an end to military operations, in accordance with the
joint road map. I count on the support of the members
of the Security Council in safeguarding the integrity of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
and the joint road map, which cannot succeed without
the responsibility of the signatories and the attendant
accountability of all parties.
For my part, I have instructed my Government
to assess the needs in order to estimate the resources
required for the implementation of all the provisions of
the road map and the Political Agreement of 6 February
2019, since a delay in funding for implementation would
be detrimental to the preservation of those agreements.
To that end, I depend on any help that the members
of the Security Council can give, together with the
assistance of the organizations and States of the region
and the leadership of MINUSCA, in mobilizing the
concrete support of the Secretary-General through the
implementation of his mandate and the remobilization
of international partners.
My ceasefire declaration illustrates once again,
if need be, that we have no other ambition than to
remobilize all Central Africans to explore a lasting
political solution to the crisis that we are experiencing.
Successful political and peace processes are therefore
both an imperative for inclusive democratic governance
and a strategic priority that cuts across all our public
policies, given the comprehensive nature of the Political
Agreement and the joint road map, which include
institutional reforms, including achieving SSR, public
security through DDRR and the transformation of armed
groups, the disbanding of which remains an essential
objective, as well as decentralization and participatory
local development. Such a collective effort requires
a favourable political and security climate, which we
intend to consolidate through the recommendations
that will result from the “republican dialogue”.
Consequently, through the “republican dialogue”
and by revitalizing the Political Agreement, including
the joint road map, we could together achieve the
10/23

18/10/2021

progress expected by the civilian population, who are
suffering from violence, the refugees and displaced
persons, who aspire to a free and safe return, our
businesses for the revival of the economy and our
households for access to basic social services.
In doing that, we do not intend to ignore human
rights violations and other serious crimes, because
justice is also a social demand to be met. Our will to put
an end to chronic impunity is clearly visible through
the gradual implementation of transitional justice
mechanisms, such as the Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation Commission and the Special Criminal
Court. More recently, following the publication of the
report on human rights violations by MINUSCA and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, we set up a special commission of
inquiry, whose conclusions will receive all the judicial
follow-up that they deserve.
We will continue our efforts and work closely
with MINUSCA to preserve the security gains made,
including in the extension of State authority and the
safeguarding of territorial integrity, in cooperation
with all States of the subregion. That mandate is still
essential to the political and peace processes, as well
as the protection of the civilian population and the
unrestricted provision of humanitarian assistance. It
will be equally essential to the conduct of electoral
activities and the security of local elections, which are
at the heart of the Political Agreement.
I appeal to the members of the Security Council
to unanimously renew the strengthened mandate of
MINUSCA. It follows from my introductory statement
that tangible progress is being made and political
perspectives are being developed with all stakeholders,
in consultation with all regional organizations and
international partners.
It is our assessment that, with the legendary
wisdom of the Security Council, another review of the
sanctions regime is possible given the efforts made to
achieve the objectives and indicators set for us. We call
on the Security Council to evaluate, with considerable
flexibility, the burden of the embargo regime in order
to take into account the requisite effectiveness of our
defence and security forces to tackle any sudden threat
and not to depend exclusively on bilateral arrangements
so as to guarantee the territorial integrity of one of the
most fragile regions of the continent. Members can
count on our solemn commitment before the Security
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8882

Council to accelerate the achievement of the objectives,
criteria and benchmarks.

thank the Special Representative for his commitment to
reconciliation in the Central African Republic.

Consequently, through me, the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic reiterate
their request for the lifting of the arms embargo. We
continue to call for the unanimous and tireless support
of all members of the Security Council for lasting peace
and security in the Central African Republic.

With the ceasefire now in place, the time for
dialogue and peace must follow the fighting. That
dialogue must be sincere and inclusive. Above all, it
requires an immediate and definitive end to violence
against the civilian population, which is key for
reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The
presence of the Wagner Group in the Central African
Republic is extremely destabilizing. It is a factor that
leads to war, not to peace. There is mounting evidence
of the atrocities committed by the Group. Extrajudicial
arrests, summary executions, sexual and gender-based
violence, threats against human rights defenders and
obstacles to humanitarian work are all unacceptable
and documented in the report of the Panel of Experts
on the Central African Republic (see S/2021/569) and
the joint report by MINUSCA and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/867) under
consideration today.

The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; the Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security of the African Union; the Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations and Ms. Pamela Audrey Derom, civil society
representative, for their briefings.
I also welcome President Faustin Archange Touadera
to today’s meeting, following his announcement on
15 October of an immediate ceasefire in the Central
African Republic.
France welcomes that announcement, which, as
we know, is the outcome of several months of efforts
by States of the subregion, in particular Angola and
Rwanda. It is an extremely encouraging sign, which,
if followed up with action, will enable the Central
African Republic, with the support of the international
community, to resume its path to stability and
development. However, the most challenging task
remains. All parties must fully respect the ceasefire.
France therefore calls on all armed groups, the armed
forces of the Central African Republic and all forces
present in the country to put an immediate end to
the fighting.
France is ready to propose to the Security Council
new individual sanctions on those who violate the
ceasefire. The international community will play an
important role in ensuring respect for the ceasefire.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) should play an active role by using all
means in its mandate, as well as regional mediation
efforts and its good offices, to facilitate dialogue among
the parties to the conflict. I take this opportunity to

Furthermore, the Wagner Group takes advantage of
its position to carry out systematic exploitation of natural
resources. Such resources should benefit the economy
of the Central African Republic. I therefore call for the
removal of ambiguity in United Nations reports caused
by references to “other security personnel”, which is
confusing. If such personnel were bilaterally deployed
and notified to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central
African Republic, then the State in question should
take full responsibility for those atrocities. If atrocities
were committed by Wagner Group mercenaries, the
Sanctions Committee has never been notified of their
presence, which is not in line with the embargo renewed
by the Council in July.
With regard to the statement by the Minister of
Justice of the Central African Republic on 1 October,
which acknowledged those atrocities, France calls
on the authorities of the Central African Republic to
ensure that there is no impunity for those responsible
for the atrocities and that they be brought to justice
swiftly. More broadly, it has implications for the future
of the Central African Republic and will pave the way
for reconciliation in the new chapter.
Next month, we will renew the MINUSCA mandate.
As recalled, MINUSCA is the best ally of the Central
African Republic — everyone must know that. It has

21-2930011/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

played a key role in countering the offensives of the
Coalition des patriotes pour le changement last winter.
It is the only mission with the legitimacy, skills and
resources to support the strengthening of institutions
and the army of the Central African Republic. It has
the support of other partners, such as the European
Union. However, MINUSCA cannot work when it is
subjected to slander on social media and in the press
and when faced with violations of the status-of-forces
agreement, which place Blue Helmets in direct danger.
France therefore calls on the Government of the Central
African Republic to do its utmost to rebuild trust
with MINUSCA.
France will propose a draft resolution that will take
into account the new political and security situation,
but also underscore the need to very swiftly implement
the increased troop ceiling, as agreed by the Council
in March. We hope to have the input of all members of
the Council.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
The A3+1 appreciates the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President
of the Central African Republic, and thanks him for
his statement.
I thank Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his informative briefing
on the situation in the Central African Republic and on
the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I also thank Ambassador
Bankole Adeoye, Commissioner for Political Affairs,
Peace and Security of the African Union; Ambassador
Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Ms. Pamela Audrey
Derom, President of the Conseil National de la Jeunesse
Centrafricaine, for their equally insightful briefings.
We commend the leadership of Special
Representative Ndiaye and express our strong support to
MINUSCA in discharging its mandate effectively amid
an increasingly challenging environment. We would
also like to take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2021/867).
We will focus on four main points in our statement,
namely, the political situation, security challenges
12/23

18/10/2021

and the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, as well as the renewal of the MINUSCA
mandate. But before that, on behalf of the A3+1, let
me welcome President Touadera’s announcement of a
ceasefire on 15 October. We call upon the armed groups
to follow suit. We encourage all parties to abide by the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation and
cease hostilities.
On the political front, we note with satisfaction the
Government-led efforts on, and commitment to, the
organization of the “republican dialogue”. We encourage
the authorities of the Central African Republic to forge
ahead with that process. In that respect, we support
the efforts of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region aimed at organizing an inclusive
dialogue that will pave the way for long-term stability
in the Central African Republic.
We underscore the necessity of ensuring the
implementation of the Political Agreement, which we
believe remains a fundamental tool to unlock stability,
security, peace and economic development in the
Central African Republic. The A3+1 is encouraged
by the active engagement of President Touadera with
regional organizations and neighbouring countries
aimed at further strengthening their cooperation
and helping support the peace process in the Central
African Republic.
We believe that regional organizations, mainly
the African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States, in their capacity as guarantors
of the Political Agreement, and out of the need for
African solutions to African problems, play a very
important role and contribute effectively to advancing
the peace process. In that regard, we equally appreciate
the constructive efforts of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and other partners for their
unwavering support to the peace process in the Central
African Republic.
We note with satisfaction the adoption of a
new calendar for the next municipal, regional and
senatorial elections. We encourage adherence to
the voter registration schedule, which will allow for
the participation of internally displaced persons,
refugee returnees and young adults. The full, equal
and meaningful participation of women is of equal
importance to the electoral process. We consider that
to be a positive step towards strengthening an inclusive
democratic process in the Central African Republic.
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

On the security front, we are deeply concerned
about the volatile situation in the west and centre of the
Central African Republic, which has resulted in civilian
casualties. We have high expectations that the recently
announced ceasefire will contribute to stabilizing the
tense security situation.
Furthermore, we welcome the Government-led
activities, with the support of MINUSCA, in the areas
of security sector reform and national reconciliation, as
well as justice and rule-of-law reform and disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation. Those
are encouraging steps on the path towards consolidating
good governance and democratic institutions.
Nevertheless, we remain deeply concerned about
the reported increase, during the reporting period,
in cases of serious human rights and international
humanitarian law violations against vulnerable and
internally displaced persons, as well as incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence, child recruitment
and continued threats and attacks against the
civilian population, humanitarian actors and United
Nations peacekeepers.
The A3+1 strongly denounces the reported
disinformation campaigns, hate speech and targeted
attacks against MINUSCA and other international
partners of the Central African Republic. We call on
Government authorities to fast-track investigations of
such violations and abuses and bring the perpetrators
to justice. In that regard, we commend MINUSCA’s
efforts to support the authorities of the Central African
Republic in ensuring transitional justice and the
protection of victims and combating impunity.
The prevailing hostile security environment has
gravely impacted the humanitarian situation in the
Central African Republic, where the civilian population
bears the brunt of the sustained tensions and increased
armed violence in several parts of the country, leading
to an increase in violence, forced displacement and
human rights violations. We are also deeply concerned
about the ever-growing threat of incidents involving
explosive devices, particularly in the west of the country.
Against that backdrop, we salute the efforts
of all humanitarian actors who are fulfilling their
duties to assist people in need in such a challenging
environment, and we urge international and regional
donors and partners of the Central African Republic
to fill the funding gap in order to sustain the
humanitarian activities.

S/PV. 8882

Before we conclude, we commend MINUSCA’s
efforts to protect civilians in accordance with its
mandate and encourage the Mission’s engagement
with all stakeholders in order to improve coordination
between MINUSCA and national defence forces.
In the light of MINUSCA’s upcoming mandate
renewal, the A3+1 supports, in principle, the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend
the mandate for one year, until 15 November 2022, and
stresses the importance of providing the Mission with
sufficient and robust capacities and resources so as to
enable it to effectively discharge its mandate.
In conclusion, the A3+1 believes that the road to
sustainable peace is not easy and that violence can lead
but to violence. We call on all parties in the Central
African Republic to prioritize the interests of their
country, put an end to the suffering of the people and
engage constructively in dialogue in order to stabilize
the situation. The people of the Central African
Republic deserve to live in peace and security and
have the right to enjoy sustainable development and
sustained prosperity.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ndiaye,
Mr. Skoog, Commissioner Adeoye and Ms. Derom for
their briefings, and we appreciate the participation and
remarks by President Touadera in today’s meeting.
Like others, Norway welcomes the unilateral
ceasefire announced by President Touadera last Friday.
We commend his choice to give peace a chance. We
urge all armed groups, particularly the members of
the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement (CPC)
that have not yet acceded to the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic — the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de Centrafrique and the Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique — to follow the Government’s example
and join the ceasefire.
This ceasefire could not be timelier. Since our most
recent meeting to discuss the Central African Republic
(see S/PV.8802), the situation has further deteriorated,
as confirmed by the visit to Bangui and Bria last
week by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic. The ceasefire could be the
first step towards bringing an end to the violence. Yet
it must go hand in hand with ending the obstruction
of the mandate implementation of the United Nations

21-2930013/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
ensuring an inclusive political dialogue.
The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2021/867) also confirms the worsening security
situation, as well as ongoing violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. All parties are to blame — the CPC
first and foremost. But, as the joint MINUSCA/Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights report published in August shows, the Forces
armées centrafricaines (FACA) and their Russian allies
from the Wagner Group were responsible for almost
half of the verified incidents, which involved nearly
500 victims. Persistent reports about the targeting of
minorities are also worrisome. The number of conflictrelated sexual violence incidents has increased sharply
by 136 per cent. The civilian population must be
protected. All parties must stop the violence and respect
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Norway commends the region for its efforts to push
the political process forward. The ceasefire is a direct
result of the third mini-summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) on the
Central African Republic and the joint road map. We
are very grateful for the efforts of Angola and Congo,
in their capacities as Chairpersons of the ICGLR and
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). The ceasefire must now pave the way for a
political solution. After months of preparations for a
dialogue, it is time to start the real work. The “republican
dialogue” should be genuinely inclusive. The political
opposition, women, civil society and armed groups that
renounce violence must be involved. We encourage the
United Nations, the African Union, the ICGLR, ECCAS
and all other stakeholders, including the members of
the Council, to intensify their efforts to bring about a
political solution to the conflict.
The Government authorities must also use the
momentum created by the ceasefire to start improving
relations with MINUSCA. Over the past few months,
the Mission continued to be deliberately obstructed
and intimidated by FACA and Russian mercenaries.
That is totally unacceptable, and we urge the Central
African Republic authorities and anyone with influence
over armed actors in the country to help stop violations
of the status-of-forces agreement and to ensure safe,
unhindered and timely humanitarian access.
14/23

18/10/2021

In conclusion, let me express our support for the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic, and the Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic. It is important that this
work, which is mandated by the Security Council, be
able to continue. We are concerned by the delays in
the appointment of new experts and encourage a swift
resolution of the issue.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, let me join
others in acknowledging the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the Central
African Republic, and thank him for his briefing. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mankeur Ndiaye for his briefing regarding progress
on the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the update on the recent political developments in
the Central African Republic. I extend our appreciation
to Ambassador Bankole Adeoye and Ambassador Olof
Skoog for their respective briefings. I also thank the
civil society briefer, Ms. Pamela Derom, for her insights.
Since our meeting in June this year (see S/PV.8802),
important political developments have taken place
in the Central African Republic. The successful
conclusion of the electoral cycle; the formation of the
new Government, with increased representation of
women; the holding of the second ordinary session of
the National Assembly; and the progressive extension
of State authority and rule of law institutions are indeed
positive signs and reflect serious efforts being made on
the ground. We appreciate the role played by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
in supporting the electoral process and the ongoing
assistance for the preparations for the local elections
scheduled for next year.
There is also forward movement on the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and related issues. President Touadera
announced a unilateral nationwide ceasefire a few days
ago. That is an important step and the fulfilment of
a commitment made at the third mini-summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), held last month in Luanda. The announcement
provides an opening for all stakeholders, including the
signatory armed groups, and could positively impact
the “republican dialogue”. We hope that the armed
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

groups will respond by giving up arms and engaging
in dialogue. We commend and support the role
consistently played by the leadership of the ICGLR and
the Economic Community of Central African States in
ensuring the commitment of the countries of the region
to finding a lasting solution in the Central African
Republic and the region. We continue to underscore that
the peace agreement is the only way forward to achieve
national reconciliation and bring political stability to
the country.
The appointments of several women leaders,
including as the President of the Commission on Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, is another
positive development.
While those developments deserve our collective
appreciation, we cannot ignore the fact that the
security situation remains fragile and volatile. A state
of perpetual insecurity exists in the areas of offensive
operations and violence-prone areas. The lives of
ordinary civilians, particularly women and children,
have worsened with increased displacement and abuses.
The halt in offensive operations and the “republican
dialogue” should provide respite to affected populations
and an opportunity for the international community
and the United Nations to scale up the humanitarian
assistance. There is also a need to expedite the process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation and security sector reform. The support
of MINUSCA and the Central African Republic’s
international partners will be important even as the
peace process gains traction.
We also note with concern incidents violating the
status-of-forces of agreement and call on the Central
African Republic authorities to proactively address that
issue. At this critical juncture, it is important that both
MINUSCA and the Central African Republic authorities
cooperate purposefully and work in harmony. Resolution
2589 (2021), adopted by the Council in August 2021,
requested the Secretary-General to report on certain
key tasks reflected in the same resolution concerning
crimes against peacekeepers. We look forward to
inclusion of those issues in the upcoming MINUSCA
reports. We also reiterate that the Comprehensive
Planning and Performance Assessment System should
be applied uniformly to all components of the Mission.
In conclusion, peace in the Central African Republic
has been elusive so far, but the recent developments
on the ground give reason to be hopeful. We need to

S/PV. 8882

acknowledge the efforts made by the Government
and support all genuine efforts towards peace and the
extension of State authority.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I welcome the participation
of the President of the Central African Republic in
today’s meeting. I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ndiaye, Ambassador Adeoye,
Ambassador Skoog and Ms. Derom for their briefings.
Hostility, poverty, displacement, sexual exploitation
and abuse, the new threat of explosive ordnance, among
others, have continued to claim lives and exacerbate
the predicaments of the people of the Central African
Republic, especially women and children.
Viet Nam shares the serious concern over the
sufferings of the Central African Republic people.
It is estimated that 3.1 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance; 2.2 million of them are in dire
need. We also take this opportunity to reiterate our
strong condemnation of attacks against civilians and
humanitarian actors, as that concerning trend has been
on the rise since the beginning of the year.
On the political front, my delegation notes with
encouragement commitments made by the Central
African Republic authorities and the aspirations
for peace and development of its people. Those
are manifested by the establishment of the new
Government, with the increased participation of women
and the successful conclusion of legislative elections.
Particularly, we welcome the nationwide ceasefire
announced by President Touadera on 15 October with
a view to giving priority to the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, the preparation for the
“republican dialogue” and the protection of civilians.
In that regard, my delegation urges all actors to
follow suit. In order to achieve sustainable peace and
development for the Central African Republic people,
there is undoubtedly no other way than rebuilding trust
and promoting dialogue among the parties concerned.
We also encourage stronger efforts with respect to
the implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform programmes,
which are key components of the success of the peace
process in the country.
My delegation greatly values the role of regional
cooperation in conflict prevention and resolution.
Owing to their knowledge of the region, regional and

21-2930015/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

subregional organizations — such as African Union,
the Economic Community of the Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR) — are well positioned in promoting
confidence, trust and dialogue among concerned
parties, thereby finding the way to settle the root causes
of conflict.
Accordingly, we commend the high-level
engagement between ICGLR countries and the adoption
of the Luanda joint road map for peace in September
2021 to help revitalize the peace process in the Central
African Republic. We believe that steps are being taken
to realize the road map and look forward to further
coordination among regional countries in that regard.
On the question of sanctions, we believe that those
measures are implemented as a temporary tool for
promoting conditions conducive to the maintenance of
international peace and security and should be lifted
when conditions allow. Regular reviews are needed to
ensure their effectiveness and impact on the long-term
objective of peace and security. The recent visit of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic showed the Council’s effort towards that end.
The support of the international community is
indispensable to alleviating the difficulties of the
people of the Central African Republic and to bringing
hope to future generations. We recognize the important
role played by MINUSCA and the vital support of other
international partners with a view to helping bolster
the capacity of the Government of the Central African
Republic to extend State authority, ensure the rule of
law and the protection of civilians. Most favourable
conditions should be created to assist the mission in
discharging its mandate and to ensure the safety and
security of peacekeepers on the ground.
In conclusion, my delegation joins others in stressing
the need for sustained and coordinated international
assistance to the people of the Central African Republic
in their search for stability and development.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of America):
Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ndiaye. It is great to see him again
and I thank him for his briefing, which clearly conveys
the enormity of the challenges confronting the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
ahead of next month’s mandate renewal.
16/23

18/10/2021

I would also like to welcome Central African
Republic President Touadera and thank him for his
leadership in declaring last week’s ceasefire. I hope
that represents a real turning point in the conflict in
the Central African Republic; in fact — for the sake
of the people of the Central African Republic — it has
to. I also thank Commissioner Adeoye and Ambassador
Skoog for their respective efforts and Pamela Derom
for her tireless efforts since the Bangui Forum and for
speaking to us today. I would also like to give a special
thank you — and we all should pause for a moment — to
the women and men of MINUSCA for the Mission’s
leadership and to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment to peace, security and
stability in the Central African Republic. We honour and
remember those who have made the ultimate sacrifice.
Today I would like to briefly discuss four points:
the ceasefire announced last week, our concerns
about recent human rights violations and abuses and
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, the work
of the Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic,
and the future of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
First, the United States welcomes the important
ceasefire announcement. We call on all armed actors
to lay down weapons immediately and recommit to
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation.
In building on this positive step, we reiterate our
commitment to working alongside with the Central
African authorities, the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region and other partners to support a peace process.
We hope that this will include an inclusive and credible
dialogue necessary for Central Africans to resolve
questions of identity, end the violence and build a better
future for their children.
Secondly, the United States remains deeply
concerned about reports of human rights violations and
abuses against civilians, including those apparently
directed at Muslim communities. MINUSCA
investigations reveal that most civilian deaths in the
past four months have been the result of indiscriminate,
disproportionate and excessive use of force by the
Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA) and what the
Secretary-General refers to throughout his report
as “bilaterally deployed and other security forces”
(S/2021/867, para. 9).
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

We all know what this term refers to — Russiansupported mercenaries invited by the Government of the
Central African Republic. Reports indicate that FACA
and individuals notified by the Russian Federation to
the Central African Republic sanctions committee as
“instructors” have committed numerous violations of
international humanitarian law and abuses of human
rights in the name of supporting the Government
of the Central African Republic. We hope that the
announcement of last week’s ceasefire will bring those
activities to a permanent halt.
The Government of the Central African Republic
has taken an important step in investigating those
deeply disturbing allegations and recognizing that
perpetrators include so-called Russian support forces.
Now, it must provide more detail on crimes identified
and hold perpetrators accountable. In addition, Russia
must hold its citizens accountable for crimes committed
in the Central African Republic — something the
country’s Government officials have said they expect
Russia to do.
In a similar vein, we must press for justice for those
harmed by United Nations peacekeepers. I commend
the Secretary-General for following the procedures
and due process outlined in resolution 2272 (2016). We
strongly encourage the Office of Internal Oversight
Services to continue interviewing victims and to help
ensure that they receive the support they require. We
also encourage all troop- and police-contributing
countries with pending cases to take immediate action
and ensure accountability for such offenses.
Thirdly, we are concerned that the work of the
Panel of Experts on the Central African Republic has
been blocked. The Council approved the Panel to ensure
independent reporting on the situation in the Central
African Republic, and we urge the swift resolution of
any concerns that some Council members may have so
that the Council can resume that important work.
Lastly, I want to underscore that the only durable
solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic
is through the full implementation of the 2019 peace
agreement and inclusive political dialogue. We welcome
progress towards the organization of a political
dialogue and contributions by regional leaders. We
urge all partners to align their efforts to support the
peace agreement, which would permit humanitarian
assistance to reach civilians in dire need. The civilians
of the Central African Republic deserve a political

S/PV. 8882

solution that will provide peace and prosperity to all
and that will save lives. They have suffered far too long.
Let us hope that last Friday’s ceasefire announcement
is the first step towards that bright future.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the briefings by Mr. Ndiaye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; Mr. Adeoye,
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
of the African Union; Mr. Skoog, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and civil
society representative Ms. Derom.
Mexico welcomed the announcement of a unilateral
ceasefire by President Touadera last Friday, to whom
we are grateful for his briefing and whom we welcome
at this meeting. The ceasefire is a gesture that gives
reason for hope and that together, with preparations
for the “republican dialogue”, reopens the way towards
reconciliation following the continued deterioration of
the security situation resulting from the actions of the
Coalition des patriotes pour le changement.
The armed groups of the Central African Republic
must now respond positively to the Government’s call
to re-establish adherence to the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. Mexico calls on regional and subregional
organizations to pursue their efforts towards an inclusive
dialogue in which Central African women will enjoy
full, equal and meaningful participation. We also call
on neighbouring countries to contribute to that process
and respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Central African Republic to end the conflict, in
which the main victim has been the civilian population.
My country believes that in order for the ceasefire
to contribute to breaking the cycle of violence, all
actors in the Central African Republic must work on
three central issues.
First, it is imperative to improve coordination
between the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) and the Government.
We note with concern how violations of the status-offorces agreement and campaigns seeking to discredit
MINUSCA’s work have persisted in recent months.
It is also discouraging to note that some aspects of
the Mission’s mandate have not made significant
progress, owing, inter alia, to a lack of dialogue with
the authorities.

21-2930017/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

Mexico believes that MINUSCA and the
Government of the Central African Republic must
review the priorities of the Mission in order to
prioritize the most important ones related to the
current circumstances. In that regard, the Government
elected by the Central African people must lead the
way in upholding its international obligations and its
commitments linked to the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation.
My country is convinced that the Central African
authorities will know how to take advantage of the
resources made available by the international community
through MINUSCA to support the operationalization
of the State and prevent the institutional vacuum from
being filled by those who have made violence their way
of life. In that regard, Mexico supports the extension of
MINUSCA’s mandate, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report (S/2021/867).
Secondly, we believe that it is particularly
important to resolve the problems that are delaying the
implementation of the demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration programme and the special mixed
security units. The success of those programmes is the
best incentive to encourage members of armed groups
to renounce violence and contribute to strengthening
the security sector. Mexico therefore calls on all
actors concerned to marshal the necessary human and
financial resources for making progress in that area.
Thirdly, we call on the authorities of the Central
African Republic to cooperate closely with MINUSCA
to improve the arms and ammunition control system in
the country, in accordance with international standards.
The creation of a coherent information system on
stockpiles and ammunition, as well as the development
of the needed infrastructure and technical equipment to
exercise effective control over weapons in the hands of
the security forces, are simply imperative.
Those actions are aimed at preventing weapons
from being diverted to the enemies of the State and
building its military superiority over armed groups.
In parallel, work must be done with neighbouring
countries to improve border controls and prevent
weapons from continuing to flow illegally to armed
groups. That entails tackling in a coordinated manner
the financing model used by those groups to equip
themselves, which is based on the illegal exploitation
of natural resources. We call on all actors to respect the
arms embargo imposed by the Council.
18/23

18/10/2021

In conclusion, Mexico condemns the alarming
increase in incidents involving explosive devices,
given their appalling humanitarian consequences.
We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks
carried out against humanitarian personnel and
human rights violations, particularly acts of conflictrelated sexual violence. We urge the authorities of the
Central African Republic to investigate and punish
all those responsible for the incidents documented by
MINUSCA. Reconciliation will be possible only if
built on justice for the victims of the conflict in the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all our briefers — Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ndiaye, Ambassador Adeoye,
Ambassador Skoog and Ms. Derom — for their
presentations. We also welcome the participation of
President Touadera and support the findings set out in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/867).
I should like to make four points.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes President
Touadera’s announcement on Friday of a unilateral
ceasefire. We now urge the President to press for
real progress on the peace process. It is imperative
that all political actors, including the Government,
armed groups and the opposition, move ahead with a
constructive and inclusive national dialogue. A fully
inclusive and sustained peace process is critical if the
Central African Republic is to attain lasting peace
and security. The United Kingdom welcomes regional
engagement and also welcomes the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region joint road map
announced in September.
Secondly, like France, the United States and others
here, the United Kingdom remains concerned by
credible reports of human rights abuses committed by
the Russian mercenary group Wagner in the Central
African Republic. Those abuses are not only wrong;
they are a driver of conflict and undermine the vital
work of international peacekeepers and the authorities
of the Central African Republic. Wagner does not offer
long-term security answers in Africa. The United
Kingdom joins other Council members in calling for
a full investigation of their human rights abuses and in
stressing that their activities must comply fully with the
United Nations arms embargo.
Thirdly, the increase in violence perpetrated by
armed groups that are signatories to the Political
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic is unacceptable. The United Kingdom
is ready to agree appropriate measures, including
United Nations sanctions, in response. Higher levels
of violence contribute to the increase in the number
of internally displaced people and food insecurity and
cause further harm to the civilian population.
Finally, we are concerned by continued reports of
status-of-forces-agreement violations, which hinder
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in the execution of its mandate. The
sustained and coordinated disinformation campaigns
against the United Nations and the Mission are
unacceptable. We call on the Government of the
Central African Republic to work with MINUSCA
to ensure that the agreements are fully implemented
and respected.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that this
moment, following the ceasefire announcement, is
an opportunity to advance peace and security for the
people of the Central African Republic. In that context,
MINUSCA’s role in the country remains critical, and
I welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
extend MINUSCA’s mandate.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I, too, wish to thank the briefers for their important
contributions this morning. I wish to extend particular
recognition to Ms. Derom, whose presence here today
demonstrates the continued desire of the people of the
Central African Republic to see the advent of peace and
security in the country. I also wish to thank President
Touadera for his presence here this morning.
We are meeting here today at a time of hope that
represents a unique opportunity for the people of the
Central African Republic. We welcome the adoption of
the joint road map for peace during the recent minisummit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. The announcement made by President
Touadera of an immediate ceasefire on 15 October
has created a space for dialogue. I echo the SecretaryGeneral in calling upon all stakeholders to immediately
respect that ceasefire. Such a letting up in the conflict
could provide the people of the Central African Republic
with the opportunity to have a society that lives in
security, which is the society that they deserve. That
would also enable armed groups and the Government
to take additional measures to move towards a future

S/PV. 8882

of peace. We cannot let this opportunity slip through
our fingers.
The 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic remains
vital to achieving a just and lasting peace in the Central
African Republic. All stakeholders in the country must
commit to the implementation of the agreement in an
inclusive fashion and in such a way that guarantees
the full participation of women, ethnic and religious
minorities and young people. The work done at the
regional level, which has made a significant contribution
to the ceasefire, has been and will continue to be vital
in that process. The Council must continue to support
such work.
We also welcome the adoption of a timetable for
local elections. The people of the Central African
Republic have time and again expressed their desire
to exercise their democratic right to vote. All citizens
must exercise their right to vote in a climate of absolute
security, and I call upon all stakeholders in the Central
African Republic to respect that right.
At this critical juncture, I encourage the
authorities to recognize the invaluable contribution
made by women — a contribution that, I would say,
women have always made — to society in the Central
African Republic. I underscore the importance of
doing everything possible to seize this opportunity
to encourage and support the full and significant
participation of women as voters, candidates and
elected officials.
(spoke in English)
I want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ndiaye and the staff of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
for their work in the country in a significantly challenged
environment. I also call for an immediate and definitive
end to violations of the status-of-forces agreement.
The civilian population has borne the burden
of insecurity and violence in the Central African
Republic. Humanitarian needs in the country remain
significant. With nearly two thirds of the population
depending on humanitarian assistance, it is imperative
that during this cessation of hostilities the Government
and all armed actors in the country ensure unimpeded
humanitarian access.

21-2930019/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

There is no doubt that grave violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law, including conflict-related sexual
violence, have been committed during this most
recent period of insecurity. We are deeply concerned
by continuing allegations of violations and abuses
perpetrated by national and bilaterally deployed and
other security personnel. We welcome the action that
the authorities of the Central African Republic have
taken in establishing the commission of inquiry and the
release of the resulting summary report.
We urge the Government to ensure that the
perpetrators of all such abuses and violations are held
fully accountable, regardless of their nationality or
affiliation. If insecurity is to be seriously tackled, there
simply can be no place for impunity.
Ireland is deeply troubled by reports and allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse in the Central
African Republic.
We welcome the action taken by the United Nations
in response to serious allegations last month. We
encourage further examination and strengthening of
prevention and accountability measures at the Mission.
The United Nations must ensure that all victims and
survivors are given the assistance, protection and
justice that are their right.
Sanctions are an important tool utilized by the
Security Council to support the restoration of peace
and security in the Central African Republic. I reiterate
Ireland’s support for the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), which visited
the Central African Republic last week. We offer
our appreciation for the essential work of the Panel
of Experts, and we look forward to the appointment
of experts to this important panel with the hope that
delays to this process will end swiftly.
As we seek to end conflict, hope and opportunity
are precious commodities. This ceasefire offers
both, but hope and opportunity are not inexhaustible
resources. Now more than ever, peace must be pursued
with determination by all parties to create the future
deserved and sought out by the citizens of the Central
African Republic.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Representative Ndiaye for briefing us today on the latest
developments in the Central African Republic. I also
thank the other briefers for their invaluable insights and
20/23

18/10/2021

welcome His Excellency President Touadera for joining
us today.
I would like to begin by welcoming the declaration
of the ceasefire by President Touadera last Friday. This
positive momentum gives impetus to prospects for
peace and stability in the country. In appreciating this
moment, however, we remain concerned at the number
of human rights violations and abuses committed in
the Central African Republic. The reported cases on
the excessive use of force, indiscriminate killings of
civilians and conflict-related sexual violence against
women and children describe well the severity of
the situation on the ground. We strongly condemn
these violations, which have been committed by all
perpetrators, including armed groups, the national
armed forces and their Russian partners. In this regard,
we hope that the Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic will soon be fully operational to continue
their valuable work in assisting the Security Council on
the implementation of the sanctions measures.
Furthermore, we take this opportunity to commend
the good offices of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) in ensuring protection
of the civilians and in supporting the peace process.
It is regrettable that, in carrying out their mandate,
MINUSCA peacekeepers and the United Nations
personnel are subjected to hate speech, restrictions
to their freedom of movement and other unacceptable
incidents, by national forces and their partners, in
violation of the status-of-forces agreement. However,
this significantly impairs the capacity to protect
civilians or respond to their humanitarian needs.
Accordingly, we encourage the Government of the
Central African Republic, acting in the best interests
of the population, to facilitate cooperation with
MINUSCA and address the disinformation campaigns
targeting United Nations personnel.
Finally, we find it important to underline the
central role the Government of the Central African
Republic plays in ensuring accountability and bringing
perpetrators to justice. We encourage the Government
to advance essential reforms, most importantly in the
security sector and in the areas of good governance
and the rule of law, with full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in political processes.
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

In conclusion, I thank the Special Representative
for his tireless efforts and support in contributing to the
peace process in the Central African Republic.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Mankeur Ndiaye,
Bankole Adeoye and Olof Skoog for their briefings.
We also listened attentively to Pamela Derom. We
also welcome the participation of the President of the
Central African Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, in today’s meeting. His thoughts
are particularly important for the Security Council’s
consideration of the situation in his country.
We are carefully following the developments in
Central African Republic. We are convinced that the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic of 6 February 2019 is a basis
for achieving security and a stable peace in the country.
We note the efforts of the authorities, in particular
the new Government, which includes members of the
armed groups signatories to the Political Agreement,
aimed at implementing the “republican dialogue”
initiated by President Touadera. What is important is
that the authorities are intent on ensuring the principle
of inclusiveness and that the road map for dialogue
envisions the possibility of engaging the illegal armed
groups that exited the Khartoum agreement in this
process. We welcome the ceasefire announced by
President Touadera on 15 October in this regard.
We are seeing that the number of civil servants is
being increased in the regions. The number of judiciary
bodies and of police officers deployed around the
country has increased. Work has begun on preparing
municipal elections that are planned for September
2022. We support all these efforts that are aimed
at normalizing the situation in the country. This has
been made possible by the fact that the Forces armées
centrafricaines were able to push back the insurgent
forces, limit the possibility of their mounting offensive
operations and continuing armed struggle, and in
general stabilize the situation.
At the same time, the alliance of illegal armed
groups called the Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement has not desisted from its plans to seize
power by force. Bearing that in mind, we think that it is
important to contribute in every way to strengthening
the legitimately elected authorities of the Central
African Republic. It is clear that the international
community’s comprehensive and coordinated support

S/PV. 8882

for the authorities of the Central African Republic must
be continued. We welcome the active participation of
the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Economic Community of Central
African States in the efforts of the United Nations and
other foreign partners of Bangui aimed at stabilizing
the situation in the country.
In that regard, we commend the outcome of the
third mini-summit of States members of the ICGLR,
which took place on 16 September in Luanda. During
that meeting, next steps on implementing the road
map proposed by the Angolan side to ensure peace
in the Central African Republic were charted. It is
important that any mediation initiatives by subregional
organizations be implemented with the consent and
participation of the Government of the Central African
Republic.
We believe that, without providing effective
support to the Government of the country in enhancing
the combat effectiveness of its national armed forces,
it will take a long time to overcome the internal crisis.
We are convinced that a strong army and robust lawenforcement bodies are essential to ensuring a longterm improvement of the situation in the Central
African Republic.
We believe that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) must be an important element in
ensuring security in the country, bearing in mind the
functions that have been entrusted to the peacekeepers,
including to counter illegal armed groups as part of
their task of protecting the civilian population. We are
in favour of a closer coordination between MINUSCA,
Bangui and bilateral partners on the ground. We are
convinced that the full implementation of the mandate of
a peacekeeping mission is possible only by maintaining
mutual trust with the authorities of the host country.
We also firmly believe that, in selecting additional
troops to be sent to MINUSCA in accordance with
resolution 2566 (2021), the Secretariat must coordinate
closely with Bangui and give due consideration to the
views of the Central African people, including with
respect to the national composition of the military and
police personnel to be sent.
However, it must be understood that a peacekeeping
mission cannot, and should not, replace the efforts of
the national authorities. It is they that bear the main
responsibility for the fate of their country and the

21-2930021/23

S/PV.8882

The situation in the Central African Republic

protection of their population. In that regard, capacitybuilding for the Central African people must continue.
Implementing that task is frankly being hampered by
the arms embargo regime. We once again draw the
attention of our colleagues on the Security Council
to the need to heed the calls of the Central African
Republic and regional partners to lift restrictions
on Bangui.
At the request of the Central African Republic’s
authorities and with the knowledge of the relevant
Security Council sanctions committee, Russian
instructors are working in the Central African
Republic. They have successfully upgraded the
level of professional training of Central African law
enforcement personnel, which has helped to stabilize
the military situation in the country.
We once again reiterate that Russian instructors
are not taking part in hostilities. Any possible cases
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights should be investigated by the national
authorities. We have a close and mutually respectful
dialogue with them. If any information is passed on
to us by the law enforcement authorities of the Central
African Republic regarding specific incidents, it will
be carefully studied.
As for the accusations made by our colleagues
on the Security Council, we once again remind them
to pay attention to the egregious cases of human
rights violations and international humanitarian law
by their own military and private companies. They
should also analyse the results of their long-standing
military involvement in military campaigns in Africa,
Afghanistan, Iraq and other parts of the world.
I would like to reiterate that the Central African
Republic is not a platform for confrontation but a unique
opportunity to jointly help a country in extremely
difficult circumstances. Russia will continue to be
open to cooperation with all constructive forces. We
are certain that we have every opportunity to establish
such cooperation without any dividing lines and with
a balance of interests. Fighting against extremists and
stabilizing the situation in the Central African Republic
and other countries is our common task. It is our firm
conviction that in today’s world there is no place for
neocolonial practices, economic blackmail, pitting
neighbours against each other or attempts to dictate to
sovereign States with whom cooperation can or cannot
22/23

18/10/2021

be established, including military cooperation. That
mentoring attitude is convincing fewer and fewer States.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome President Touadera to today’s meeting, and
I thank him for his statement. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ndiaye;
Mr. Adeoye, Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace
and Security of the African Union; and Ambassador
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, for their briefings. I also listened
to the statement by the Central African Republic civilsociety representative.
At present, the overall political and security
situation in the Central African Republic is moving in
a positive direction. The Government of the Central
African Republic has taken a series of important
initiatives aimed at post-conflict reconstruction. The
international community should step up its support to
help the Central African Republic embark on the path
to development and nation-building.
In connection with the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/867), I wish to make the
following points.
First, the political process must continue to be
strengthened. Currently, the functioning of State
institutions in the Central African Republic is gradually
returning to normal, with the local administrations and
security sector continuing to gain strength. Next year
will see the first local elections in more than 30 years.
China welcomes the steady progress made in restoring
State authority and promoting national political life.
On 15 October, President Touadera declared a
ceasefire. That is an important decision made by the
Government of the Central African Republic in the
greater interest of national peace and development.
China welcomes that initiative and hopes that a general
ceasefire can be attained. We encourage the parties
concerned to take an active part in the “republican
dialogue” and step up the implementation of the
peace agreement through concrete actions. Peace and
development in the Central African Republic are closely
linked to the prosperity and stability of the region.
China has taken note that the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region convened
several mini-summits and drew up a road map for
the Central African Republic. We support the good
offices of regional organizations carried out on the
21-29300

18/10/2021

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8882

basis of the actual conditions and needs of the Central
African Republic in order to move the political process
forward along the right path. In turn, the international
community should provide targeted assistance based
on respect for the leadership of the Government of the
Central African Republic.

debate of the General Assembly (see A/76/PV.3). This
is a good opportunity for the international community
to collaborate and help developing countries, including
the Central African Republic, to achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and eliminate the
root causes of conflicts.

Secondly, there must be strong support for the
Government of the Central African Republic in
strengthening its capacity-building. The Government
of the Central African Republic has responded
positively to international concerns over areas such as
security sector reform, the protection of the civilians
and fighting impunity, among others, and has taken
a series of important measures to that end. However,
maintaining national security and protecting civilians
must ultimately depend on the strength of the country
itself. As the security threat from armed groups wanes,
the international community, in particular the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
should shift the focus towards helping the Government
of the Central African Republic to restore State
authority, promote the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process and facilitate judicial
institution-building. It is particularly important to help
the Central African Republic enhance its own strength
in maintaining stability so as to lay a solid foundation
for post-conflict reconstruction.

China supports the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and MINUSCA in successfully
discharging the Security Council’s mandate. We support
maintaining the status-of-forces agreement with a view
to ensuring the safety and security of peacekeeping
personnel. At the same time, when defining the future
mandate and the priorities and allocations of the relevant
capacities and resources, MINUSCA should fully heed
the views of the country concerned and strengthen
coordination and consultation with it so as to ensure
that the Mission’s activities align with the country’s
needs and priorities. That will also be a positive step
in restoring trust between MINUSCA, on the one hand,
and the central Government and the various sectors of
society, on the other.

Thirdly, it is important to help the Central African
Republic to stabilize its economy. At present, the
country faces multiple challenges, including economic
difficulties, the worsening fiscal situation, a shortage
of food and the coronavirus disease pandemic. More
than 3 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. It is important that the international
community, in particular major countries, help the
Central African Republic to recover its economy,
develop its energy resources, enhance public services
and improve people’s livelihoods. International
financial institutions, including the World Bank, must
honour their commitments by stepping up assistance
with increased inputs. The relevant countries must
restore without delay their material assistance so as to
help the country to tackle the current challenges.
China’s President, Mr. Xi Jinping, recently proposed
the global development initiative during the general

Finally, I wish to once again stress that lifting the
arms embargo touches on the sovereignty and security
of the Central African Republic. That is desired by the
popular sentiment of the people of the Central African
Republic and is echoed by countries of the region.
The Permanent Representative of the Niger, in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic, led a visit to the Central
African Republic last week. It was a good opportunity
for the Council to better understand the wishes of the
Government and the situation on the ground, which
should in turn promote a swift decision on the complete
lifting of the arms embargo on the country.
Lastly, together with the rest of the international
community, China will continue to work for peace and
development in the country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I shall now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

21-2930023/23
