S/PV.9244

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9244th meeting

Monday, 16 January 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mrs. Neves Moreira
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01562 (E)
*2301562*

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Saudi Arabia and Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: Allow me to start by welcoming
the newly elected members to the Security Council.
I look forward to working closely with them towards
a peaceful, durable and inclusive settlement of the
conflict in Yemen.
I am pleased to deliver the first briefing of the year
from Yemen. Today I held positive and constructive
discussions with the leadership here in Sana’a, as
represented by Mahdi Al-Mashat. I look forward to
continuing those conversations. In recent weeks, I
also had fruitful discussions with the President of the
Presidential Leadership Council, Rashad Mohammed
Al-Alimi, as well as with regional stakeholders in
Riyadh and Muscat. I am hopeful that we can build
on those discussions to ensure that 2023 delivers a
more peaceful and prosperous future for Yemeni men
and women.
Before discussing the current state of play and the
way forward, let me turn to the situation on the ground.
The overall military situation in Yemen has
remained stable. There has been no major escalation or
changes to the disposition of front lines. I would like
to acknowledge that the parties are continuing their
military restraint. However, we continue to see some
limited military activity along front lines, in particular
in Ma’rib, Taiz, Dhale, Al-Hudaydah and Lahij
2/19

16/01/2023

governorates, as well as along the Saudi-Yemeni border
area. Regrettably, those military activities have also
resulted in civilian casualties. I call on the parties to
respect international law and international humanitarian
law. Military activity combined with negative rhetoric
and escalatory political and economic measures create
a situation where simple miscalculation could reignite
a cycle of violence that would be difficult to reverse. I
therefore urge the parties to actively work to extend the
longest period of relative quiet we have seen in the past
eight years, which offers a much-needed reprieve for
the Yemeni population.
The absence of large-scale fighting is also positive
for the continuation of the elements operated under the
truce. Since the truce first came into force, on 2 April
2022, 97 round-trip flights have transported almost
50,000 passengers between Sana’a and Amman, with
46 flights operating since the expiration of the truce,
on 2 October 2022. Similarly, 81 fuel ships entered the
port of Al-Hudaydah, of which 29 entered since the
expiration of the truce. I welcome the continuation of
those measures, which allow Yemenis to continue to
experience the benefits of the truce beyond its formal
expiration last October.
Allow me now to turn to the current state of
mediation efforts.
I have been in continued contact with the parties
as well as with countries of the region. Discussions
have focused on options to secure agreement on
military de-escalation and measures to prevent further
economic deterioration and mitigate the impact of
the conflict on civilians. We know from experience,
however, that short-term measures and a piecemeal
approach that focuses on individual issues can provide
only temporary and partial relief. That is why I have
also been engaging the parties on embedding those
immediate-term measures in a more holistic vision and
ensuring movement towards a more comprehensive
settlement. That includes the resumption of the political
process and a nationwide ceasefire.
We are currently seeing an intensification of
regional and international diplomatic activity to
resolve the conflict in Yemen. I would like to reiterate
my appreciation for the efforts of Saudi Arabia and
Oman in that regard. We are witnessing a potential step
change in the trajectory of this eight-year conflict. The
ongoing dialogues are a possibility that should not be
wasted and that demand responsible actions.
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

While regional and international support is crucial
in both the negotiation and implementation phases of any
agreement. I would also like to stress the importance of
Yemeni ownership of the process. Many of the issues on
the table, especially those related to sovereignty issues,
can be sustainably resolved only through an inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue. My Office continues to hold
consultations with a variety of Yemeni stakeholders,
including political parties, women’s groups and civil
society. That helps to ensure that the negotiation
agenda is not solely determined by the warring sides
and that the substance developed and discussed with
the parties is informed by the perspectives and interests
of a diverse range of Yemenis.
The situation remains complex and fluid. Based
on my recent discussions with the parties, I note
the following.
The various dialogue efforts of the past months
have allowed for a clearer definition of the parties’
positions and the development of options for
mutually acceptable solutions to outstanding issues.
Nevertheless, it is important that discussions on the
short-term way forward be framed in the context of a
more comprehensive approach that delineates a clear
pathway towards a sustainable political settlement.
Some of the issues on the negotiations table cannot be
viewed in isolation. There are sequencing challenges as
well as concerns for guarantees for all sides. They need
to be addressed.
In addition to working towards a shared vision
for an end to the conflict, it is also essential to break
that vision down into concrete, actionable steps;
otherwise, challenges will arise and cause delays in
the implementation phase. Ultimately, any set of steps
should be geared towards facilitating an inclusive
Yemeni-led process, under United Nations auspices, for
sustainably resolving the conflict.
Let me conclude by reiterating that I am encouraged
by the intensified discussions that are taking place.
Yemen needs an agreement that includes a shared vision
for the way forward in order to avoid a return to fullblown conflict. I therefore urge the parties to make the
most of the space for dialogue provided by the absence
of large-scale fighting.
I would also like to reiterate my sincere
appreciation for the steadfast support of the Council.
Its united position sends a clear signal to the Yemeni
parties that the international community expects, and

S/PV.9244

is committed to helping them make progress towards, a
comprehensive settlement and a more peaceful future.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: As we usher in a new year, I am
hopeful that a decisive turn in this conflict remains
possible. We just heard very eloquently from
Mr. Grundberg about the moves he is making to make
that a reality. And I want to start by being very clear
that the most important efforts we can make as the
international community in the humanitarian, political
and any other sphere is to support Mr. Grundberg in
those most important primary efforts. I wish the Special
Envoy good luck.
However, I also fear that the year 2023 will be
another extremely difficult one for the people of
Yemen.. Humanitarian needs remain alarmingly
high, as the country’s economy continues to weaken
and basic services hang by a thread. Meanwhile,
people’s access to humanitarian assistance is being
impeded, as aid agencies are forced to contend with an
increasingly challenging operating environment and an
unencouraging funding landscape.
An estimated 21.6 million people across Yemen
will need humanitarian assistance and protection
services this year. It is precisely because that is such a
high percentage of the country’s total population that
the United Nations has for so long talked about the
humanitarian crisis in Yemen as being the worst we
see across the globe. But even that staggering figure
does not truly convey the reality or extent of people’s
suffering. It does not relay to us the impossible choices
parents make as they struggle to feed their children.
It does not tell us the story of those families whose
hopes of returning home — even in Yemen we have
displacement and refugees — are fading with each
passing year. And it does not reflect the fear and risk
that people face, especially women and girls, while
doing simple activities, such as fetching water or
walking to school.
In the coming weeks, the humanitarian community
will release its plan for the coming year to respond to
those needs. Of course, it is important to know that we
cannot do this alone. In 2022, thanks to strong donor
support, aid agencies delivered life-saving assistance
to almost 11 million people every month. We did

23-015623/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

that despite an increasingly challenging operating
environment and key funding gaps across a number of
sectors. As we begin this year, I urge the international
community to continue to stand in good faith with the
Yemeni people by giving generously to the humanitarian
appeal and narrowing the existing funding gaps for
those equally life-saving livelihood programmes. We
will do our part to strengthen the aid operation. That
includes redoubling our engagement with all parties to
the conflict to remove impediments and strengthening
monitoring and accountability mechanisms, in line with
the recommendations of the inter-agency evaluation
that was issued last year.
As we have briefed the Security Council before,
access constraints remain a major obstacle in
Yemen — one of the worst in the world. Last year,
humanitarian partners and agencies reported more than
3,300 access incidents. That is the equivalent of almost
10 per day. Collectively, those incidents — whether
being stopped at a roadblock, not allowed to start
a journey or stopped from taking needed staff on a
journey — affected the provision of assistance to more
than 5 million people. Again, 3,300 incidents and
5 million people affected by unnecessary and unhelpful
access impediments.
Bureaucratic impediments are the most frequently
reported constraints, including restrictions on
humanitarian movements and delays in visa and work
permit approvals. We have seen some progress in the
areas controlled by Ansar Allah, with approvals on
project agreements during December. But that is not
enough, as procedures remain extremely cumbersome.
We also have to cope with attempted interference,
which is prevalent at every stage of aid delivery. That
is particularly severe in areas under Houthi control,
where authorities often try to compel the selection of
certain contractors, restrict the travel of aid workers
or otherwise seek to influence aid operations. I
appeal to the leadership of Ansar Allah to remover
those unnecessary and unhelpful impediments. Those
constraints delay the delivery of urgent assistance.
I am particularly concerned about the imposition
of strict mahram requirements, primarily in areas
under the control of the Houthi de facto authorities.
Those restrictions have wide-ranging and, frankly,
unacceptable operational impacts. They prevent
Yemeni women aid workers from travelling without a
male guardian, both inside and out of the country. They
4/19

16/01/2023

curb the work of our staff. And they limit the social
and economic participation of female humanitarians.
They impede effective programme delivery by forcing
delays, or even suspensions, of critical missions and
programmes. And they are increasingly severing our
access to Yemen’s most vulnerable people — women
and girls — as they are in all countries affected by
humanitarian catastrophes. Women and girls are always
disproportionately affected by crises, and even more so
in the case of the implementation of the mahram edict.
Despite our continued engagement with the Houthi
authorities and the commitments made by them to
find solutions, we have yet to see any tangible change.
Instead, mahram restrictions have only become
more prevalent and entrenched. After many months
of discussions, we are still trying to work with the
authorities to find an acceptable path forward. But with
every day that passes without a solution, this issue is
becoming more acute and more urgent.
The security situation in Yemen also remains
difficult for humanitarian operations. Aid agencies
reported almost 150 incidents of violence against
their personnel last year, the vast majority of them
taking place in Government-controlled areas. Just last
month, the office of a humanitarian non-governmental
organization was attacked in Aden. Thankfully, there
were no casualties, but some damage to the office’s
facilities was reported. Two United Nations staff
also remain detained in Sana’a after 14 months, and
another five are still missing after being kidnapped in
Abyan almost a year ago. That is the backdrop against
which Resident Coordinator David Gressly and his
team have to operate to try to improve protection for
humanitarian workers.
The trends that I am describing — of increasing
interference, restrictions and violence against our
colleagues — should not continue. Aid workers,
including female Yemeni aid workers, must be able
to carry out their work safely, independently, rapidly
and without hindrance. Anything less is an affront to
the people we serve. I therefore appeal to all parties
to the conflict, as we have so often, to facilitate the
safe, rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian
relief to all civilians in need and protect humanitarian
personnel and assets, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Members may
have heard that paragraph before, and I am sure that
they will again.
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9244

Over recent months, we have seen signs of
increasing economic tension emerge between the
parties, with potentially harmful consequences for the
people of Yemen. We know from experience that even a
small deterioration in Yemen’s economy can have major
ripple effects for millions of people. Despite a certain
amount of currency appreciation last year, the Yemeni
rial is now trading at 1,250 to the dollar in Governmentheld areas. I believe that that is the lowest point since
the truce was announced in early April. I urge the
parties to do everything possible to avoid any actions
that could further destabilize the economy. And I call
on the international community to redouble its efforts
precisely to boost Yemen’s economy and restore basic
services, which is as crucial a priority as the many
others that we in the humanitarian community profess
to serve.

The Houthi block on oil exports has plunged the
Government of Yemen into dire economic straits. We
urge the international community to take all steps to
mitigate its impact and support Yemen’s Government at
this critical time. With the launch of the humanitarian
response plan at the end of this month, the United
Kingdom encourages all donors, current or prospective,
to remain committed to alleviating the suffering of the
Yemeni people. In order to ensure access to life-saving
assistance, we further call on the authorities in the
north and south for unfettered access for our partners
across the country. As Mr. Griffiths has outlined, the
introduction of mahram requirements in the north
does the very opposite. We call for an immediate end
to those restrictions, which curtail Yemeni women’s
ability to both deliver and access crucial aid and
remain employed.

Every month, we brief the Council on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen and advocate for
the means to respond to people’s needs, and we will
continue to do that for as long as it takes. But what the
people of Yemen really want is not more briefings with
people like me and others on the humanitarian situation.
They want a lasting end to the conflict. This brings me
back to where I began: our full support for the efforts
of Hans Grundberg, his team and all the Member States
that support his Yemeni-led search for peace under
United Nations auspices.

Lastly, I want to reiterate our concern about the
delays surrounding the operation to salvage the FSO
SAFER tanker, to which the United Kingdom has
dispersed £6 million in funding. In order to avoid an
entirely preventable crisis, we call on the United Nations
and all parties to continue working together at pace.
Urgency needs to be balanced with rigour, but we must
identify ways to avoid further delays.

The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings. We are extremely
grateful for the work that they and their teams continue
to do for the Yemeni people.
The United Kingdom welcomes efforts by all
parties to build on the relative peace we continue to see.
All steps towards a negotiated, Yemeni-led political
settlement under United Nations auspices are steps
towards the long-standing peace that Yemenis deserve.
That is the only way to fully address the humanitarian
situation, which remains dire across the country. While
efforts continue to seek a lasting solution to the conflict,
we must intensify efforts to improve the immediate
humanitarian situation and address long-term drivers
of the humanitarian crisis.

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Japan for its leadership as President of the
Security Council during the month of January and am
grateful for the convening of this first monthly briefing
of the year on the situation in Yemen. I also appreciate
the information provided by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Martin Griffiths.
The conflict in Yemen is having devastating
consequences on the civilian population. According to
estimates, by 2023, 17 million people will suffer from
food insecurity, more than 60 per cent of the population
will require international assistance for their survival,
and all Yemenis will face the effects of the deterioration
in the economy and in the provision of public services.
Ecuador rejects the acts of violence perpetrated by the
Houthis during the last quarter of 2022 that targeted
the lives and safety of United Nations personnel and
the civilian population, including children, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. Ecuador
condemns the illegal trafficking of arms and attacks on
sea ports and strategic oil infrastructure and demands
the release of humanitarian personnel and political

23-015625/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

prisoners, who have been arbitrarily deprived of
their freedom.
As proponents of the Council’s women and peace
and security agenda, we condemn the measures taken by
the Houthis to hinder the free movement of women and
the work of humanitarian personnel on the ground. As
has been discussed in depth at recent Council meetings,
adopting policies that undermine women’s basic rights
means undermining the possibility of building inclusive
and peaceful societies. Similarly, we note with concern
the findings of the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2022/493) with regard
to the persistent high number of children killed and
maimed by explosive remnants of war. In that regard,
we reaffirm the need to dramatically step up demining
efforts and the clearance of improvised explosive
devices, in line with Yemen’s obligations as a signatory
of the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction.
Ecuador acknowledges that, during the period that
the truce agreement was in force, prior to its expiration
on 2 October 2022, tensions between the parties were
de-escalated, and the civilian population saw the period
of greatest calm of the eight-year conflict. Ecuador
therefore encourages Special Envoy Grundberg to
continue his efforts to unblock the negotiations between
the Houthis and the Yemeni Government, with a view
to renewing the truce agreement for an additional
six months.
Ecuador welcomes the progress on the situation
concerning the FSO SAFER oil tanker and hopes that
the first phase of fuel transfer is carried as planned
during the first quarter of 2023.
The people of Yemen deserve peace, stability and
well-being. Ecuador joins the Secretary-General’s call
for the parties to return to the path of negotiations
aimed at finding lasting solutions by employing the
necessary Security Council mechanisms to implement
a definitive ceasefire and initiate a serious and
transparent political dialogue.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
informative briefings and express our support for their
work on the ground. I also welcome the participation
in today’s meeting of the Permanent Representative
of Yemen.
6/19

16/01/2023

Since the expiration of the truce in October 2022, a
new phase of uncertainty has begun in Yemen, despite
the relative calm that has been seen on the ground.
My country reaffirms the need to reach a new truce
and remains convinced that a peace agreement can be
reached between the parties. We note with interest the
intensive diplomatic efforts being made in the region
in order to find a solution. We are following very
closely the ongoing talks on renewing the truce in the
country and call on all stakeholders to demonstrate
responsibility, flexibility and compromise by engaging
in good faith in an inclusive, frank and constructive
dialogue whose main focus is to ensure the well-being
of the Yemeni people. In that regard, we commend all
the actors in the region for their efforts to find a way to
facilitate negotiations.
My country remains very concerned about the
welfare of children, who along with women are the main
victims of the conflict that has devastated the country.
According to a UNICEF press release published in
December, more than 11,000 children have been killed,
maimed or wounded in Yemen, and nearly 4,000 have
been recruited among those fighting on the ground. We
are also very concerned about the devastating effects of
malnutrition, especially in the governorates of Hajjah,
Al-Hudaydah, Sa’dah and Amran. The winter has also
made the humanitarian situation worse for vulnerable
people, including internally displaced persons. At least
seven newborns died recently in tents in the central
governorate of Ma’rib because of the extreme cold.
Another six newborns died in Al-Ma’acher camp owing
to the chronic lack of adequate heating and shelter. We
also note with regret the ongoing restrictions on the
movement of women humanitarian workers, which has
made their working environment more difficult. We
therefore urge the parties to ensure safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian sites and to respect international
humanitarian law.
We welcome the World Bank’s additional
$150 million contribution to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in order to build
resilience and address the rising food insecurity of
Yemen. That increased support will be allocated to the
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project,
which is jointly implemented by three United Nations
bodies, in order to scale up efforts to recover the
livelihoods of people in rural areas, boost household
food production and provide emergency assistance
to vulnerable Yemeni households. In that regard, we
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

call on the international community to make greater
efforts to address the financing gap in order to support
Yemen’s economy and public services, including its
schools and hospitals. We also take this opportunity
to reiterate the need to step up mine action efforts,
including the identification, marking and clearance of
dangerous areas.
In conclusion, Gabon reiterates its appreciation to
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg for his tireless efforts,
through dialogue, to reach a new truce agreement and
eventually a peaceful settlement of the conflict in
Yemen. That is the only way to ensure a return to lasting
peace and restore the well-being of the Yemeni people.
Mr. Issahaku (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Special Envoy Hans Grunberg and Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
At the outset, we note with regret the continuing
inability of the parties to reach an agreement to extend
the truce, despite the mediation efforts of the Special
Envoy and other stakeholders. Ahead of a new truce
agreement, it is imperative that the parties stave
off any action that has the potential to threaten the
fragile security situation in the country and escalate
violence, with its attendant consequences for the
civilian population. We therefore implore the parties to
exercise restraint and continue to observe the elements
of the truce as the negotiations proceed in order to find
common ground for its renewal. We underscore the
need for the parties to treasure and guard the benefits
that the people of Yemen have accrued following the
initial implementation of the truce agreement and the
continuing tacit observance of its tenets, including
the significant reduction in human casualties and the
resumption of international commercial flights to and
from Sana’a.
The international community, in particular the
stakeholders in the region with influence over the
parties, must leverage that relationship to implore
the parties to choose peace over violence; consensusbuilding over confrontation; flexibility over rigidity;
and above all, a return to the negotiation table with an
open mind, guided solely by the supreme interests of
the people of Yemen. Attempts to rearm will not serve
the cause of peace. After nearly a decade of fighting,
it is high time for the parties to the conflict to work
assiduously towards a long-term ceasefire in order to
create the conditions necessary for a negotiated political
solution. It is our firm belief that the Special Envoy’s

S/PV.9244

proposal for a six-month extension of the truce offers
a propitious opportunity that could ultimately lead to
such an outcome.
Addressing the humanitarian crisis that has
bedevilled the country remains of the utmost
importance and must continue to engage the attention of
the international community. As many as 21.6 million
people — a huge number — are in need of humanitarian
assistance. UNICEF also recently reported that about
11,000 children may have been killed or injured in
Yemen since 2015, with many more children at risk of
death from preventable disease or starvation, which
is deeply distressing. We urgently appeal to the donor
community to shore up its support for the humanitarian
response plan for the country in order to help alleviate
the suffering of the affected populations.
The risks posed by landmines and explosive
remnants of war in Yemen remains high and
unfortunately are now the leading causes of death
and injury in the country. Even more troubling is the
disclosure that, between July and September 2022 alone,
landmines and unexploded ordnance caused 164 deaths
or injuries in the country — 74 of them suffered by
children. As we call for increased international action to
deal with the issue, we appeal for the immediate lifting
of the bureaucratic and administrative bottlenecks that
have impeded United Nations demining efforts in the
country in order to curb that menace.
It is regrettable that impediments continue to
be put on the access of humanitarian organizations,
which are by definition impartial, to people in need of
assistance in Yemen. The imposition of administrative
and bureaucratic restrictions on the movement of
humanitarian staff, in particular female staff, has
affected the delivery of critical humanitarian aid to
segments of Yemeni society. Such interference in the
delivery of aid violates international humanitarian
law. We remind the parties of their obligation to grant
unimpeded access for the delivery of humanitarian aid
to all those in need.
Unfortunately,
the
deteriorating
economic
conditions, including the depreciation in the value of
the Yemeni rial, high inflation and rising food prices,
continue to put essential and basic supplies, including
food, out of the reach of many Yemenis. We call for
support for Yemen’s economy as part of the collective
efforts to improve the humanitarian needs of the country.

23-015627/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the parties to
put the interests of the people of Yemen above any other
interest and to make the necessary concessions as they
strive to find common ground on contentious issues in
order to renew the truce agreement.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I too would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Grundberg and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for their insightful and
powerful briefings today.
It is clear from what has been portrayed by our
briefers that the situation in Yemen remains dire. We
commend the efforts of the Special Envoy and echo his
call for the truce to be re-established with the utmost
urgency. We know that is possible, as we witnessed the
signing of a United Nations-brokered truce last year
in April, which was extended until October. Those six
months were the longest period of calm since the war
began eight years ago and brought a measure of respite
and hope to the Yemeni population. Though the truce
has lapsed, we welcome the fact that some elements of
the agreement have continued to hold and that we have
not witnessed a return to large-scale hostilities.
Nevertheless, the situation remains precarious.
Intermittent episodes of violence and confrontation
continue to be observed. It is crucial that all parties
refrain from any escalatory or confrontational measures.
Malta calls on all sides of the conflict, in particular the
Houthis, to refrain from imposing maximalist demands
and to put the Yemeni people first. There can be no
military solution to the conflict in Yemen. The parties
must immediately re-engage in the negotiation process
in good faith and work towards re-establishing a truce.
That would serve as fertile ground for further efforts to
resolve the conflict.
Malta is gravely concerned by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Yemen. Over 21 million
people, or two thirds of the Yemeni population, are in
need of humanitarian assistance. Nearly 13 million of
those in need are children, many of whom have known
nothing but the terrors of war. A total of 17 million
people are projected to experience crisis-level food
insecurity or worse. Millions of Yemenis are internally
displaced and lack the most basic access to essential
necessities. That is unacceptable from a moral and
humanitarian point of view, and we must collectively
do more to alleviate the situation.
We urge all parties to the conflict to refrain from
any hostilities that could worsen the humanitarian
8/19

16/01/2023

disaster and underscore their responsibilities to fully
abide by and respect human rights and international
humanitarian law. We call on the Houthis to open the
roads around Taiz and end the city’s blockade, which
has caused its inhabitants untold suffering for several
years. It is time to put the people first.
We also call for the rapid implementation of the first
phase of the United Nations-facilitated plan to remove
the oil from the FSO SAFER oil tanker to prevent a
potentially catastrophic environmental disaster.
An inclusive process leading to a Yemeni-led
and Yemeni-owned political solution is the only way
to bring lasting and durable peace to Yemen. Such a
process must facilitate the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, and the involvement of young
people and civil society. The persistent exclusion of
women from peace talks and formal politics continues
to undermine the prospects for realizing that peace.
Women play an indispensable role at the local and
grass-roots levels, and their participation is crucial for
a successful political process.
The increasingly limited space allowed to women
in Yemen, particularly in the light of the mahram
requirement in Houthi-controlled areas, is concerning.
Yemeni women need to be able to move freely. Women
humanitarian workers must be allowed to pass without
impediment to deliver life-saving assistance. Anything
preventing Yemenis from accessing critical aid
is unacceptable.
We reiterate our full support to all United Nationsled peace efforts, especially those of Special Envoy
Grundberg. We call on all parties to the conflict, as
well as regional actors, to continue to push for a
commitment to genuine dialogue and compromise.
We also acknowledge the flexibility and constructive
approach of the Government of Yemen on key issues
and call on the Houthis to also engage for the benefit of
the Yemeni people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Hans Grundberg, and
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Martin Griffiths, for their briefings on political and
humanitarian developments in Yemen.
We continue to closely monitor the situation in
the country. The absence of acute military escalations
unambiguously demonstrates the general inclination of
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Yemen’s leading political forces towards a renewal of
the truce. Its implementation, however, is being made
more difficult by mutual antagonism. Under those
circumstances, it is extremely important to exercise
maximum restraint and prevent any provocative
actions — especially those of a military nature — that
could lead to a catastrophe.
The necessary solutions should be sought and carried
out within the framework of an inclusive negotiation
process under the auspices of the United Nations,
which is the only way to establish peace on the basis
of the legitimate interests of all leading political forces.
Stabilization can be achieved only through direct
dialogue with the Ansar Allah movement, which has
long been part of the objective reality of the existing
military-political balance of power. In that regard, we
welcome efforts through any and all channels aimed at
breaking the deadlock in resolving the Yemeni question
and paving the way to stabilization.
The international community must now do
everything in its power to restore peace to Yemen.
At the same time, we are seeing more and more signs
that the ultimate goal of our Western colleagues is not
a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the large
number of challenges facing Yemen, which also directly
affect its neighbouring States, but, above all, ensuring
the uninterrupted export of Yemeni hydrocarbons to
the global market. We consider such an opportunistic
approach to be extremely harmful to sustainable peace
in the country.
For our part, we continue to provide all possible
assistance towards a settlement and maintain contact
with both the official authorities and the Houthis. We
are actively promoting the importance of inter-Yemeni
contacts and privileged dialogue with the Special Envoy.
We also express the hope that the Special Envoy’s
efforts will result in the development of constructive
proposals, in coordination with the parties, that could
serve as a basis not only for the resumption of the
ceasefire but also to launch a full-fledged political
process and renew the legal framework for a resolution
of the Yemeni question.
Unfortunately,
the
extremely
difficult
socioeconomic situation in Yemen persists. We
underscore the need to mobilize international efforts to
provide assistance to all those in need in the country
without exception. Any restrictions on the delivery
of food, medicine and other vital goods to all regions

S/PV.9244

of Yemen and, ultimately, blockades on the country
must be lifted in their entirety. We urge for continued
cooperation in that area with international financial
organizations, as well as support for the efforts of the
relevant United Nations entities, without any restrictions
on the work or movement of women personnel.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their briefings and their continued efforts
to lay the foundation for a comprehensive peace process
that will improve the lives of the Yemeni people.
While the United States remains concerned about
the situation in Yemen, it is important to take stock of
the progress that has been made. A year ago, fighting
was raging inside of Yemen, and Houthi attacks were
threatening civilians in the United Arab Emirates and
Saudi Arabia. Today a period of relative calm prevails,
civilian casualties have decreased dramatically, and
key elements of the truce continue. While we are
concerned about the lapse of the truce agreement, the
United States remains hopeful that the parties can reach
a new, expanded agreement that paves the way for an
inclusive, durable peace. To do so, the Houthis must
urgently change course and choose negotiations over
attacks on Yemen’s economic infrastructure.
We are seeing significant repercussions from the
repeated Houthi terrorist attacks on Yemeni ports
and international shipping. Those attacks threaten to
plunge Yemen back into conflict, to deprive Yemenis
of desperately needed resources and to worsen the
humanitarian crisis. The Houthi attacks have placed
extraordinary pressure on Yemen’s economy and have
derailed hard-won Government progress on balancing
its budget. The attacks are driving up the cost of
shipping to and from Yemen, raising the prices of
goods for families already struggling to get by. The
attacks stand in stark contrast to Houthi statements that
Yemen’s resources should benefit its people. Instead,
Houthi strikes have deprived Yemen of the tens of
millions of dollars of hard currency it needs every
month to import food and fuel to feed the population and
transport essential goods. Those attacks and the harm
that they cause to the Yemeni people must stop. The
United States hopes that the international community
will continue to take a strong stance against Houthi
terrorist attacks on Yemen’s economic infrastructure,
especially at this critical moment.

23-015629/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

Despite the ongoing period of calm, Iran continues
to send a steady flow of weapons to the Houthis. Just 10
days ago, the United States intercepted a dhow carrying
thousands of AK-47s from Iran to the Houthis, which
was the third interdiction in recent months. Such lethal
external interference can only fuel war and suffering
in Yemen, at a time when Yemenis are calling for the
Houthis to negotiate to end the war.
The best way for the Houthis to achieve their
stated goals of paying public sector salaries, harnessing
Yemen’s resources to benefit its people and improving
the humanitarian situation is for them to sit with the
representatives of the Government of the Republic of
Yemen, under the auspices of the United Nations, and
reach a political agreement. Only Yemeni-Yemeni talks
can address the fundamental question of how Yemen’s
resources are used, and only a Yemeni-Yemeni political
agreement can reverse Yemen’s dire humanitarian crisis.
We welcome the restraint of the Government of
the Republic of Yemen and its continued commitment
to peace. The Government’s ongoing support for
elements of the truce, including the facilitation of
fuel imports and continued commercial flights from
Sana’a, demonstrate the Government’s efforts to
ease the suffering of Yemenis. We also commend its
establishment of a political negotiating team, which is a
clear signal that the Government is prepared to resolve
the conflict, and we hope that team can intensify its
engagements with the Special Envoy.
On the humanitarian front, the United States
remains concerned about the reports of significant
access constraints on the aid operation, on which we
were just briefed. We support United Nations efforts
to address those challenges and urge the parties,
particularly the Houthis, to enable the provision of aid,
in line with humanitarian principles. We also call for
the immediate and unconditional release of all detained
United Nations and United States local staff, many of
whom have been detained for more than one year and
deserve to be reunited with their families.
We remain concerned about the alleged abuses
against migrants on the border with Saudi Arabia. We
urge all parties to allow United Nations investigators to
access both sides of the border in order to thoroughly
investigate those allegations.
Finally, the United States notes the important
work being undertaken to address the critical situation
posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Donors have come
10/19

16/01/2023

together to avert ecological and economic disaster. As
others have done, we urge the United Nations to take
a forward-leaning approach and consider the creative
options available in implementing that project. The
longer we wait, the greater the risk of a catastrophic
oil spill. We remain committed to helping to address
the situation and underline our expectation that the
United Nations will expedite the implementation of
the project.
In conclusion, 2023 provides a unique opportunity
for peace. The United States and the international
community stand ready to support a peace and recovery
process. However, it is the Yemenis themselves who
must choose peace. We call on the Houthis to engage
in good faith, seize this unique moment of relative calm
and choose peace and a brighter future over more war
and suffering.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings and welcome
the representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia to
today’s meeting.
In 2022, the truce gave the people of Yemen hope
for peace and tangible benefits and presented a rare
opportunity for resolving the situation in the country.
The current situation is generally stable, yet the status
quo of neither war nor peace is not sustainable and the
window of opportunity for peace will not remain open
forever. All parties concerned should act with a sense
of urgency and expedite dialogue and negotiations.
The international community should provide more
constructive assistance.
First, the international community must remain
committed to the overall objective of a political
settlement. The parties to the conflict, in particular
the Houthis, should refrain from taking any action that
could undermine mutual trust and compromise the
positive atmosphere of the peace talks. They should
demonstrate clear political will and set reasonable
expectations for matters related to the relevant issues.
China appreciates and supports the good offices of
Special Envoy Grundberg and the mediation work
carried out by Oman. Council members should remain
united, work together to facilitate the peace talks and
mobilize all parties to engage actively so as to break
the deadlock in the Yemeni political process at the
earliest opportunity.
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, the international community should
alleviate the humanitarian situation that has afflicted
the Yemeni people, who have suffered the consequences
of the eight-year-old conflict. Yemen faces the most
serious humanitarian situation on the Council’s
agenda. According to the estimates of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, approximately
21.6 million people across Yemen will need humanitarian
assistance this year. China appreciates Saudi Arabia’s
provision of food aid to the poorest people in Yemen.
The international community should increase its
humanitarian and development input in Yemen and
work collectively to help the country improve its
humanitarian situation. We call on all parties in Yemen
to provide the necessary humanitarian access and
ensure the safety of humanitarian workers. The wellbeing of the Yemeni people remains a top priority. Last
month, at the first China-Arab States summit, President
Xi Jinping proposed eight major common actions
covering eight areas of cooperation — development,
food security, health, green innovation, energy security,
dialogue among civilizations, youth development and
security and stability. China plans to provide increased
humanitarian and reconstruction aid to Arab countries,
including Yemen.
Thirdly, the international community should foster
a favourable regional environment. The situation in
Yemen has important implications for the security
situation in the Gulf region, all the countries of
which aspire to peace rather than war. China remains
steadfast in supporting the countries of the region in
efforts to protect national security. We commend their
efforts to find a political solution to the situation in
Yemen and encourage countries with influence on the
situation in Yemen to provide constructive assistance.
A stable regional environment is conducive to resolving
the situation in Yemen. China encourages the Gulf
countries to address their differences though dialogue
and to build mutual trust and security together.
Mrs. Neves Moreira (Brazil): We thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their detailed and informative briefings
on the situation in Yemen. We also welcome the
representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia to today’s
meeting and look forward to their views on the matter
at hand.
Amid the eight-year-long protracted civil war,
Yemen’s legitimate Government and the Houthi militia
agreed last April to a two-month comprehensive

S/PV.9244

ceasefire. Shortly thereafter, a new governing body
emerged in Yemen — the Presidential Leadership
Council. While the negotiations proceeded, the muchneeded respite in the conflict brought a series of benefits
to the country, including a substantial decrease in
displacement, the resumption of commercial flights to
and from Sana’a International Airport and the re-entry
of fuel tankers into Al-Hudaydah port. Notwithstanding
considerable doubt that it would hold, the agreement
was renewed twice and resulted in the lowest level of
war-related casualties since the beginning of 2015.
In fact, even after its regrettable formal expiration in
October, the ceasefire continues to benefit the longsuffering Yemeni population.
As Special Envoy Grundberg previously indicated,
the enduring effects of the ceasefire represent a unique
window of opportunity for a political settlement that
should not be overlooked by the parties. To waste
that opportunity would mean worsening the suffering
of Yemeni men, women and children. Even in the
absence of large-scale hostilities, the persistence of the
status quo hinders development and prolongs the dire
humanitarian crisis in the country. Let us renew our
resolve to avoid that path and contribute to a new era
for all Yemenis.
Hundreds of thousands of people have already
perished; in addition, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, approximately
20 million people will require humanitarian assistance
in 2023. The economic conditions have exacerbated an
already alarming food insecurity crisis in the country
that has further aggravated the security situation.
We urge all parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and to refrain
from measures that undermine the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
Brazil reiterates its steadfast support for Special
Envoy Grundberg’s efforts in favour of a sustainable
resolution of the conflict. Brazil supports a ceasefire
agreement in Yemen that can lead to a comprehensive
political process, under United Nations auspices and
with the inclusion of relevant Yemeni groups. We urge
the belligerent parties to show the necessary flexibility
and engage constructively in meaningful dialogue, with
no preconditions, in order to pave the way for a future
of peace, stability and development for Yemen.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Allow me to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Grundberg and Under-

23-0156211/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

Secretary-General Griffiths for their hard work and
their briefings today.
Since the beginning of October 2022, the members
of the Security Council have called for the truce to be
renewed, extended and expanded, and we deeply regret
that the appeal has not been heard by all. The obstructive
behaviour of the Houthis and their unreasonable
demands have hampered the renewal of the truce. We
call on the Houthis to engage in good faith to extend the
truce and reach a durable ceasefire in order to allow for
a lasting political solution to the conflict, which should
be Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned under the auspices
of the United Nations. We appreciate the efforts of
global and regional actors, such as Saudi Arabia and
Oman, and the efforts of the Government of Yemen to
renew the truce. We reiterate our appreciation for the
work of Special Envoy Grundberg and fully support
his efforts in bringing the parties together to find a
lasting solution.
The prolongation of the pain and suffering of
Yemeni people is unacceptable, and we call on the
parties, especially the Houthis, to end the hostilities and
allow humanitarian workers to deliver life-saving aid to
people who are in dire need. We deplore and condemn
all constraints that restrict humanitarian workers
from fulfilling their vital mission, and we are deeply
concerned at the imposition of mahram for aid workers.
We reiterate our call on the Houthis to put an end to that
discriminatory practice against women and allow them
to perform their duties, at a time when two out of every
three Yemenis are in urgent need of assistance.
Among those whose lives depend on humanitarian
assistance are also the 12 million children who suffer
from a lack of food, water and medical assistance. Any
attempt to prevent the provision of humanitarian aid to
children is inhumane, and their malnutrition remains
an acute challenge of the humanitarian landscape
in Yemen.
We also join the call for the immediate release of
all the staff of the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and other civilians, as well as the
employees of the United States of America and the
United Nations, who have been detained by Yemen.
We remain deeply worried and condemn the terrorist
attacks by the Houthis against international maritime
shipping and on the port infrastructure. We deplore their
economic war, which is further worsening the economic
hardship of the Yemenis and delaying the recovery of
12/19

16/01/2023

the country. The violation of the arms embargo by the
Houthis is deeply concerning. The recent seizure of
rifles that were being smuggled from Iran to Yemen is
not only a serious breach of resolution 2216 (2015) but
also another reminder of the malign activities of Iran
in the region and the determination of the Houthis to
prolong the conflict.
In conclusion, let me reiterate once more our
support for Special Envoy Grundberg and his efforts to
renew the truce.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and Mr. Martin
Griffiths for their comprehensive briefings, and I
welcome the participation in this meeting of the
representatives of Yemen and the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.
Despite the end of the truce and the disruption of the
political track due to the behaviour and procrastination
of the Houthis, the international community and all the
people of Yemen are determined to end the protracted
war and the prolonged suffering of the brotherly
Yemenis. Therefore, we reiterate our support for all
diplomatic efforts aimed at reaching a permanent
ceasefire agreement and implementing additional
economic and humanitarian confidence-building
measures in order to pave the way for all parties in
Yemen to engage in dialogue and reach a comprehensive
political solution. In that context, we commend the
positive position of the Presidential Leadership Council
and its efforts to achieve stability throughout Yemen.
We also express our firm support for the important role
played by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to end the crisis
in Yemen. We also value the mediation efforts made by
the Sultanate of Oman.
Achieving security and stability in Yemen will
require the Houthi militia to abandon its terrorist
activities and destructive agenda. The long list of
Houthi violations against the Yemeni people includes
acts of oppression and terrorism, killings and forced
disappearances. In addition, the Houthis continue to
recruit children and indoctrinate them with extremist
and violent ideologies, while treating women with abuse.
The repeated rejection by the Houthis of proposals
to renew the truce requires the Security Council to
take a stronger approach in order to discourage the
Houthis from military escalation, which we strongly
condemn, and to compel them to respond seriously to
United Nations and regional initiatives to end the war.
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9244

That stronger approach should include the adoption
of measures to enforce the arms embargo imposed on
the Houthi terrorist militia. We once again express our
deep concern at the continued violations of the arms
embargo, which threaten regional and international
peace and security. We were recently informed of a
number of shipments seized in transit to the Houthis,
which contained weapons, ammunition and explosive
materials, as well as components of missiles and drones
that could be used to launch cross-border attacks. We
reiterate that any attack by that group on neighbouring
countries will be met with a firm response by the
Arab coalition.

affected, as Mr. Griffiths reminded us. The lives of
Yemenis depend on it. While the need for humanitarian
assistance remains high, full humanitarian access and
better working conditions for humanitarian actors
must be ensured. We reiterate our deep concern about
the restrictions on United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. We are particularly concerned about the
imposition of male guardians. Several of us have
been mentioned this point. The Houthis must respect
women working for non-governmental organizations,
cease their intimidation of female aid workers, and
immediately and unconditionally release detained
United Nations and humanitarian personnel.

At the humanitarian level, we stress the importance
of de-escalation and building on the progress achieved
during the truce. The Houthi militia must stop its
economic war, which targets the economic interests
of Yemen, and lift all the restrictions imposed on
humanitarian workers, in particular women. The United
Arab Emirates will continue its humanitarian efforts to
advance the Yemeni economy and improve the delivery
of health and education services throughout Yemen.

With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, France
is proud to announce an additional contribution of
€1 million to the United Nations-led rescue plan. This
will bring our total contribution to €2.26 million. We
hope that the first phase of the plan can be quickly
implemented in order to avoid an ecological catastrophe.
We also call on the Houthis, who are currently in control
of the ship, to fully cooperate with the United Nations
in the implementation of the rescue plan.

In conclusion, as we begin a new year, we hope that
2023 will pave the way towards peace in Yemen and the
recovery of its economy, which will enable the brotherly
Yemeni people to focus their energies and capabilities
on achieving sustainable development and ensuring a
prosperous future for succeeding generations.

Thirdly, we would like to express our full support
for the Special Envoy’s efforts to prevent a resumption
of hostilities and promote dialogue between the
various Yemeni and regional actors. France recalls
its commitment to the unity and territorial integrity
of Yemen. We reaffirm our support for the Yemeni
Government, which is striving in difficult conditions to
meet the expectations of the population.

Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Hans Grundberg and Martin Griffiths for their briefings.
I also welcome the presence of the representatives of
Yemen and Saudi Arabia in the Chamber today. For my
part, I have three messages.
First, the Security Council must do everything
it can to prevent a resumption of hostilities on the
ground. The breakdown of the truce has created lasting
instability. The situation is fragile and can deteriorate
rapidly if the parties decide to resume hostilities. Eight
years of conflict in Yemen have shown that the military
option is not a solution. We therefore call on all parties,
including the Houthis, to show restraint and not give in
to the temptation of violence. The actors in this conflict
must show responsibility. Any new confrontation will
only increase the suffering of the population. France
also condemns the Houthi strategy to stifle the Yemeni
Government economically.
Secondly, it is also our responsibility to preserve
the humanitarian space, which is being seriously

France calls on the parties involved, first and
foremost the Houthis, to commit without delay and
in good faith to a political process to end the crisis.
We welcome the constructive involvement of certain
regional actors in the mediation, notably the Sultanate
of Oman. It is essential that all these mediation efforts
be carried out in perfect coordination with those of the
Special Envoy.
France calls on the Houthis to change course and
think of the interests of the Yemeni people rather than
their own ambitions. We take note of the ongoing talks
and call on the Houthis to engage fully and in good faith
with the mediation efforts undertaken by the Special
Envoy, who made a special trip to Sana’a. We also call
for progress being made towards a lasting ceasefire and
a political process among Yemenis.
Finally, France reiterates the importance of the
participation of Yemeni women in the peace process

23-0156213/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

and in the decision-making process concerning the
political future of their country. Alongside the Special
Envoy, we will continue our commitment to bringing
an end to this conflict.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and
the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
for their briefings and for the arduous work they have
carried out.
As the year begins, we strongly encourage the
ongoing efforts to reinstate the truce between the
Yemeni Authorities and the Houthis. We hope for the
continued consolidation of the tangible benefits that the
respite in fighting brought to the Yemeni people. We
deem it essential that the Security Council support these
efforts towards a political settlement of the conflict,
which can lead to durable peace and stability in the
country. At this stage, we are particularly concerned
over the unparalleled humanitarian tragedy, the
continued threat to the free movement of goods in one
of the most important points in international shipping
lanes, and the possibility of sanctuary that the conflict
might offer to terrorists and extremists.
Mozambique joins the voices of those Council
members who repudiate in the strongest terms possible
the continued violence against humanitarian personnel
and the restrictions on humanitarian work and operations.
We call for the immediate release of all aid workers
being held captive. We are also disturbed by reports
of continued recruitment of children as combatants,
as well as the widespread and indiscriminate use of
landmines and unexploded ordnance, which results in
high casualties among civilians, mostly women and
children. We wish to remind the parties involved of
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
It is Mozambique’s considered view that the risk
of relapse into renewed all-out war is still high. We
believe no efforts should be spared in averting such
a development.
We echo the calls for an urgent and generous
response by the international community to the
United Nations humanitarian appeal for Yemen. We
commend in particular the openness and willingness
of the Yemeni Government to find a negotiated solution
to the conflict. We reiterate our strong support for the
important role being played by the Special Envoy in
this process.
14/19

16/01/2023

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for their briefings
and, more importantly, for their efforts aimed at
promoting peace and protecting civilians in Yemen.
As the new year begins, Yemenis are once again
suffering the effects of rampant inflation and high
levels of food insecurity, compounded by increasingly
harsh economic measures put in place by the parties to
the conflict. People’s livelihoods have been destroyed
by devastating drought and flooding, both of which
have been exacerbated by climate change. In addition,
Yemenis have limited access to basic services, which
has increased their humanitarian needs and worsened
the human rights situation in the country.
The truce has provided a much-needed respite for the
civilian population. We echo the calls of the SecretaryGeneral and the High Commissioner for Human Rights
for the parties to the conflict to re-establish a formal
truce and work towards a negotiated settlement of the
conflict. In their words, it is time “to choose peace
for good”.
Switzerland believes that the following elements
should be part of this choice for peace.
First, we welcome the fact that a de facto truce
continues to be largely respected. We call on the parties
to continue the dialogue in good faith and to exercise
restraint. The longer-term goal of an intra-Yemeni
political settlement that involves all of society and
includes the voices of women and marginalized groups
must remain at the centre of peace efforts. We welcome
the various dialogues under way and highlight the
engagement of the Sultanate of Oman. It is important
that all those dialogues are aligned with the efforts of the
United Nations Special Envoy, whom we fully support.
Secondly, humanitarian assistance must be
guided by the needs of the affected population and be
independent of any political considerations. Currently,
the operating environment for humanitarian actors
is becoming increasingly restrictive. Rapid and
unhindered humanitarian access must be guaranteed
throughout the country and by all parties to the conflict.
All humanitarian personnel, both women and men,
must be allowed free movement in order to distribute
goods or services for the benefit of the most affected
population. We also reiterate the need to minimize
bureaucratic restrictions such as delays in approving
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

visas or work permits, as these impede an effective
response in line with humanitarian principles.
Thirdly, we have an obligation to protect children,
who are particularly affected by this conflict. Many of
them are victims of explosive remnants of war, deprived
of schooling or recruited for war efforts. We therefore
urge all parties to the conflict to protect the welfare of
children, to release them immediately from their ranks
and to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. We call on them
to implement signed action plans and commitments
on children in armed conflict. Furthermore, given the
prevalence of threats related to mines and explosive
remnants of war, we stress the importance of allowing
essential equipment for humanitarian demining to be
imported, and we call on the international community
to mobilize to fill the funding gap.
Finally, with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
Switzerland calls for a rapid implementation of the first
phase of the salvage plan. Efforts to avoid an ecological
disaster in the Red Sea must be redoubled.
The Council has repeatedly reaffirmed that the
truce must be formally restored and extended into a
permanent ceasefire. That is an essential step towards
a lasting peace in Yemen. Switzerland reiterates this
message today.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I would like to express my gratitude to the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans
Grundberg, and Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for their briefings today. Japan commends
Mr. Grundberg’s dedicated and continuous efforts
towards realizing peace in Yemen.
Stability in Yemen is critical not only for peace
and stability in the entire Middle East, but also for the
security of the adjacent sea lanes, which are directly
linked to the security of global supply chains, including
for energy. In that light, we are deeply concerned about
the unstable security situation in Yemen, which was
exacerbated by the Houthi attacks on the Al-Dabba
oil terminal and the Qan’ah seaport in October
and November.
We appreciate that the Government of Yemen and
countries of the region, including the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the Sultanate of
Oman, have made concerted efforts to renew the truce

S/PV.9244

among the parties to the conflict. There is no military
solution to this conflict. A political solution through
dialogue is the only option. We strongly support
the ongoing efforts of the Special Envoy, concerned
parties and the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement and hope that such engagement
will lead to a concrete peace process.
Japan calls on the parties concerned, especially
the Houthis, to take the necessary actions to renew the
truce in Yemen, thereby paving the way for constructive
talks towards realizing a durable peace. The longstanding conflict in Yemen has led to the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis. In order to meet the urgent needs
of people in a dire situation, Japan, as a major donor
country, has been providing humanitarian assistance to
Yemen, in cooperation with international organizations.
We commend the United Nations and all humanitarian
workers — male and female — in Yemen for their
tireless efforts to deliver assistance under extremely
difficult circumstances. All parties concerned have
to make sure that humanitarian activities are being
conducted without obstructions.
This year, Japan will continue to support the people
of Yemen by providing an additional humanitarian
assistance package. That includes assistance for the
United Nations plan for the FSO SAFER oil tanker, as
we believe it is imperative to prevent the unleashing of a
humanitarian and ecological catastrophe in the region.
However, providing humanitarian assistance alone
is not sufficient to deliver peace and stability in Yemen.
It is also important to create an environment in which
the Yemeni people, including women, can engage in
economic activity. To that end, we believe that our
assistance to strengthen the functions of the port of
Aden should play an important role in the reconstruction
of the economy. We also believe that our capacitybuilding programme for officials of the Government of
Yemen can contribute to Yemen’s economic recovery,
which is essential for long-term peace.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council that Japan
remains committed to continuing to make efforts, in
cooperation with the United Nations and countries
concerned, to realize peace and stability in Yemen.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

23-0156215/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to express my sincere
wishes for success in your tasks. I also thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of India,
for her successful presidency last month. I take this
opportunity to express our appreciation and thanks
for the role played by India, Kenya, Ireland, Mexico
and Norway during their membership in the Security
Council and to express our sincere wishes for success
to Japan, Mozambique, Ecuador, Switzerland and
Malta during their membership in the Council, which
begins this month. I also thank Mr. Hans Grundberg,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their briefings.
More than three months have passed since the
Houthi militias refused to renew and expand the truce,
which was aimed at alleviating the human suffering of
the Yemeni people. Despite the fact that the Yemeni
Government, under the guidance of the Presidential
Leadership Council, continues to show absolute
flexibility by continuing to facilitate commercial
flights to and from Sana’a airport and enabling fuel
ships to reach the port of Al-Hudaydah to alleviate
human suffering, the Houthi militias continue to deepen
the human suffering of Yemenis by manipulating the
fuel black market, obstructing the work of banks and
financial institutions and creating a parallel economy
by preventing the circulation of national currency notes
in the areas under their control. Most dangerous of all
is the insistence of those terrorist militias on rejecting
the option of peace and pushing towards violence and
a return to the beginning of the conflict through their
terrorist escalation that targets civilians, displaced
persons and the capabilities of the Yemeni people.
My country’s Government has addressed the
Council over the past months about the flagrant
violations committed by the Houthi militias, their
continual terrorist attacks on ports and economic
facilities and their explicit threats to Member States of
the United Nations. While my country’s Government
appreciates the Council’s unified voice in condemning
the Houthi terrorist attack of 21 October 2022 in
a statement to the press issued by the Council,
such statements are no longer enough, and greater
commitment to peace in Yemen must be demonstrated
16/19

16/01/2023

by using all means of applying pressure on the
terrorist Houthi militias and the Iranian regime that
supports them.
The Presidential Leadership Council reaffirms
its commitment to the option of peace and supports
the efforts of the United Nations to end the conflict
and achieve sustainable peace based on the terms of
reference of the political solution in Yemen, namely,
the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
its implementation mechanisms, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015). However, peace cannot be
achieved without a real partner who abandons the option
of war and believes in equal rights for all Yemeni people,
and who abandons violence as a means of imposing
his political agenda. Our many experiences with those
militias, the latest of which are the truce efforts, prove
to the world with conclusive evidence what the Yemeni
Government has repeatedly warned with regard to the
fact that the Houthi militias unfortunately have no desire
for peace, but are working to exploit the efforts of the
United Nations as a cover for their terrorist behaviour
against civilians and civilian facilities in Yemen and
the region, threatening international shipping lines and
evading any entreaties within the peace efforts. All of
that requires the Council and the United Nations to find
a new approach to the peace process.
In the light of the procrastination, threats and evasion
adopted by the Houthi militias, the approach adopted
during the past period has brought Yemenis nothing but
a further tightening of the Houthi grip around the necks
of Yemenis and prolonging the conflict, while enabling
the militias to undermine all efforts aimed at achieving
peace. That has led to deepening the humanitarian,
economic and social crisis, while the Houthis continue
to brainwash millions of children in so-called summer
camps, recruiting them and thrusting them into the
front lines.
They are also violating women’s rights, assaulting
them and using sexual violence as a means of suppressing
the voices of Yemeni women. In an unsurprising step
similar to that taken by the Taliban, the Houthi militias
impose the mahram system and deprive Yemeni women
of their right to education and to participate in public
life, at a time when the importance of the role and
participation of women at all levels, including efforts to
provide humanitarian aid and participate in the political
process, is evident.
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

All the efforts of the Council and the United Nations
will continue to fall short as long as the rogue Iranian
regime continues to interfere in the internal affairs
of my country. That regime continues to support the
Houthi militias in prolonging the war, taking the lives
of thousands of Yemenis and endangering regional and
international peace and security. The Iranian regime
continues to transfer weapons and military technology,
including ballistic missiles and drones, to the Houthi
militias, in flagrant violation of international
resolutions, in particular resolutions 2216 (2015) and
2624 (2022).
The interception of a group of ships carrying
Iranian weapons bound for Yemen since the end of
the truce, including a ship carrying more than 50 tons
of ammunition, fuses and propellant for missiles and
another ship carrying quantities of missile fuel and
explosive materials, in addition to a ship carrying 2,116
assault rifles, were all en route to the Houthi militias.
The Tehran regime is escalating arms smuggling
operations in preparation for a new round of conflict in
Yemen. Therefore, we call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security and to stop that destructive
behaviour, through which the Iranian regime aims
to escape from internal responsibilities and meet the
demands of the Iranian people, while destabilizing
the security and stability of the region by supporting
terrorist militias.
Over the past years, the war has destroyed Yemen’s
cities and countryside, crushed livelihoods and turned
the country into an active hotbed for exporting violence
in an attempt to turn my country into a springboard for
threatening the security of the region and the world. In
view of the repeated attacks and terrorist acts by the
Houthi militias on the Yemeni people and neighbouring
countries, the National Defence Council decided to
classify them as a terrorist organization, a measure
that requires the Security Council and the international
community to move from condemning those terrorist
acts to collective action to deter them by including
the Houthi militias in the Security Council’s list of
the terrorist groups as a means of pressure to return
to the peace track and the political process, especially
since resolution 2664 (2022) has ensured the removal
of any sources of concern related to the delivery of
humanitarian aid.
The Government of Yemen appreciates the
United Nations-led efforts to alleviate the scale of human

S/PV.9244

suffering exacerbated by Houthi terrorist attacks on oil
and economic facilities, aimed at cutting off revenues
needed to pay salaries and provide basic services.
In addition, the complexities of the economic
situation imposed by the Houthi militias by preventing
the circulation of the national currency in the areas
under their control are pushing more Yemenis to rely
fully or partially on humanitarian aid. Therefore, we
call on the international community to provide generous
support to the Yemen humanitarian response plan for
2023, pressure the Houthi militias to stop their terrorist
attacks, allow the circulation of the national currency
throughout Yemen and stop the procedures imposed on
banks operating with humanitarian organizations.
In conclusion, the situation of the FSO SAFER
tanker poses a serious threat to Yemen, the region and
the world. Unless that dossier is dealt with urgently,
the region and the world may one day wake up to an
environmental, humanitarian and economic disaster,
which will double the human suffering and will cost
tens of billions of dollars if it occurs, in addition to
disrupting international shipping lanes and destroying
the economic and living resources of millions
of people in Yemen and the region. The Yemeni
Government expressed its support and readiness to
facilitate the United Nations-led efforts to address
the situation of the tanker. However, serious concern
about the prolonged delay in the implementation of
that plan cannot be ignored. We once again call on the
United Nations to expedite the implementation of the
salvage plan in accordance with the proper procedures
to avoid an imminent and unfortunate disaster. We
warn against the manipulation and procrastination of
the Houthi militias and the exploitation of that dossier
for political blackmailing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Japan’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council, wishing you every success
during your presidency. I cannot fail to note the
positive role of the Government of Japan in alleviating
the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people, for which
we are sincerely grateful.
I would also like to congratulate the new members
that joined the Council at the beginning of this
month and wish them every success. I would like

23-0156217/19

S/PV.9244

The situation in the Middle East

as well to sincerely thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
for his valuable briefing, delivered from Sana’a, and I
commend his tireless and concrete efforts, which we
hope will succeed in bringing peace to Yemen. We also
support the efforts of the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and we
thank him for his briefing. We appreciate his and his
team’s tangible efforts in Yemen, which contribute to
alleviating the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.
Since the Houthi militias refused to extend the truce
on 2 October 2022, the United Nations has been making
efforts through Mr. Grundberg and in cooperation with
the coalition countries, specifically the Government of
my country, the United Arab Emirates, the Sultanate of
Oman and the Presidential Leadership Council, which
is the legitimate representative of the Yemeni people.
Those efforts did not stop for a moment, with the aim of
establishing peace in Yemen. We have all witnessed the
insistence of regional and international partners, along
with the legitimate Government in all its components,
on taking the peaceful path and supporting the
United Nations efforts led by Mr. Grundberg to reach
a comprehensive political solution that will get the
brotherly Yemeni people out of their current plight. The
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia continues
to support that path and the efforts of Mr. Grundberg
until a peaceful solution is reached that returns Yemen
to its people with its legitimate Government.
As is known, all Yemeni parties agreed last
year to extend the truce in accordance with the
Kingdom’s initiative to end the Yemeni crisis and
reach a comprehensive political solution in the country.
However, the Houthi militias refused to extend the
truce for political reasons and opportunistic factional
ambitions, as they reneged on their commitments at
the last minute, cancelled most of the items that were
agreed upon and submitted new demands, including the
payment of salaries in United States dollars to militia
members, refused to implement their pledge to deposit
the revenues from the ports of Al-Hudaydah in the
Central Bank of Yemen, to be disbursed to all Yemenis,
and refused to lift the siege on the besieged city of Taiz
since the coup.
On the other hand, the legitimate Government did
not reciprocate with the coup forces and did not change
its noble, humanitarian and national positions or retreat
from the concessions it made during the truce phase,
Sana’a airport is still operating and civil, commercial
18/19

16/01/2023

and humanitarian flights to a number of destinations
are continuing. The ports of Al-Hudaydah, Ras Issa and
others are operating smoothly and normally according
to the United Nations Mechanism for Inspection and
Verification. That undoubtedly reflects the awareness,
wisdom and patriotism of the leadership of the
legitimate Government when it comes to putting the
interests of the Yemeni people — all its groups and
affiliations — above all other considerations.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and neighbouring
countries have not yet sensed any real desire on the
part of the Houthi militias to end the conflict in Yemen
and reach a comprehensive political solution that
will get Yemen out of the security and humanitarian
impasse it has been in since the militia-led coup in
2014. It is indeed a delicate and extremely sensitive
moment that once again makes the Houthi leadership
face the international community and gives it another
opportunity to prioritize the Yemeni national interests,
lay down arms, accept a political solution and engage
in serious and direct talks in good faith in line with
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcome
of the National Dialogue Conference, the international
resolutions and the relevant regional initiatives. This is
a historic moment, and we hope that the Houthis will
abide by all the commitments they have already made
during the negotiations and avoid thwarting peace
efforts at the last minute.
History will record that the Security Council
has failed to take firm action regarding the atrocities
and crimes that continue to be committed by the
Houthi militias against the Yemeni people, which are
prohibited by all international laws and norms, such as
planting extremist and terrorist ideas in the minds of
younger generations within educational institutions,
the continued recruitment of children and sending them
forcefully to the battlefronts, the continued siege of
the city of Taiz, the arbitrary arrests of journalists and
activists, the liquidation of opponents, the imposition of
taxes on humanitarian work, the looting of international
aid and directing it to those who do not deserve it through
the Houthi arm called the Supreme Council for the
Management and Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and International Cooperation, and indiscriminately
planting mines that lead to the killing and injuring of
innocent civilians. In that regard, we recall that the
convoy of the Head of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodaydah Agreement, General Michael
Perry, and his accompanying team were exposed to an
23-01562

16/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East

explosion last year due to a mine planted by the Houthi
group in Al-Hudaydah.
The crimes and atrocities of the Houthi militias
also include collective punishment by depriving the
Yemeni people in areas not under the control of the
militias from obtaining power by targeting the export
of natural resources, the income of which is used to pay
teachers and workers in the public and health sectors,
as happened when the port of Al-Dabba in Hadramawt
was targeted late last year.
In short, we can say that, since the 2014 coup, the
Yemeni people have become hostages in the hands
of the Houthi militias, who control their destiny and
impose their extremist ideology on them, as well as
blackmailing the international community with the
humanitarian situation and threatening the security of
the region and the world.
In the face of such atrocities and crimes, and in
view of the responsibilities entrusted to the Security
Council, more stringent measures should be taken
against those militias if they continue to procrastinate
and reject peaceful solutions. The designation of those
militias as a terrorist group has become an urgent
matter and a demand from all peoples of the region who
wish to live in peace.
On the other hand, we call for the need to establish
an independent international supervisory committee
to follow up the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement. Events on the ground have proved that the
Houthi militias did not abide by the agreement signed

S/PV.9244

in Stockholm, as the port of Al-Hudaydah still receives
smuggled weapons and ammunition used by the militias
against the defenceless Yemeni people, including as
well to target the countries of the region. There is still a
military presence at the port. There is no international
mechanism whatsoever to monitor and check port
activities. The Houthi militias deliberately put obstacles
and impediments in the way of United Nations
monitors as they carry out their inspection tasks, in
addition to the fact that Al-Hudaydah is still full of
mines everywhere, and we believe that the port in its
current state represents a threat to international peace
and security.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to our allies
in the United States of America. Last week, a United
States marine force intercepted a ship off the coast of
Oman containing weapons and ammunition in transit
to the Houthi militias, which are supported by Iran.
That constitutes another violation against the Security
Council resolutions related to the arms embargo.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will continue to support the
international efforts in Yemen pursuant to the relevant
international and regional initiatives and resolutions.
The coalition countries will never hesitate to defend
themselves if those militias target their security and
interests, the Kingdom or the Gulf countries in any
way. Those militias will be responded to with firmness
and force.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-0156219/19
