General Auembl7 - Ninth Seaaion

12

838 (IX). Draft International Cotle of Ethics for
the me of information personnel
The Genet'al Assembly,
Recalli1,1g its previous decisions, in its resolutions

635 (Vil) of 16 December 1952 and 736 B (VIII) of
28 November 1953, concerning the draft International
Code 8 of Ethics for the use of information personnel,
Noting the Secretary-General's report' on the question of organizing an international professional conference to prepare the final text Qf such a Code,
Noting furthe,- that the information enterprises and
national and international associations which favour the
organization of a conference do not appear to constitute
a sufficiently representative group,
Reaffit'ming its interest in the improvement of standards of conduct and performance for information personnel, through measures ·adopted by professional
action,
Decides:
(a) To take no further action at the present time
in regard to the organization of such a conference ;
(b) To request the Secretary-General to transmit
the text of the draft International Code of Ethics for
the use of information personnel, together with his
report1° to the enterprises and associations with which
he has been in communication regarding this matter,
for their information and for such action as they may
deem proper.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.

839 (IX). T~hnical assistance in freedom of
information
The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 522 J
(XVII) of 29 April 1954 concerning technical assistance in freedom of information,
Autho,-izes the Secretary-General to render, at the
request of Member States, services which do not fall
within the scope and objectives of existing technical
assistance programmes, in order to assist these States
in promoting freedom of information.
514th pleoory meeting,
17 December 1954.

840 (IX). Draft Convention on Freedom of Information
The General Assembly,
Considering that it has not studied the draft Convention11 on Freedom of Information during its sixth,
seventh, eighth and ninth sessions,
Recalling its decision, in resolution 631 (VII) of 16
December 1952, that it would consider, inter alia, the
draft Convention on Freedom of Information in the
8
Ibid., Fourtunth SesS1°on, Supplement No. 4 A.
• Sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, documents A/2691 and Add. 1
and 2.
10 Ibid.
11 /bid., Seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, document A/AC.42/7 and Corr.1, annex.

light of the report 11 of the Rapporteur on Freedom of
Information to the Economic and Social Council and
after the Council had had an opportunity to examine
that report,
Noting that the Rapporteur on Freedom of Information has made recommendations for further consideration of the draft Convention,
Conside,-ing the reasons why the Convention has been
delayed, as pointed out by the Rapporteur,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council has
not made any recommendations for further action on
the draft Convention,
Considering the importance of freedom of information as a fundamental human right and the necessity
for giving the conclusion of a convention on this right
high priority in the work of the United Nations,
Noting that the draft International Covenants on
Human :Rights are to be discussed during the tenth
session of the General Assembly,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue its efforts on the technical level to promote
freedom of information ;
2. Further t'equests the Economic and Social Council
to discuss, at its nineteenth session, the draft Convention on Freedom of Information and to formulate
recommendations for the consideration of the General
Assembly, taking into account the views expressed and
the proposals made on this subject at the ninth and
previous sessions of the General Assembly;
3. Decides to discuss the draft Convention on Freedom of Information not later than at its eleventh
session, including such recommendations as the Economic and Social Council may make.
514th plenary meeting,
17 Decembet' 1954.

841 (IX). International Convention concerning
the Use of Broadcasting in the Cause of
Peace ( Geneva, 1936)
The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Convention concerning the Use of Broadcasting in the Cause of Peace
( Geneva, 1936) 13 constitutes an important element in
the field of freedom of information,
Considering that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 24 (I) of 12 February 1946, the
custodial functions mentioned in the Convention have
already been assumed by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and that the Convention is still in
force,
Considering furthe,- that by taking over, by agreement between the Parties to the Convention, the powers
and functions established by certain provisions of the
Convention, the United Nations can give full effect to
all the provisions of the Convention in question,
Decides:
1. To request States which are Parties to the International Convention concerning the Use of Broadcasting in the Cause of Peace (Geneva, 1936) to state
whether they wish to transfer to the United Nations
12 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 12.
13 See League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CLXXXVI,
1938, p. 301.

Resolutions adopted on the rePorts of the Third Committee

the functions which were performed, under the terms
of that Convention, by the League of Nations;
2. To instruct the Secretary-General:
(a) To prepare for this purpose a draft protocol
concerning the transfer to the United Nations of the
functions assigned to the League of Nations under the
International Convention concerning the Use of Broadcasting in the Cause of Peace ;
(b) To provide in the draft protocol for the accession of Members and non-members of the United
Nations which are not Parties or signatories to the
Convention, and also for such legal or other adjustments as may be necessitated by current conditions;
including new articles, based on General Assembly resolution 424 (V) of 14 December 1950, to provide that
each High Contracting Party shall refrain from radio
broadcasts that would mean unfair attacks or slanders
against other peoples anywhere and in so doing conform
strictly to an ethical conduct in the interest of world
peace by reporting facts truly and objectively, and to
provide that each High Contracting Party shall not
interfere with the reception, within its territory, of
foreign radio broadcasts ;
(c) To circulate the draft protocol to the International Convention concerning the Use of Broadcasting
in the Cause of Peace to the States Parties to that
Convention.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
842 (IX). Forced labour

The General Assembly,
Having noted Economic and Social Council resolution 524 (XVII) of 27 April 1954 concerning the
report of the Ad H oc Committee on Forced Labour,
1. Endorses the condemnation by the Economic and
Social Council of the existence of systems of forced
labour which are employed as a means of political
coercion or punishment for holding or expressing
political views, and which are on such a scale as to
constitute an important element in the economy of a
given country;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the International Labour Organisation to continue their
efforts towards the abolition of such systems of forced
labour;
3. Supports the Council's appeal to all Governments
to re-examine their laws and administrative practices
in the light of present conditions and the increasing
desire of the peoples of the world to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights and in the dignity and worth
of the human person ;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the action taken by
the Economic and Social Council in requesting the
Secretary-General and the Director-General of the International Labour Office to prepare a further report
on this subject for consideration by the Council at its
nineteenth session, setting out:

2S

(a) Whatever replies are received from Governments in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 740
(VIII) of 7 December 1953;
( b) Any new information on systems of forced
labour which might be submitted by Member States,
specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations in consultative status, together with any comments
submitted by the Governments concerned.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.

843 (IX). Status of women in private law: customs, ancient la,:'s and practices affecting the
human dignity of women

The General Assembly,
Recalling the principles set forth in the United
Nations Charter and in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights,
Considering that, in certain areas of the world,
women are subject to customs, ancient laws and practices relating to marriage and the family which are
inconsistent with these principles,
Believing that the elimination of such customs,
ancient laws and practices would tend to the recognition
of the human dignity of women and contribute to the
benefit of the family as an institution,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 547 H (XVIII) of 12 July 1954,
1. Urges all States, including States which have or
assume responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing and Trust Territories, to take all appropriate measures in the countries and Territories under
their jurisdiction with a view to abolishing such
customs, ancient laws and practices by ensuring complete freedom in the choice of a spouse; abolishin{{ the
practice of the bride-price ; guaranteeing the right of
widows to the custody of their children and their freedom as to remarriage; eliminating completely child
marriages and the betrothal of young girls before the
age of puberty and establishing appropriate penalties
where necessary; establishing a civil or other register
in which all marriages and di\'orces will be recorded ;
ensuring that all cases involving pC'rsonal rights be
tried before a competent judicial body; ensuring also
that family allowances, where these are provided, be
administered in such a way as to benefit <lirectly the
mother and child;
2. Recommends that special efforts be made through
fundamental education, in both private and public
schools, and through various media of communication,
to inform public opinion in all areas mentioned in the
second paragraph of the preamble above concerning
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and existing decr.ees and legislation which affect the status of
women.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
