United Nations

S/PV.6735

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6735th meeting
Tuesday, 20 March 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2012/133)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-26920 (E)

*1226920*

S/PV.6735

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2012/133)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia,
Canada, Finland, Japan, Norway and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jan Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/133, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and
security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: I am very honoured to brief the
Security Council for the first time in my new capacity
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Allow me to give the Council
some impressions and findings based on the first two
months of my work in that new capacity.
First of all, 10 years after the creation of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, we
face a set of ground realities that is very different from
those we found at the beginning. The international
military presence is gradually transferring full security
responsibility in Afghanistan to the Afghan National

2

Security Forces and will finish its current mission by
the end of 2014. Efforts continue to make institutions
of national and sub-national governance increasingly
capable of providing governance, the rule of law,
development and social services to the population, in
order to ensure their fundamental rights and freedoms.
Voices in support of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace and reconciliation are stronger, both from the
various parts of Afghan society and from the region.
The profile and work of the United Nations in
Afghanistan must reflect those realities and take full
account of the principles and requirements of the
transition process. Active support of those positive
trends and developments, in partnership with Afghan
authorities and society, must be at the very core of the
way we work.
During the first two months of my work in
Afghanistan, I met Government officials, political
leaders and civil society actors in Kabul and the
provinces and across the region. Starting with
President Karzai, each and every individual offered me
a warm welcome. If there was one thing I drew hope
from, it was the strong expressions of the desire for
peace. The message of the people is clear — it is time
to wind down this war.
News about the nascent peace process has
prompted a lively debate that needs to be harnessed
and fed into constructive policymaking. Under the
People’s Dialogue supported by UNAMA, Afghans
across the country share their vision of and road map
for a peace process. The Dialogue also revealed that
corruption, lack of justice and abuse of authority are
seen by many as the biggest problem facing ordinary
people, coupled with a lack of work prospects for the
growing urban population of young people.
Another important point I drew from my
meetings was a near universal recognition of the value
of the United Nations work and a great desire for
UNAMA’s continued presence.
Finally, I need to mention the recent tragedies
that marked my first weeks in Afghanistan. I again
offer my condolences and sympathies to the families of
all casualties of the recent instances of violence, be it
civilian or military. And I applaud the commitment to
full accountability.
At the same time, I passionately emphasize the
need for non-violent means of protest, even in response

12-26920

S/PV.6735

to such grave, albeit unintentional mistakes as the
recent burning of the Holy Quran. I commend the
appeals and actions of the majority of religious leaders
and community elders, who ensured that deep anger
was expressed at peaceful community gatherings. And
I condemn the sermons and appeals of those few who
called for violence. They have only brought death and
destruction, first and foremost to Afghans.
A series of killings also targeted international
troops there to help and train Afghan forces and
institutions. This is unacceptable. Such malicious acts
have potentially profound implications for these
essential efforts, for public support and for the
enduring commitment of the international community
to assisting Afghanistan and its people.
The United Nations has also been singled out for
violence by some. Notably, the UNAMA office in
Kunduz was directly attacked, which brought back
frightening memories of the seven dear colleagues of
ours killed a year ago in similar circumstances in
Mazar-e Sharif. The timely actions of the Afghan
National Security Forces ensured that no United
Nations personnel were hurt, but six persons lost their
lives. We regret these losses.
In response, international staff members have
been temporarily relocated while security is reassessed.
This may have an impact on some programmes in the
short term, and local leaders have already issued
statements appealing for their return. However, the
security of all our staff, national and international, is of
critical importance. We continue to work with the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), and
increasingly with the Afghan authorities, to address
this. I expect, and indeed request, the support and
understanding of the Afghan authorities for our
security requirements. They are sine qua non for our
continuous work and presence in the country.
Regardless of those recent tragedies, let us not
loose perspective. Recent events should not eclipse or
overshadow positive trends and developments or push
the international community, Afghanistan or the
transition process off agreed plans and timetables. The
transition so far has been on track and on target, and
the Afghan National Security Forces have so far proven
that they are up to their tasks. The Chicago summit
should firm up these developments and plans by
reaching specific and solid commitments. The absence
of such commitments would be a setback to the

12-26920

transition and stability in Afghanistan and the region.
In looking to the future, we must demonstrate that we
have learned from our mistakes of the past.
Transition,
however,
also
encompasses
accelerated Afghan leadership, responsibility and
accountability in governance, the rule of law, justice,
economic development and combating corruption and
poverty, to name but a few. Stronger efforts in
combating drug production and trafficking are
critically important, given the increase in poppy
cultivation and opium production and the consequent
increased threat to security, stability, development and
governance in Afghanistan and the region. Security
gains must be supported by progress in these areas to
make them and the transition sustainable.
Last year’s international conference in Bonn saw
commitment to enduring partnership also during the
transformation decade beyond the 2014. Mutual
commitments need to be respected by both the
international community and Afghanistan. The
challenge now is to translate political commitments
into predictable funding for the national priority
programmes, and to define a follow up mechanism for
mutual accountability between Government and its
partners for the coming decade. Tokyo will provide that
opportunity. In the coming months, the Government
and its international partners must intensify their
engagement to ensure that properly sequenced national
priority programmes serve as the basis for strategic
public and private funding and the achievement of
development outcomes identified by the Government
as fundamental to self-reliance.
Long-term support and predictability are further
enhanced by a number of comprehensive partnership
agreements between Afghanistan and its bilateral
partners. This process continues. UNAMA is working
consistently for coherent approaches on the part of the
international community in support of Afghanistan’s
development and governance challenges, including as
co-chair of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board.
Many of my Afghan interlocutors have placed
emphasis on the 2014 presidential polls. Already the
focus of intense debate and political mobilization, the
leadership change coincides with the planned
culmination of the security transfer. Elections are an
Afghan process to be managed by independent Afghan
electoral management bodies. If the results are to be

3

S/PV.6735

trusted, the majority of my Afghan partners gave me a
clear message — there is a need to strengthen and
improve Afghanistan’s electoral process, including
electoral reform, in order to increase its sustainability,
integrity, transparency and inclusiveness. A United
Nations supporting role, at the request of the Afghan
authorities, is welcome and, indeed, needed.
The value of UNAMA’s human rights work has
been repeatedly emphasized to me by all parties. As
confirmed by UNAMA’s impartial tracking and
verification of civilian casualties, 2011 was the fifth
year in a row that civilian deaths rose. Insurgent tactics
of suicide attacks and the use of victim-activated
pressure-plate improvised explosive devices account
for the majority of this toll. This is unacceptable and
contradicts even the publicly declared ban on land
mines by anti-Government forces.
Improvements in the condition of Afghan
detention centres and a reduction in the torture and
mistreatment of detainees are another concrete
outcome of our efforts. Both ISAF and Afghan
authorities have undertaken measures to address
abusive practices in Afghan detention facilities. It is
important to build on gains made to date.
In spite of legal and constitutional protections for
women, violence against women and girls remains
pervasive in Afghanistan. Improvements require the
enforcement of laws — notably the law on the
elimination of violence against women — that
criminalize and penalize violence and harmful
practices against women and girls. UNAMA will
continue to work to improve protection and to promote
the rights of Afghan women, including their
participation in public life and peace and reconciliation
processes and with regard to equal opportunities in
education and employment. Similarly, we will continue
our work for the benefit of Afghan children.
Recent months have seen some potentially
positive developments in support of peace and
reconciliation. To turn that potential into a successful
process, efforts must first of all be fully Afghan-led,
but also comprehensive and genuinely inclusive and
involve representatives of all relevant forces and
segments of Afghan society. At the same time, peace
should not be achieved at the expense of the basic
achievements of the past decade, as confirmed by the
Kabul communiqué and the Bonn Conference. In

4

moving towards a peace process, reducing civilian
deaths and injuries should be of the highest priority.
A much repeated request has been for UNAMA to
continue to support the High Peace Council and
generally make use of its good offices and services in
support of peace and reconciliation. Many have called
for a United Nations role in those nascent processes,
and there are different ideas on what form and shape
that could take and when.
Support for Afghanistan in the region has gained
momentum, as reflected, among other similar efforts,
by the recently held trilateral summit at Islamabad
between the leaders of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan,
who spoke in favour of an Afghan-led peace process. I
have been particularly impressed with the Afghan
leadership of the regionally owned Istanbul process, as
well as with how the process is progressing. I also
welcome the commitment of the supporting countries.
The work currently focuses on seven specific
confidence-building measures and on preparations for
the Kabul ministerial meeting in June, which will be
preceded next week by an important meeting in
Dushanbe of the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan.
My recent visits to Pakistan, Turkmenistan, India
and Iran provided invaluable opportunities for an
exchange of views on the support of those countries for
Afghanistan and UNAMA. We spoke about
opportunities, but I also heard words of strong concern.
I would like to thank those countries for the valuable
meetings and for their hospitality.
One of my top priorities is to ensure greater
coherence of United Nations efforts in all areas —
pragmatic, operational and policy — and to ensure that
our activities are outcome-oriented, transparent and
cost-effective. My deputy, Mr. Michael Keating, is
working with the entire United Nations system to
ensure full United Nations alignment behind a national
development strategy and the national priority
programmes, which will serve as the basis for the
United Nations pragmatic and operational coherence.
As Humanitarian Coordinator, he is working with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
promote and provide practical support for an effective
response to humanitarian needs, whether as a result of
chronic vulnerability, disasters or conflict. Also,
decades-long ongoing problems with regard to refugees
and internally displaced persons should be addressed

12-26920

S/PV.6735

on the basis of sustainable solutions that link
humanitarian efforts with development.
From the beginning of my work in Kabul, I have
been clear that the Mission and the 28 United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes present in
Afghanistan must work in support of increasing the
capacity of Afghan authorities, institutions and systems
to meet the needs of the Afghan people. That will also
guide my work in the future.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to express a warm welcome to
our good friend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš, who today spoke for the
first time in the Security Council. In a short period of
time, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has gained much confidence and admiration
from the Afghan people. We look forward to
continuing our close cooperation. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive report (S/2012/133) on
Afghanistan.
We meet today at a critical juncture in
Afghanistan’s history. It is a time in which the
culmination of the efforts of my country and of the
nations involved in the stabilization process in the past
10 years has reached a moment of truth. Today’s debate
falls within a series of important events that will shape
the contours of the international community’s work
during the transition and beyond: from the Bonn
Conference in December 2011 to the Tokyo ministerial
conference next July. After a decade, today we are also
looking into a new framework for the United Nations
mandate and work, in a situation characterized by
transition, followed by the transformation decade.
The transition process, which started with the
transfer of responsibilities to Afghan security forces a
year ago, is continuing apace. With the second tranche
completed, we are nearing the launch of the third phase
of transition, at the conclusion of which the majority of
Afghan territory will come under full Afghan security
control. By end of the transition in 2014, Afghanistan

12-26920

will assume full responsibility for security and
ownership and leadership of governance and
development. A paradigm shift is under way. The aim
is sovereignty and empowering Afghanistan to take
charge of its own destiny and turn the direct military
and civilian function of the international community
into a support and enabling role.
A successful transition requires renewed
parameters of partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community, with the guaranteed
commitment of the continuation of military, political
and financial support during the transition and the
decade of transformation from 2015 to 2024. That is
what we, Afghanistan and the international community,
set out to do last December at Bonn. That commitment
will be supported concretely in July in Tokyo.
At this stage, we hope that the assistance of the
international community, as manifested in the
commitments of the Kabul Conference in 2010 and the
Bonn Conference in 2011, will help to meet the
requisite needs of our security forces. That is crucial
for the building up, training and equipping of our
national security forces, which have proved themselves
in recent weeks to be increasingly capable of
protecting their fellow Afghans. Furthermore, the
transition dividend, channelled into Afghanistan’s
political stability, economic growth and social
advancement, will have a direct effect on fostering
sustainable peace in the country, and bring about real
change in the lives of people.
In the long term, what matters is the
establishment and strengthening of an enduring
strategic partnership that will provide us with a solid
base of mutual cooperation. Thus far, we have signed
or are negotiating long-term strategic partnerships with
our international partners, including those in the
region. In that connection, Afghanistan and the United
States are working to finalize all parts of the strategic
partnership agreement, which will ensure our combined
commitment to the future of a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. On 9 March we signed a memorandum of
understanding with the United States on the handover
of control of the Parwan Detention Facility to the
Afghan Government, and we are working to finalize
another memorandum relating to special operations in
the very near future.
An effective transition is also contingent upon the
successful outcome of the Afghan-led peace and

5

S/PV.6735

reconciliation, outreach and reintegration process. The
dynamics of the peace talks shifted with the
announcement of the opening of the Taliban office in
Qatar, which we believe will provide fresh impetus to
our peace efforts. We welcome recent measures taken
by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), which have
enhanced confidence building and will help expedite
our reconciliation efforts.
On the national level, outreach and reintegration
efforts remain essential to bringing members of the
armed opposition back into mainstream society. Nearly
3,500 anti-Government elements have been enrolled in
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Program. In
the coming months, we expect to see many more
joining the Programme and returning to normal life.
At the same time, we will continue to work with
all relevant regional and international partners to move
the peace process forward, including the United
Nations, the United States, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and
Pakistan. We are pleased that the peace process has
garnered the support it needs from all countries in the
region. Our desire for multifaceted cooperation is
embodied in the Istanbul Process, which began in
November 2011. It is a visionary step forward to
achieving a benevolent regional order, characterized by
cooperation, collaboration and shared goals. We look
forward to furthering our progress at the follow-up to
the Istanbul process this June in Kabul.
For the success of transition, we must redouble
our efforts towards a more effective, accountable and
transparent Government that is ready to deliver
services and safeguard national interests as set out in
the Kabul process. Afghanistan continues its fight to
strengthen good governance; end corruption; promote
human rights, including gender equality; combat illegal
narcotics and foster greater economic opportunities.
For Afghans, a successful transition is the key for
peace and stability. We are well aware of the
challenges, but the bitter memories of war and conflict
only strengthen our determination to work together to
secure a peaceful future. However, our confidence
needs to be deepened through real cooperation, trust
and mutual respect between Afghanistan and the
international community. The recent incidents — such
as the brutal killing of 16 innocent civilians, mostly
children and women, in the Panjwayi district of
Kandahar province, the burning of the Holy Koran

6

north of Kabul and similar atrocities — could
undermine our trust and cooperation by inciting deep
sorrow, anger and frustration among Afghan people. It
is imperative that such incidents cease immediately and
that the perpetrators be held accountable.
Over the past 10 years, the United Nations has
been in the forefront of helping the Afghan people. The
United Nations has supported the efforts of the Afghan
Government to build a more peaceful future for the
country.
While Afghanistan continues its transition, it will
still benefit broadly from the support of the United
Nations. We are thankful to the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
mandated activities, for United Nations support in
Afghanistan and for the work of the review team. The
Afghan Government fully agrees with the findings of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/133) that
UNAMA should use its good offices to continue to
support Afghan-led political processes and capacitybuilding for Afghan institutions. We appreciate the
report’s emphasis on the United Nations work to
protect the human rights of all Afghans, and we share
the report’s assertion that aid coherence in support of
Afghanistan’s development agenda is crucial.
We are satisfied with the work of the
comprehensive review. Of course, plenty of work for
us all lies on the road ahead. The size and
configuration of the United Nations presence needs to
be considered in the coming months, as well as the
application of a one-United Nations approach to
streamlining United Nations activities, based on the
evolving realities on the ground and the needs of
transition. The Government of Afghanistan looks
forward to close cooperation in that regard.
A long-term, strategic examination of the
renewed posture of the United Nations in Afghanistan
will be needed in order to answer some of the bigger
questions about the Organization’s political role, the
necessary steps towards reinforcing integration and
delivery as one, and questions about bringing more
transparency and accountability into the management
of resources and the coordination of aid during the
transition and transformation decade. I am confident
that with our strong, ongoing partnership, Afghanistan
and the United Nations are well-equipped to address all
future challenges.

12-26920

S/PV.6735

In the past 10 years, Afghanistan and the
international community have been together in fighting
terrorism and working to bring stability and peace to
the country. The fight is not yet finished. We still have
a long way to go, and we continue to struggle to
normalize the situation in the country. That is the aim
of the transition. But the transition we agreed upon
must be a responsible, unhurried and coordinated
process. Afghanistan and its people count on both the
conscience and the commitment of the international
community to remain steadfast to the many and oftrepeated assurances for a stable, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Ján Kubiš, for his briefing. My delegation
appreciates the courage and the energy with which he
has taken up his new position, and we would like to
assure him of our support — for him, for his office and
for the many able and dedicated men and women at the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the valuable work of the United
Nations in that country.
We would also like to welcome Ambassador
Tanin and to thank him and his delegation for their
close cooperation in the preparation of the draft
UNAMA mandate that the Council is scheduled to
adopt this Thursday.
My Government aligns itself with the European
Union statement to be delivered later on.
Today, I would like to touch upon three points,
namely, follow-up to the international Afghanistan
Conference in Bonn, the review process undertaken by
the Secretary-General at the Security Council’s request
in last year’s UNAMA mandate and the upcoming
UNAMA mandate renewal.
I would first like to refer to the follow-up to the
Bonn Conference, in line with the strategic consensus
reached between the international community and the
Afghan Government to affirm our mutual commitments
with regard to the transition process and the
transformation in the following decade — until
2024 — all of which now requires further spelling out
in concrete terms. The upcoming summit and

12-26920

conferences, especially those in Chicago and Tokyo,
will be opportunities in that regard.
While the international community will be
extending additional, much-needed tangible and
predictable support for the Afghan Government’s
development efforts, we note the equally high
expectations on the part of the international community
as to the continued progress on the Afghan side,
including in areas such as governance, democracy and
human rights.
In view of the transition calendar, Germany
wishes to reiterate its position that fiscal sustainability
must increasingly be at the centre of our joint efforts in
Afghanistan. Germany shares the view of the
Secretary-General that growth-oriented policies must
be a high priority. At the same time, the Afghan
Government’s leadership will be essential in designing
and sequencing its national priority programmes.
Secondly, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the comprehensive review of UNAMA’s
mandated activities and of the United Nations support
undertaken in response to the request by the Council in
last year’s UNAMA mandate resolution. Germany’s
particular appreciation goes to the review team
comprising representatives from the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security, as
well as to all those in and outside the United Nations
system who have contributed to the review.
The review was well received because it took
concerns about Afghan leadership and ownership very
seriously and because, at the same time, it carefully
analysed questions with regard to the United Nations
own coherence. The review concluded that the
emphasis of international support must be increasingly
on enabling and strengthening the role of Afghan
institutions in performing their mandated services for
the Afghan people.
Thirdly, UNAMA’s renewed mandate was
informed by important developments over the past
year, namely, the beginning of transition; important
progress on regional cooperation at the Istanbul
Conference; the strategic decision at the Bonn
Conference to enter into firm, mutual commitments
and to chart out an internationally supported decade of

7

S/PV.6735

transformation; increased momentum towards a
political process and the decision of the Council to
split the sanctions regime established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999).
All of these developments have far-reaching
ramifications that the Council will reflect in the
renewed UNAMA mandate. I am very pleased to report
the continued, very high degree of consensus in the
Council regarding the UNAMA mandate, which
exemplifies the continued importance that the Council
attaches to the situation in Afghanistan.
The other important component informing the
mandate renewal is obviously the outcome of the
comprehensive review contained in the observations
section of the report (S/2012/133) of the SecretaryGeneral of 5 March. Germany fully supports the
recommendations made therein. While consultations
are ongoing, let me inform participants about the
Council’s clear consensus that the United Nations good
offices in support of the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
processes should remain the essence of the United
Nations political mandate. That includes, increasingly,
the important field of regional cooperation. In that
context, Germany shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that the United Nations has a lot to contribute
to the inclusiveness of the political process and in
support of Afghan institutions. That also holds true for
the continued improvements in the electoral process, to
which the Afghan Government is firmly committed.
Germany also shares the opinion of the SecretaryGeneral that the protection, promotion and fulfilment
of the human rights of all Afghans should become
increasingly central to UNAMA’s mandate. The draft
mandate includes important provisions in that regard,
with a view of the role of women and girls in political
processes and the implication of those processes for
human rights, a subject on which the Council puts
special emphasis this year.
The new mandate represents a true milestone in
the relationship between the United Nations and
Afghanistan. It has been customized according to both
the imperatives of the transition process and the
comparative advantages of the United Nations. At its
core lies the strong consensus between the Government
of Afghanistan and the United Nations about the
invaluable contribution of the United Nations to a
secure, strong and democratic future for Afghanistan.

8

To conclude, Germany would like to emphasize
particularly the constructive spirit of all Council
members in the mandate negotiations and to once more
thank its Afghan partners for their close cooperation
and friendship.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš for his briefing. I also welcome to
the Security Council Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and I thank him for his
statement.
Portugal also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered in the name of the European Union.
Next Thursday, the Security Council will be
called upon to adopt a draft resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). Portugal agrees with the basic
proposals contained in that mandate. In it, the Security
Council builds upon the enhanced role of the Afghan
Government and, overall, of the national institutions in
the process of transition and increased Afghan
leadership and ownership. Such emphasis is a
recognition of the fact that Afghan institutions are on
the way to an increased capacity to undertake their
constitutional mandate for the Afghan people in all
aspects of the country’s activity. At the same time, the
proposed renewed mandate aims at striking a balance
between the growing fulfilment of that objective and
the need for an active, strong and secure presence of
the United Nations throughout Afghanistan. UNAMA’s
leadership and coordination role is thus strengthened
by such a balance, and by the clear priorities and
objectives laid out in the draft resolution.
A significant part of the transition to full Afghan
leadership and ownership is clearly the consolidation
of the rule of law and human rights sector in the
country. That is an area where the action of the State is
perhaps more visible to foreign partners and more
keenly felt by the population. In that regard, the action
undertaken to address serious problems in the
correctional system is encouraging despite the serious
challenges that still exist. It is important that UNAMA
and humanitarian actors are able to work on those
issues with relevant Government interlocutors.
On the same note, we are encouraged by the care
put into the mandate of UNAMA regarding human
rights, notably the human rights of women and girls.
The Mission’s capacity in this area will continue to

12-26920

S/PV.6735

rank high in its priorities and in ours. The Mission will
continue to support the efforts undertaken by the
Afghan authorities, such as the full implementation of
the law on the elimination of violence against women.
The Mission will also continue to assess the situation
of civilians, notably children, and the participation of
women in political life and processes in Afghanistan,
and to play a relevant role in humanitarian action. The
relevance of this task, particularly during the coming
months, cannot be overstated.
Secondly,
in
discharging
their
mission,
international forces and international assistance face a
deteriorating environment in Afghanistan. The current
situation is the product of deeply regrettable actions,
some of them mutually avoidable, some unpredictable.
These events have had a strong impact on the
population, as indeed they had on all of us friends and
partners of Afghanistan. Apologies have been made
and responsibilities accepted. It is now fundamental
that the achievements already attained by international
assistance in Afghanistan, both civil and military, are
not endangered by these events. This is an undertaking
for all stakeholders in Afghanistan, including the
national authorities.
In these circumstances, it is clear that the coming
summits and conferences will have increased
importance, namely, the NATO summit in Chicago, in
May, the conference on refugees in May in
Switzerland, the follow-up ministerial meeting of the
Istanbul conference in June and the Tokyo summit next
July. The rapid sequence of these major events is a
good measure of the commitment of the international
community to Afghanistan and the Afghan people, and
of its interest in seizing the opportunity to consolidate
the foundations of security, social and economic
development and the regional integration of
Afghanistan.
Portugal, as a partner of Afghanistan, is working
towards, and looking forward to, outcomes from those
meetings that may prove successful for the people of
Afghanistan. Broad national consensus in Afghanistan
regarding governance, development and the rule of law,
as well as on development strategies and initiatives, is
vital for a sustainable transition and, ultimately, for the
success of the peace and reconciliation process.
Recent developments in the relations between
State institutions, such as the National Assembly and
the Government, are signs to be welcomed. UNAMA’s

12-26920

role in the national political sphere, namely, by
working for the strengthening of national electoral
institutions at the request of Afghan authorities,
deserves the Security Council’s full support.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s support for
the mandate that we are preparing to approve. It is an
ambitious mandate for UNAMA, and rightly so, given
the priorities identified by the Afghan national
authorities and the United Nations. International
assistance to Afghanistan must adapt as new necessities
arise and the situation on the ground changes. I wish
the best to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš in the implementation of the mandate,
and I assure him that we in the Security Council will
continue to be ready to support the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan as required.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2012/133), which is the basis for today’s
meeting. We also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubiš and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for their respective briefings. Guatemala
supports Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve
democracy, prosperity and peace.
As we all know, Afghanistan has been on the
agendas of the Security Council and the international
community for many years. Many conferences have
been convened to mobilize resources and take steps
towards peaceful reconstruction of the country and a
better life for its people. The endeavour is a complex
one whose execution falls to the Afghan people
themselves. Progress must be made simultaneously on
political stabilization, security, development and the
rule of law.
We are concerned that the security situation
remains problematic. We especially regret the frequent
bloody incidents with civilian victims. The
international community must redouble its efforts to
support the Afghan Government in achieving sufficient
stability to move towards the gradual transfer of
security maintenance to the Government.
We support the long-term commitments taken on
by the international community at the Bonn Conference
last December, aimed at spurring political development
in the country, which depends, inter alia, on
reconciliation among various groups of the population.
We welcome the process, building on commitments

9

S/PV.6735

previously undertaken in London and Kabul, as well as
a structured follow-up and a clear timetable for its
implementation. The upcoming regional conferences in
Tokyo and Kabul will provide further opportunities for
progress.
We encourage all to carry on with the road map
and not to be sidetracked from the successes achieved
through cooperation between the international
community and Afghanistan. We must not lose sight of
the big picture, even as we recognize that much
remains to be done. Guatemala supports the transition
under the leadership and ownership of Afghanistan,
even as we acknowledge the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security. That includes
confronting the transnational problem of drug
trafficking that plagues the country and the region. We
applaud the long-term commitment of the United
Nations to cooperating with the Government and
people of Afghanistan. We lend our full support to the
excellent work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
We would like to make a few points about the
UNAMA mandate. First of all, we endorse the
recommendations of the mandate review team, which
include the United Nations taking the role of facilitator
rather than implementer. Secondly, we support
extending UNAMA’s mandate for an additional 12
months. Thirdly, we commend the Organization for
strengthening the coherence of international efforts in
Afghanistan and successfully promoting Afghan
ownership. Fourthly, despite some progress on human
rights, we call for further efforts to respect and protect
the rights of women and children. Fifthly, we believe
that UNAMA should play a more active role in
elections, which are critical to promoting democracy,
the rule of law and Afghan ownership. Sixthly, we
eagerly await the Special Representative’s of the future
presence of UNAMA at the subnational level, as called
for in paragraph 76 the Secretary-General’s report.
Lastly, we would like to mention the Afghan
Peace and Reintegration Programme. We note the
number of armed groups identified in the report as
participating in the reintegration process, which is a
highly positive development. We fully endorse the
principles and outcome of the Bonn Conference,
especially those reflected in paragraph 18 of the
Conference Conclusions. We also support the work of

10

the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), which is a positive addition to efforts for
national reconciliation in Afghanistan. We further
believe that UNAMA should continue to support the
Government’s efforts to build its capacities and to
promote the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján
Kubiš, for introducing the quarterly report of the
Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2012/133). South
Africa welcomes the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, at this debate, and we thank him for his
statement.
There has been notable progress in Afghanistan
over the past few months, particularly towards
strengthening Afghan leadership and ownership.
Significant progress has also been achieved towards
inclusive national and regional processes to enhance
peace, reintegration and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
Nonetheless, Afghanistan continues to face
challenges in its endeavour to achieve stability and
development. Key among them are the security
situation, a worsening humanitarian situation, rule of
law and human rights challenges, and continued
violence that has resulted in civilian casualties, which
continue to increase. South Africa stresses that, given
the magnitude of those challenges, a comprehensive
strategy incorporating security, humanitarian efforts,
good governance and socio-economic development is
required. In that regard, we would like to underscore
the central role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the
Government of Afghanistan and in coordinating
international assistance to the country. Crucially, the
continued role played by bilateral and multilateral
partners remains indispensable.
Political dialogue and reconciliation is a critical
factor for the Afghan people and its Government to
ensure sustainable peace for the country, which has
suffered severely as a result of continued insecurity.
We wish to affirm our principled view that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan.
In that regard, we welcome the Afghan
Government’s initiatives to engage with the armed
opposition and the continued calls by President Karzai
for the armed opposition to lay down its arms.

12-26920

S/PV.6735

Engagement with all elements of the armed opposition
should be viewed as moving the country forward and
should not in any way compromise the achievements of
the past 10 years.
With regard to efforts to strengthen political
outreach activities, we welcome the implementation of
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme,
which has already resulted in the reintegration of
thousands of ex-combatants. The Traditional Loya
Jirga, held in November 2011, was an important
catalyst in that regard. Security at the national level
should continue to be reinforced by efforts to
consolidate peace, stability and development at the
regional level.
We welcome the political dialogue and
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours
during the reporting period. There has been significant
bilateral contact between Afghanistan and countries of
the region, which has resulted in strengthened
economic, political, security and socio-cultural links.
Those initiatives intensified following the Istanbul
Conference, jointly convened by Turkey and UNAMA,
which developed confidence-building measures to
improve regional cooperation. We welcome the followup ministerial conference in Kabul, tentatively
scheduled for 11 June, to continue expanding regional
cooperation.
We further welcome the improved operational
effectiveness of the Afghan National Security Forces.
Efforts to operationalize and professionalize the
Afghan national security forces have seen
improvements at both the quantitative and the
qualitative levels. That is demonstrated by the
increased number of Afghan-led and Afghan-partnered
operations. It is an important development that should
be sustained as the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) gradually transfers full security
responsibility to the Afghan National Security Forces
by 2014.
However, we are concerned by recent
developments, which have witnessed increased
tensions between members of local communities and
ISAF forces. We call on ISAF to undertake efforts to
mitigate the loss of civilian life and to respect the
cultural and religious heritage of the population.
My delegation continues to believe that there is a
close link between development and security in
Afghanistan. The socio-economic challenges facing

12-26920

Afghanistan are significant. It is therefore important
that, despite the financial situation facing the
international community, we should continue our
support to the Government and people of Afghanistan,
in line with the commitments of the Bonn Conference,
in the area of direct financial support towards its longterm economic growth. The upcoming Tokyo and
Chicago conferences will therefore be important in
consolidating global support for Afghanistan’s longterm economic sustainability.
Over the past 10 years, UNAMA has played a
crucial role in assisting the people of Afghanistan in
laying the foundations for sustainable peace and
development.
South
Africa
supports
the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that
UNAMA’s mandate be extended for a further
12 months and that it continue its integrated mandate,
which should, inter alia, include its good-offices role
and political outreach in support of Afghan-led
processes and the promotion of the human rights of all
Afghans and a coherent international civilian
engagement with the Government’s development
agenda and programmes.
In conclusion, national ownership and leadership
remain crucial to achieving political, security and
socio-economic progress in Afghanistan as it enters the
next phase of its transition. For its part, the
international community should continue its supportive
role in the country’s move from conflict to stability and
prosperity.
I wish Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš and his team, including his new
deputy, Mr. Michael Keating, the best. South Africa
fully supports him as he diligently implements
UNAMA’s mandate.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. We commend you
for your able stewardship of the Council. We are
grateful to Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement.
We also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš for his presentation to the Security
Council today. Under his able leadership, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
is implementing a challenging mandate. Pakistan has
always supported and facilitated the work of UNAMA.
We will continue to do so.
Since its inception, UNAMA has led international
State-building efforts in Afghanistan. As Afghan

11

S/PV.6735

institutions come of age, complete national ownership
will be essential for the further consolidation of
statehood. We look forward to the increasingly
effective role of the Afghan leadership in consolidating
its institutions and transitioning to full responsibilities
in all sectors.
With a reviewed mandate, UNAMA should
continue to align itself with the transition process. To
an extent, UNAMA’s success will depend on our
collective work in the Security Council. The Council
must enable UNAMA to accomplish its goals through
clear mandates based on current and emerging realities.
UNAMA should not be used to impose concepts and
values alien to Afghanistan. We must therefore pay
closer attention to the aspirations of Afghanistan’s
leaders, as well as the sentiments of its people.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/133)
under consideration today provides useful updates on
the situation in Afghanistan. It documents progress in
the
transition
process
against
pre-identified
benchmarks. The Secretary-General has rightly
observed that progress in governance, development and
the sustainable transition of security responsibilities is
fundamentally interlinked.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights
fiscal sustainability and potential funding gaps in
meeting the various targets in transition. It also
cautions against donor fatigue and fiscal constraints in
the international economic climate.
Pakistan would underline the need to maintain the
current political and financial interest in the transition
process with a view to setting Afghanistan on a
sustainable course. The value of long-term
international support and private-sector investment in
facilitating the transition cannot be overemphasized.
Pakistan is committed to peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan. As agreed by our two
Foreign Ministers in Kabul on 1 February in the joint
communiqué, a strong, robust and independent bilateral
relationship between the two countries would greatly
contribute to peace and stability in the region.
Our two countries are deepening interaction in
diverse fields, including security, development, transit
trade, economic and investment linkages, as well as
infrastructure and energy. Our documented bilateral
trade has reached $2.5 billion, and the target set by our
leadership to double it by 2015 is well within reach.

12

Our bilateral assistance to Afghanistan is more than we
provide to any other country.
The Pakistan-Afghanistan Joint Economic
Commission met in Islamabad last month to discuss the
modalities and timelines of various transregional
economic projects. Our scholarship programme for
facilitating higher education for Afghan students in
Pakistan continues. More than 1,400 Afghan students
have so far benefited from the programme, while some
7,000 are enrolled in Pakistani universities and
professional colleges.
High-level contacts between Pakistan and
Afghanistan drive our bilateral cooperation. We were
privileged to receive the Afghan President, together
with the President of Iran, for the third Trilateral
Summit in Islamabad last month. As mentioned earlier,
our Foreign Minister visited Kabul last month.
Parliamentary exchanges between the two countries are
strengthening mutual understanding and goodwill.
In the area of security, Pakistan has always
sought closer engagement with Afghanistan and its
international partners on real issues that lie beyond
polemics. The interdiction of illegal cross-border
movement is vital to counter-terrorism, drug trafficking
and commercial smuggling. It is a joint responsibility
that needs to be discharged more vigorously. Pakistan
has established over 1,000 posts along its border with
Afghanistan. More than 120,000 Pakistani troops are
deployed on our side of the border, at considerable
financial cost. That needs to be matched on the other
side of the international border.
In a country suffering from four decades of war,
the vexing question of security cannot be resolved by
externalizing the problem or by imposing another war.
Military action cannot solve problems. We only
disregard the lessons of history at our peril. A
comprehensive approach, under complete Afghan
ownership, is essential to address that challenge.
Pakistan has always supported an Afghan-led and
inclusive reconciliation process. The Prime Minister of
Pakistan, in response to an unprecedented appeal from
the President of Afghanistan, issued an important
statement on 24 February to reiterate our long-standing
support for reconciliation in Afghanistan. Allow me to
share some portions of the Prime Minister’s statement.
“Pakistan firmly believes that respect for
Afghanistan’s sovereignty, independence, unity

12-26920

S/PV.6735

and territorial integrity, as well as adherence to
the principles of non-interference in internal
affairs of Afghanistan, are of critical importance.
“We also believe that the process of national
reconciliation must be Afghan-led and Afghanowned. It is imperative to promote an intraAfghan consensus for a durable political
settlement that accords with the aspirations of the
people of Afghanistan as a whole.
“It is now time to turn a new leaf and open a
new chapter in the history of Afghanistan. It is
time to now combine the strengths of the Afghan
people, in the true spirit of our noble religion,
Islam, and in accordance with the glorious
traditions of the Afghans to build peace and bring
prosperity to Afghanistan.
“In this spirit, I would like to appeal to the
Taliban leadership as well as to all other Afghan
groups, including Hezb-e Islami, to participate in
an
intra-Afghan
process
for
national
reconciliation and peace.
“It is our sincere hope that the Taliban
leadership, Hezb-e Islami and all other political
leaders will respond positively to my appeal and
agree to enter into direct negotiations in the
framework of an intra-Afghan process for
reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan.
“Pakistan, on its part, will support such
authentic Afghan processes and is prepared to do
whatever it can for its success.
“I would like to appeal to the international
community
to
support
fully
national
reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan.
“We are appreciative of the important
initiative taken by President Hâmid Karzai and
wish the intra-Afghan process every success”.
I will conclude by highlighting two issues of
great importance that I hope will be duly prioritized in
the work of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš and in our collective deliberations on
Afghanistan.
The first is Afghanistan’s drug situation, which is
a serious and growing challenge not only for
Afghanistan but also for the rest of the world. Our
collective goal must be the complete eradication of
poppy cultivation in Afghanistan and the progressive

12-26920

elimination of manufacturing and trafficking of its
higher derivatives. We need to pay more attention to
this issue, which, regrettably, has worsened recently.
Pakistan will also support regional efforts and
initiatives to counter that threat.
Another issue is the presence of a large number
of Afghan refugees in Pakistan and Iran. We would like
to remind the Council that, during the past 10 years,
Pakistan’s average annual budget for Afghan refugees
has nearly doubled in proportion with international
assistance, despite a decrease in the number of
refugees. After 10 years of internationally assisted
State- and institution-building in Afghanistan, this
trend should be reversed and more refugees should be
repatriated. We urge further international focus on the
issue and hope that the forthcoming conference in
Switzerland will be a success. I will also urge the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
record the trends and figures relating to the return or
otherwise of Afghan refugees in his quarterly reports
on a regular basis.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling
today’s debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I also
thank
Ambassador
Zahir
Tanin,
Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his statement. I
would also like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, for his briefing, as well as the SecretaryGeneral for his latest report on Afghanistan
(S/2012/133).
It is now more than a decade since the
international community came together to assist
Afghanistan with the shared goal of eliminating
terrorism and the safe havens and sanctuaries from
where it is emanating, right from the source, and to set
the country firmly on the path to security, recovery,
reconstruction and development. The progress made
since then cannot be underestimated. However, the
journey is far from over and much more needs to be
done.
The past few months have witnessed important
high-level regional and international engagements on
Afghanistan. The Istanbul Conference provided a new
impetus to regional cooperation. The outcome of the
Bonn Conference, as embodied in the Bonn Conference
conclusions, was an expression of the international
community’s determination and political commitment

13

S/PV.6735

to sustained long-term engagement with Afghanistan.
The upcoming conferences in 2012, including the
NATO Chicago summit in May on security, the followup ministerial conference in Kabul in June on regional
cooperation, and the Tokyo conference in July on
development, will be instrumental in working out
clearly defined and tangible commitments in the
critical areas of security, governance, trade promotion,
investment, development and regional cooperation.
Afghanistan today confronts major challenges in those
areas and will need considerable assistance for a long
time, even beyond the transition period, to address
those challenges.
First and foremost, concerns on the security front
continue to remain paramount. The security gains
achieved during the past decade are still tenuous and
fragile. Terrorist violence shows no sign of receding
and civilian casualties attributed to anti-Government
elements have continued to rise over the past five
years, reaching a peak in 2011. Terrorism continues to
find sustenance and support from a dangerous osmosis
of ideologies, ambitions, training and operations
among the syndicate of terrorism in the region, with
suicide terrorism as its main technique and targets not
limited to Afghanistan. We need concerted action to
isolate and root out this syndicate of terrorism, which
includes elements of the Al-Qaida, Taliban, Lashkar-eTaiba and other terrorist and extremist groups
operating mainly from outside Afghanistan’s borders.
Afghanistan needs assistance and support to build
its capacity to tackle the critical challenges of
terrorism, including suicide terrorism, the religious
extremism that fuels it and the drug trafficking that
sustains it. We must ensure that Afghanistan’s security
is ensured through non-interference in its internal
affairs. As Afghanistan moves ahead with the transition
process, we must take into account the conditions on
the ground and the capacity of Afghanistan’s security
forces to preserve the sovereignty, independence and
territorial unity and integrity of its nation. We support
all efforts for the strengthening of the Afghan national
security forces, which must go hand-in-hand with the
strengthening of their training and equipping and the
financing and development of their capabilities beyond
the transition period.
India fully supports an Afghan-led and Afghanowned inclusive and transparent process of
reconciliation, as opposed to an internationally led
process, accompanied by an inclusive political process

14

and intra-Afghan dialogue that should include a
renunciation of violence, a cutting of ties to terrorist
groups, and abiding by the Afghan Constitution, with
its protections for human rights, including the rights of
women. It is important that any political settlement not
jeopardize the hard-won gains of the past 10 years and
be acceptable to all constituents of the Afghan nation.
It is also important that the ongoing transition remain
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, be multi-faceted and
ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans and lead to the strengthening of
the Afghan State and its institutions.
With the gradual drawing down of international
forces from their combat role, there are already signs
of a transition recession. We need to find ways and
means to ensure that Afghanistan does not feel
abandoned by a withdrawal of assistance, at least in
terms of the quantity, if not the quality, of the
international
assistance
required
post-2014.
Afghanistan needs a comprehensive strategy for its
national development that takes into account its leastdeveloped-country status, its landlocked situation,
three decades of conflict and a continued existential
threat to its future from terrorism. Such a strategy
should
include
security
cooperation,
official
development
assistance,
capacity-building
and
education, trade access, and foreign investment
commensurate with its needs. I am happy to state that
India is contributing in each of those areas. That is also
the approach that we advocate for the Chicago, Kabul
and Tokyo conferences. We also need greater
coherence, coordination and further streamlining of the
international community’s development-related efforts,
including the aligning of assistance with the Afghan
national priorities.
In that context, we are appreciative of the
comprehensive review of UNAMA’s mandated
activities, the support of the United Nations in
Afghanistan and the intention of the United Nations
Development Programme to channel 80 per cent of its
assistance through on-budget support. India appreciates
and supports the work of UNAMA.
India
has
age-old
historical,
cultural,
civilizational and economic ties with our neighbour
Afghanistan. During the last decade, our relationship
has been renewed and consolidated by our partnership
in the rebuilding and reconstruction of Afghanistan.
India has pledged up to $2 billion in development and
humanitarian assistance. India signed a comprehensive

12-26920

S/PV.6735

strategic partnership agreement with Afghanistan last
October, looking to 2014 and beyond. The agreement
creates an institutional framework for our multifaceted
relationship in the fields of political and security
cooperation, trade and economic cooperation, capacitybuilding and education, and social, cultural, civil
society and people-to-people relations. In November
2011, we eliminated baseline customs duties on
virtually all imports from Afghanistan, and in
December a consortium of seven Indian public and
private-sector companies were awarded the bid for
three blocks of the Hajigak iron-ore reserves.
We are happy to note the enhanced focus on
regional cooperation. Today our investments in
Afghanistan require a framework of regional
collaboration for their success. The South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, of which
Afghanistan is a full member, is an important vehicle
for regional economic cooperation within the South
Asian region. Cooperation linking our region with
Central Asia through Afghanistan could be a critical
confidence-building measure.
We firmly believe that Afghanistan’s growth
strategy has to be built upon its comparative advantage
of abundant natural resources and its strategic
geographical location. Those would have to be the
building blocks of our vision for Afghanistan as a hub
linking the Middle East and West Asia with Central and
South Asia through trade and transit routes, railways
and highways, energy pipelines and electricity
networks, economic projects and cross-investments.
Such cooperation should not be only between
Governments, but have civil society and business as
stakeholders. In that context, we are prepared to make
long-term investments in Afghanistan, as we have done
with Hajigak.
In conclusion, India believes in a strong,
independent, sovereign, stable, united, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan at lasting peace with itself and
its neighbours. We look forward to a future for
Afghanistan where the Afghan people can live in peace
and security and decide their future themselves,
without outside interference, coercion or intimidation.
We must continue to work together with renewed
vigour and unity of purpose towards strengthening the
efforts of the Afghan Government in seeking solutions
that are inclusive and led by the Afghan people
themselves. It is in that spirit that India will remain

12-26920

engaged with the international community’s efforts in
Afghanistan.
The President: I would remind Council members
that if they are circulating lengthy written statements,
they do not need to read out the entire text.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján
Kubiš, for his concise and comprehensive report on the
situation in Afghanistan. The sensitive functions and
responsibilities that he has assumed have our full
support. I should like also to thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
his analysis of the situation, presented from the point
of view of his Government. I wish to convey to him the
support of the Government of Colombia and our strong
wish that the transition process be efficient and
peaceful.
We are optimistic about the progress made in the
transition towards Afghan responsibility and leadership
in the area of security. It is significant that a growing
percentage of the Afghan population can now be found
in areas where the Afghan forces have assumed
control. However, it is important to continue to
increase the capacity and professionalism of the
Afghan security and police forces. To that end, the
contribution of the International Security Assistance
Force and the NATO training mission in Afghanistan
will be essential.
We must continue to work towards ensuring
Afghan responsibility in the area of security within the
framework of the agreed timetable, which is set to
conclude at the end of 2014, while taking into account
developments on the ground. The recent security
incidents and the regrettable episodes of violence to
which they led should not hinder the implementation of
prior agreements. In that respect, we support the talks
under way aimed at resolving differences, and we look
forward to a satisfactory outcome.
We wish to stress the importance of ensuring that
the transition focuses not only on security but also on
improving the living conditions of the Afghan people.
We agree with the Afghan Government that confidence
in State institutions and prosperity are fundamental to
the building and strengthening of stability. We
recognize in that respect that the progress made in the
area of security could be affected by weaknesses in the

15

S/PV.6735

areas of socio-economic development, governability
and the rule of law.

ownership and leadership and respect
sovereignty and unity of Afghanistan.

Violence remains one of the main factors
affecting the Afghan people. We reiterate our call on all
parties to the conflict to abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law and human rights
and to take all of the necessary measures to ensure the
protection of civilians. Practices such as suicide attacks
and the use of improvised explosive devices are
ruining the process of dialogue and reconciliation. It is
important that all parties show clearly that they are
committed to the process in which the Afghan
Government is engaged.

In that context, regional cooperation is very
relevant. We wish to stress the numerous initiatives
undertaken at the bilateral and subregional levels to
address and amicably resolve the various humanitarian
and security problems burdening Afghanistan and its
neighbours — efforts that also contribute to bolstering
the building of confidence.

We welcome the efforts of President Hamid
Karzai to ensure that progress in a credible process of
dialogue and reconciliation is a high priority for his
Government. We hope that the recent difficulties will
be overcome and that the Taliban will commit to
renouncing violence and terrorism and accept the
Constitution.
We deem very timely the comprehensive review
of the activities of UNAMA in implementation of its
mandate and hope that it will contribute to the
effectiveness of the activities undertaken by the various
United Nations entities with a presence on the ground.
The one United Nations approach, supported by the
Government of Afghanistan, has the support of my
country as well.
UNAMA must continue to focus its efforts on
critical areas so as to facilitate the political process
aimed at peace, reconciliation, security, governability,
economic development and regional cooperation. The
United Nations must continue to play a central role in
coordinating international efforts with national
authorities in order to ensure their coherence with the
priorities identified by Afghanistan and prevent any
duplication of effort.
The international community reaffirmed its
willingness to work with a stable, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan at the Bonn Conference. To
that end, a number of mutual commitments were made
in the area of governability, security, the peace process,
economic and social development and regional
cooperation. The Kabul process and the national
priority programmes must continue to be the policies
that govern the commitments and responsibilities under
that process on the basis of the principles of Afghan

16

for

the

Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for his
comprehensive briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2012/133). I
would also like to congratulate the German delegation
on its crucial role in managing the Afghanistan issue
and for preparing the draft resolution that will be
submitted to the Council on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The report under consideration takes stock of the
substantial progress made towards the established
indicators, some of which I will mention here. With
respect to security, the public image of the Afghan
police has considerably improved, thanks not only to
an increase in well-supervised officers who are trained
and operational, but also to the increased role of
women within those ranks.
In the political sphere, since the Bonn Conference
of 5 December 2011, the debate has focused on the best
way to manage the country’s political process. From
that standpoint, national and regional mechanisms to
strengthen efforts towards promoting peace as well as
reintegration and reconciliation processes that are open
to all have been developed and implemented by the
Afghan Government. Furthermore, my country is
delighted that the Afghan authorities are seeking to
extend their authority in the context of good
governance throughout the country, to which the
authorities have given top priority.
The involvement of the international community
in capacity-building, both of the authorities and
institutions, that particularly takes into consideration
women’s participation and constitutionally guaranteed
quotas is to be commended. Additionally, it should be
noted that the fight against corruption has also seen
progress due to establishment of the joint Government
and international Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee composed of national and international

12-26920

S/PV.6735

representatives. Its mission is to achieve 60 welltargeted aims, which Togo would like to see
implemented gradually.
Those encouraging developments have only been
possible thanks to a favourable regional context that is
characterized by good cooperation on work aimed at
peace and security in the country. Such a positive sign
could herald the return of investors in Afghanistan.
Togo hopes that the ministerial conference
planned for Kabul in June will lead to conclusions
capable of improving coherence within existing
regional mechanisms. My country would like to take
the opportunity of this debate to express its gratitude to
the countries that are friends of Afghanistan for their
unwavering efforts to help the country to bring an end
to the situation of crisis and insecurity in which it has
found itself for now more than a decade.
We hope that the NATO summit and the Tokyo
conference to take in place in May and July,
respectively, will constitute a turning point in the
implementation of the mutual commitments defined in
Bonn in December 2011. At the same time, Togo is
delighted that UNAMA, in line with the pertinent
resolution, is implementing its political mandate,
which includes good offices, political outreach, support
for the processes under way in the country related to
strengthening electoral institutions as well as
protecting, promoting and enforcing human rights.
Furthermore, we cannot fail to mention the
crucial role that the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), under NATO command, continues to
play alongside Afghan national forces in ensuring the
people’s security and protecting the country’s
infrastructure and institutions.
My delegation congratulates the entire United
Nations system as it continues to work steadfastly, in
an extremely difficult context, to support the peace
process, at the end of which Afghanistan will be able to
take control of its own destiny, in line with the decision
taken at the Bonn Conference stipulating the departure
of a large majority of foreign forces in 2014.
Despite such progress, it is unfortunate that the
peace process in Afghanistan continues to face
numerous obstacles and challenges that hinder the long
and laborious march of the Afghan people towards full
autonomy. Those include the recurring question of
security represented by terrorist acts and a campaign of

12-26920

intimidation and assassination targeting senior
Government officials and security forces, local
political leaders and religious leaders. That climate of
violence is coupled with local power struggles.
The recent and unfortunate events that have been
attributed to ISAF forces are not likely to calm the
ostensible hostility of certain organized groups, such as
the Taliban, against the foreign presence that,
nevertheless, benefits the country. It is important for a
frank and constructive dialogue to be established
between the Government and representatives of those
groups in order to create a climate of confidence and
achieve the task at hand.
Furthermore, the fight against terrorism, drugs
and contraband remains a major challenge in terms of
ensuring peace in the country. For that fight to be
successful, all neighbouring countries must cooperate,
in particular through participation in the regional
programme developed by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
Above and beyond those challenges, UNAMA
has worked in synergy with other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations, and we commend
the Mission once again. It must continue its work to
ensure stability in the country. That task requires more
time and the support of the Council at this time, to
renew the mandate of UNAMA for an additional
12 months.
Togo firmly supports the extension of the
mandate of UNAMA and at the same time wishes
Mr. Kubiš and his team every success in carrying out
their task.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing. I also welcome
Mr. Tanin’s presence in the Council. I endorse the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.
A strategic review of the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has been carried out, and we are entering a new phase
of our presence in the country that is now 10 years old.
Since the aims and the format of the international
coalition in Afghanistan are evolving, it is natural for
the United Nations to adapt to the progress made in the
transition process, as well as for the progressive
handover to Afghan authorities by 2014 of civil and

17

S/PV.6735

military tasks to be fully reflected in the mandate of
the Mission, as Mr. Rassoul requested of the Council in
his letter of 1 March 2011 (see S/2011/118, annex).
The mutual commitments taken in Bonn for the socalled transformation decade that will follow the
transition decade, from 2015 to 2024, have also been
integrated, as has the regional cooperation process
launched in Istanbul last November.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/133)
contains recommendations from the comprehensive
review of UNAMA’s activities in Afghanistan, which
was also conducted in response to Mr. Rassoul’s
request. France fully endorses the three areas identified
as constituting the heart of the Mission over and
beyond 2014, namely, political good offices, human
rights, in particular the rights of women, which must
remain a priority, and international aid coherence.
The gradual adaptation of the United Nations
presence to those tasks and to the new environment
created by the transition process will be the main
challenge facing the Special Representative, bearing in
mind the implementation of the reforms stipulated in
the Kabul process, possible progress in inter-Afghan
reconciliation and the development of both the regional
context and political dialogue among neighbouring
States.
The situation in Afghanistan is volatile and each
week seems to provide its share of tragedies. France
has, along with many other nations present in the
Chamber, made the ultimate sacrifice. At the same
time, there are grounds for optimism. Regular contact
has been established with the various sectors of the
insurgency. We hope that it will lead to a political
solution to the current conflict via a peace process led
by the Afghan authorities that will unite all sectors of
Afghan society.
Secondly, following the attacks targeting Shiites
on 6 December 2011, Afghans reacted with a
remarkable display of solidarity, thereby illustrating
their commitment to national unity.
Thirdly, the security transition is now a reality for
50 per cent of Afghans — as it will soon be for 80 per
cent — without deterioration in security in the areas
involved.
Fourthly, my Minister has just co-chaired the
third Ministerial Conference of the Paris Pact with his
Russian counterpart in Vienna.

18

Finally, security questions were given a boost at
the regional level during the Istanbul Conference on
2 November 2011. In that context, we will continue to
stand alongside Afghans and our allies for as long as
necessary and as long as long as the Afghan
Government asks us to do so. It is in that spirit that we
will participate in the NATO Chicago summit in May
and at the economic conference that will take place in
July in Tokyo.
As for France, we will gradually reduce our troop
numbers and bring an end to our combat missions in
2013, in accordance with NATO’s force planning, while
maintaining our trainers beyond 2014. We will continue
to work with the entire international community to set
up professional, credible and sustainable Afghan
security forces. Our commitment alongside Afghans, in
particular in civil terms, will be framed by the
friendship and cooperation treaty, signed by President
Karzai and the President of the French Republic in Paris
on 27 January. That treaty will be fulfilled by a
significant increase in our civil commitment in the areas
of health care, education, agriculture, cultural
exchanges, mining resources and infrastructure.
France’s only objectives for Afghanistan are for it
to achieve sustainable stabilization, eliminate safe
havens for international terrorism and for Afghans to
gain control of their national destiny.
The success of the transformation will broadly
depend on the success of UNAMA. We are therefore
convinced that the United Nations and, in particular,
UNAMA will have a key role to play in Afghanistan in
the years to come.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): Allow me, at the
outset, to welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and thank him for
his presentation. At the same time, I would like to
express our appreciation to Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his update on the situation in his country.
Throughout the period covered by the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2012/133), the situation in
Afghanistan witnessed significant progress in several
aspects. Indeed, the national political dialogue among
Afghans evolved significantly during that period, and
we express the hope that those steps will boost the
peace process.

12-26920

S/PV.6735

The sustained progress in the implementation of
the Afghan Peace and Reintegration Programme helped
thousands of combatants to disengage from fighting in
order to reintegrate into Afghan society. Health and
education sectors also recorded real progress for the
benefit of the vulnerable population.
The security situation, however, remains a real
concern for all, despite the decrease in security related
events in December 2011 and January 2012, compared
to the previous two-month reporting period of last year.
Despite those challenges, we cannot fail to
acknowledge that approximately 50 per cent of the
Afghan population lives in areas where responsibility
for security has been handed over to Afghan security
forces.
We commend the role of UNAMA for its real
multifaceted engagement in Afghanistan, as well as the
International Security Assistance Force and its efforts
to keep peace in the country in a very difficult
environment.
In
that
regard,
we
appreciate
the
recommendations listed in the comprehensive review
of the mandated activities of UNAMA, as requested
under resolution 1974 (2011). We support a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghanowned political process, which should lead Afghan
authorities to address the challenges of stabilizing the
country and reconciling different communities.
We also express our support for the Afghan
Government during the ongoing transition period,
which should be completed by the end of 2014,
consistent with the Kabul process, and aim at enabling
the Afghan Government to fully exercise its sovereign
authority over its entire national territory.
We consider that the phase of transformation
from 2015 to 2024 will enable Afghanistan to complete
the building of its institutions and achieve a democratic
and stable country based on the rule of law, respect for
human rights and good governance.
Morocco encourages Afghanistan to pursue
political dialogue and partnerships with its
neighbouring countries, with a view to strengthening
cooperation in areas such as security, anti-terrorism,
counter-narcotics and the problem of refugees. We
value the efforts of neighbouring States to assist
Afghan refugees, and we look forward to the orderly

12-26920

and voluntary repatriation of those refugees to their
homeland.
Finally, we look forward the conclusions of the
Tokyo conference in July 2012, aimed at building on
the outcomes of the Bonn and Istanbul Conferences
and at ensuring delivery on the commitments made by
the international community towards Afghanistan’s
stability and sustainable economic development.
As Ambassador Zahir Tanin put it, Afghanistan
has a long way to go and counts on the international
community to remain steadfast and assist it in making
it a successful transition. We hope that the Council,
which has an important role to play, will heed that call.
To that end, Morocco supports the extension of the
mandate of UNAMA for an additional 12 months.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2012/133), and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for
his briefing. I would also like to thank our colleague,
Ambassador Tanin, for his statement.
While presenting a record of positive
developments during recent months in Afghanistan, the
report and the briefing testify to the need for increased
efforts, including through a continued United Nations
presence, to tackle the existing security, economic,
humanitarian and other challenges in the country. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) plays a critical role in supporting the
Government of Afghanistan. We expect that the
mandate of UNAMA, renewed on the basis of full
recognition of Afghan sovereignty and the progress
made in recent years, will ensure more coordinated,
coherent and efficient work on the part of the United
Nations in Afghanistan.
Despite some decrease in security-related events
during the reporting period, the precarious security
situation continued to pose a serious threat to the
overall peace and stabilization efforts in Afghanistan.
Recent incidents demonstrate that additional resolute
measures are needed to eliminate civilian casualties,
which along with being a human tragedy also seriously
undermine the national and international efforts
towards peace and reconciliation.

19

S/PV.6735

We are encouraged by positive political
developments in Afghanistan, in particular by the
progress achieved so far in the implementation of the
Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
Azerbaijan welcomes the ongoing national dialogue
and reconciliation efforts. An inclusive Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process, in accordance with the
Constitution of Afghanistan and with the support of the
international community, is an essential element of
overall stabilization and an absolute prerequisite for
achieving a durable solution.
As the transition period continues towards the
eventual withdrawal of international military forces
and the assumption of overall security responsibility by
Afghan security forces by the end of 2014, it is
becoming increasingly imperative that the international
community maintain its active support of the
Government of Afghanistan. Meanwhile, the timely
implementation of mutual commitments assumed at the
Bonn Conference is of paramount importance to ensure
that the transition period will lay a solid foundation for
the transformation decade of 2015-2024, during which
Afghanistan will be able to consolidate its sovereignty
by strengthening a fully functioning and sustainable
State. We look forward to the forthcoming Chicago
conference on security matters and the Tokyo
conference on development issues, which will give
specific shape to the framework and parameters of the
international engagement in Afghanistan after the
transition period.
We commend the strengthening of regional
dialogue and cooperation, which are necessary in the
broader context of stabilization efforts. In that regard,
the positive momentum gained after the Istanbul
Conference in November 2011 should be further
developed, and we consider the follow-up ministerial
conference to be held in Kabul in June 2012 to be an
important step towards ensuring greater coherence
among existing regional mechanisms. Undoubtedly,
stronger regional ties based on mutual confidence and
common vision will also lead to an increase in foreign
investment in Afghanistan from the region and beyond.
Basing its approach on the principle of the
indivisibility of security and its close relations with
Afghanistan, Azerbaijan decided from the very outset
to contribute to international efforts designed to
enhance the security, stability and prosperity of the
country. Azerbaijan joined the International Security

20

Assistance Force almost from its beginning and has
steadily increased its military contribution to it.
Azerbaijan is expanding its engagement in nonmilitary spheres by contributing to developing
capacity-building in Afghanistan. We believe that
capacity-building for Afghan institutions must remain
at the heart of international assistance in order to
enable the Government of Afghanistan to exercise
sovereign authority in all of its functions.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
country’s full support for Afghanistan’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity. I emphasize my
Government’s determination to continue being a part of
the collective efforts being undertaken in Afghanistan.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ján Kubiš for his briefing. I also wish to thank
Mr. Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for his statement.
Currently, peacebuilding in Afghanistan is at a
crucial juncture. As decided by the international
Conference on Afghanistan held in Bonn in December
2011, Afghanistan will enter a transformation decade
starting in 2015. The continuous promotion of the
transitional process of peaceful reconstruction aimed at
laying down a sound basis for the transformation
decade is an important task that must be taken up by
the people and the Government of Afghanistan. China
welcomes the positive efforts made and the results
achieved in national reconstruction by the Afghan
Government.
We support Afghanistan’s strengthening of its
efforts in the political, security, development and rule
of law fields, in promoting national reconciliation and
the Kabul process and in implementing the Afghan
Peace and Reintegration Programme. We support
Afghan national institutions in their efforts to
comprehensively assume responsibilities in various
fields, especially in gradually taking over the onerous
task of maintaining national security. We support
Afghanistan in actively committing itself to economic
development and national reconstruction and in
working to develop friendly and cooperative relations
with other countries, especially countries in the region.
Peacebuilding in Afghanistan cannot be
accomplished without the help and support of the
international community. We hope that the

12-26920

S/PV.6735

international community will fully respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan, adhere to the principles of Afghan
leadership
and
ownership,
develop
in-depth
partnerships with Afghanistan and provide constructive
help for national reconciliation and the reconstruction
of the country.
We hope that the parties involved in
implementing the plan for withdrawal from
Afghanistan will fully take into account the situation
on the ground and execute that implementation in an
appropriate and responsible manner while ensuring the
security and stability of Afghanistan and helping the
country to further strengthen capacity-building in the
security field.
We call upon the international community to
devote greater attention to the economic reconstruction
of Afghanistan, honour the relevant commitments in an
effective manner and increase assistance according to
the national priority programmes formulated by
Afghanistan so as to promote the country’s sustainable
development with a view to addressing the root causes
of the turbulence in Afghanistan. We express our
concern at the recent incidents, such as the burning of
the Koran and the shooting of civilians, and hope that
the issues concerned can be resolved properly.
We would like to express our appreciation for the
active efforts made by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to maintain peace
and stability and promote national reconciliation in the
country. We support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNAMA
for another year and support the United Nations in
continuing to play a central role in coordinating
international assistance for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
has played an active role in supporting, promoting and
participating in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. We
will continue to provide assistance to the best of our
ability and, together with the rest of the international
community, make our due contribution to the early
realization of lasting peace and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš and thank him
for his extensive briefing.

12-26920

The achievement of an effective and long-term
Afghan settlement is a key task for the international
community. The conferences in Istanbul, Bonn and
Vienna have confirmed our joint commitment to
achieving the aims of the Kabul process. The efforts
undertaken must lay a solid basis for the development in
Afghanistan of democratic processes, socio-economic
recovery and the establishment of that friendly country
as a peaceful, independent, prosperous and neutral State
that is free from the threats of terrorism and drugs.
However, despite the efforts of the Afghan
authorities and those of the international community,
the situation in Afghanistan is still far from stable.
Against the background of the ill-preparedness of
national armed forces and police to clamp down on the
threat of drugs and terrorism on their own, of particular
concern is the ongoing worsening of the situation
related to the escalation of violence on the part of
Taliban and Al-Qaida fighters.
Unfortunately, oil often gets poured on the fire by
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
The recent unfortunate incidents that have produced
intense reactions among Afghans attest to that fact. We
deem it ill-considered to set artificial deadlines for
withdrawing international forces from Afghanistan. We
must not forget that one of the main tasks given to
those forces by the international community was to
ensure the establishment of viable national security
structures that could maintain basic order in the
country. Our long-term efforts must not have been be
in vain.
ISAF troops must fully carry out their mandate to
eradicate threats emanating from Afghanistan. I would
like to remind the Council that the mandate of the
coalition was given by the Security Council. We would
therefore be right to expect a final Council report
before a withdrawal of the coalition forces takes place.
We need to be careful when we talk about
national reconciliation. We are convinced that that is
only going to be productive if the process is led by the
Afghan Government itself. An important aspect of
national reconciliation and a settlement in Afghanistan
is the implementation of the sanctions regime pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) and the three key basic
principles.
Of serious concern is the production of, and
illegal trade in, drugs in Afghanistan. The Afghan drug
trade is currently a direct and open threat to

21

S/PV.6735

international peace and stability. It is the source of
financing for terrorist activities. We can only combat
the threat together.
Unfortunately, the trends in that area do not give
rise to hope. The production of opiates increased by
almost 60 per cent in 2011. The key aim here is to
eradicate the fields of drug crops and the infrastructure
for producing drugs. It must become a real priority for
international security forces. Of course, we need to
react to the difficult situation along the whole of the
drugs trafficking route running from Afghanistan, but
without strict, stringent measures to eradicate drug
crops we will only be treating the symptoms. The
outcome of the Third Ministerial Conference of the
Paris Pact, which took place in Vienna on 16 February,
is of significance in that context.
We are concerned about the information in the
report on UNAMA indicating that more than 3,000
Afghan civilians died in 2011, representing 8 per cent
more than in the previous year. An increasing number
have died as the result of air strikes by coalition forces
in Afghanistan. We continue to deem it necessary to
ensure that all parties in Afghanistan uphold human
rights and the norms of international humanitarian law,
and that no harm be done, even unintentionally, to the
country’s population and infrastructure.
It is important to note that the picture painted in
the Secretary-General’s report is oversimplified. Some
problems are noted only in passing. This is particularly
true concerning the political sphere and the security
situation. Little mention is made of the terrorist threat
and not one word is said about Al-Qaida. The basic
Security Council sanctions resolutions are not
mentioned. With respect to the drug problem, the report
conveys the impression that there is no problem. A
successful resolution of the problems facing the
international presence, in particular UNAMA, will
require a completely objective analysis of the situation
in the country.
Russia is working to broaden its assistance to
Afghanistan. We are prepared to cooperate in
rebuilding economic facilities built by Soviet
specialists, and to jointly undertake projects to
construct hydroelectric stations, infrastructure, and oil
and gas plants. We have joined the ranks of donors and
international financial institutions, including in
providing our own resources, including $500 million

22

for the enormous CASA-1000 transnational energy
project.
In conclusion, I stress yet again that achieving
long-term stability in Afghanistan will be possible only
through a comprehensive approach on the part of the
international community and the phased, careful
transfer of responsibilities for the situation to the
Afghan authorities. We will ensure that, by
strengthening the coordinating role of the United
Nations and coordinating the activities of external
players in the interest of the Afghan people, peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region as a whole.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
welcome Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kubiš to the Council and thank him for his
comments. He has our support in carrying out his
challenging assignment.
I also thank the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
important work they do each day under very difficult
conditions. I further welcome Ambassador Tanin and
thank him for once again addressing the Council.
Afghanistan has made great progress, and I want
to underscore our support for Afghan leadership and
Afghan sovereignty. The United States is committed to
backing Afghanistan and continuing our partnership
through 2014 and beyond.
I will focus today on two areas: the progress
Afghan authorities have made in taking over
responsibility for security, and efforts to reduce the
corrosive effect of narcotics.
In the past few months, we have seen several
significant steps. Last November, President Karzai
announced the second tranche of areas that will begin
the transition to an Afghan security lead. This tranche
includes five provinces in their entirety, and various
districts and cities in 13 other provinces. Parwan
province became the first area from tranche II formally
to begin the transition process last December. All but
one have followed since. Now, approximately 50 per
cent of the Afghan population lives in areas that are
transitioning to Afghan security lead.
The Afghan Government’s increased domestic
success has been complemented by its diplomatic
leadership in the Istanbul process on regional security
and cooperation and at the Bonn conference.
Afghanistan’s neighbours had the foresight to

12-26920

S/PV.6735

recognize that economic development in the region
will take root only when there is security and stability.
At both Istanbul and Bonn, Afghanistan’s neighbours
and the broader international community pledged their
support to the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation process. This support is critical.

food-zone programme that, with international support,
has reduced poppy cultivation by over 36 per cent
since 2009. The eradication programme sponsored by
the Afghan Ministry of Counter-Narcotics expanded
into 18 provinces in 2011. More Afghan provinces than
ever are leading their own anti-narcotics efforts.

Since then, regional and international partners
have helped solidify Afghanistan’s progress. After
Istanbul, the United Nations played a key role in
supporting regional efforts to implement the
commitments and confidence-building measures agreed
there. In Bonn, 15 international organizations and 86
countries joined with Afghanistan to reiterate mutual
commitments and to deepen and broaden our historic
global partnership in support of Afghanistan.

Across Afghanistan, the United States Agency for
International Development has invested $541 million
over the past three years in encouraging alternative
livelihoods, including through agricultural and
agribusiness training, agricultural credit, and the
promotion of high-value alternative crops. These
programmes serve over 300,000 rural households each
year. While the Afghan drug trade begins in
Afghanistan, its causes and consequences extend far
beyond its borders, and so must our responsibility for
resolving it. This is a global problem that demands a
common response.

The NATO summit to take place in Chicago in
May, and the Foreign Ministers’ meeting to take place
in Tokyo in July, will be particularly important for
clarifying plans for supporting Afghanistan into the
future. At the NATO summit, we will determine the
next phase of our commitment to Afghanistan. This
includes shifting to a support role in 2013 in advance
of Afghanistan taking full responsibility for security in
2014. As President Obama reiterated last week, we are
going to complete this mission responsibly.
I also want to re-emphasize President Obama’s
message that we are deeply saddened by the events that
took place last week in Kandahar. That incident was
tragic and shocking. United States Secretary of
Defense Panetta has expressed our commitment to
getting the facts as quickly as possible and to holding
accountable anyone responsible.
On the issue of narcotics, we welcome the
discussions that took place in Vienna in February at the
Third Ministerial Conference of the Paris Pact on
controlling the flow of opiates from Afghanistan. This
was the first such meeting in five years, and brought
the Paris Pact’s 57 partner States together to discuss
how best to combat narcotics trafficking from
Afghanistan.
The problem before us is complex and
entrenched; it funds terrorism and violence, blocks the
emergence of legitimate livelihoods, and ruins lives.
Yet we know that a better future is possible, freeing
Afghanistan and its neighbours from the curse of drug
addiction and economic dependence on this illicit
trade. On the ground today in Helmand province, the
Afghan Government is driving forward an innovative

12-26920

Security and narcotics are just two of the
obstacles Afghanistan faces in building a strong
economy, ensuring the health of its citizens, and
asserting full sovereign control over its fate. The
United Nations plays an essential role in supporting the
Afghan Government and people in addressing the
challenges that Afghanistan faces in developing a
secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
For that reason, the United States supports the
extension of the UNAMA mandate for a further 12
months. UNAMA’s role will continue to evolve during
this period of transition, but there can be no doubting
the continuing importance of its contributions. From
the use of its good offices to promote regional
cooperation and its work as co-chair of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board, to humanitarian
assistance and its work with refugees and internally
displaced persons, the United Nations has shown
beyond any doubt its commitment to the people of
Afghanistan. We commend the Organization for its
vision and tenacity, and we thank the delegation of
Germany for its leadership in negotiating the renewed
mandate.
Afghans are taking responsibility for their own
security, pursuing reconciliation and planning for a
stable economic future. And as they do, the United
States will continue to stand by their side.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

23

S/PV.6735

I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his first briefing to
the Security Council this morning. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important statement.

reconciliation would be a challenging process. The
recent Taliban statement announcing the suspension of
talks does not alter our support for Afghan-led
reconciliation.

I shall focus my comments today on the
importance of the international community delivering
on the political commitment made to Afghanistan at the
Bonn Conference. We must use this year to signal our
enduring commitment to Afghanistan’s security and
economic viability for the post-2014 decade of
transformation.

Therefore, as we prepare for a post-2014
Afghanistan, there is still much to do. UNAMA has a
vital role, both during and beyond the transition
process, to coordinate the international community and
support the Afghan Government to deliver on its
commitments. The United Kingdom supports a strong,
continued UNAMA presence throughout the country to
assist the Afghan Government in establishing a strong
and durable Afghan State.

First, at the NATO Chicago Summit in May, we
need to agree a long-term funding plan for the Afghan
national security forces and to clarify NATO’s role in
Afghanistan after 2014. Capable, sustainable and
affordable Afghan forces are vital to ensuring that
stability in Afghanistan does not unravel once
International Security Assistance Force combat troops
withdraw after the completion of the transition process
at the end of 2014.
Secondly, for any security gains to be sustainable
in the long term, we must work together to ensure that
the Afghan people have confidence that their
Government can deliver key basic services and better
prospects for the future. The United Kingdom looks
forward to the Afghan Government’s implementation
of vital governance and economic reforms. The
international community must match that at the Tokyo
conference by ensuring continued, long-term
commitments to supporting economic growth and basic
social services in Afghanistan. That is fundamental to
Afghanistan’s long-term stability and prosperity.
Thirdly, stability in Afghanistan will also depend
on the participation and support of its neighbours. The
Kabul Conference in June will be a key moment for
heart-of-Asia countries to take that forward. The
United Kingdom welcomes the regionally led
implementation of the Istanbul Process, as well as the
support that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has provided.
Fourthly, underpinning those elements is the need
for continued progress towards a political settlement.
The United Kingdom welcomes Afghan-led efforts to
move forward the peace process. We note in particular
President Karzai’s and Pakistani Prime Minister
Gilani’s recent statements supporting the establishment
of the Taliban political office and calling on the
insurgency to reconcile. We have always said that

24

In conclusion, the international community made
commitments at the Bonn Conference in December
2011 for enduring support to Afghanistan’s long-term
security and development. Now is the time for us to
deliver against those commitments, to reassure the
Afghan people that we will not abandon them after
2014 and to ensure that Afghanistan does not again
become a safe haven for terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Ján Kubiš for his
briefing this morning. I also thank Afghan Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his statement.
(spoke in English)
Canada welcomes the diligent work of the
Secretary-General in conducting a comprehensive
review of the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) over the
past year. The next four months will present
Afghanistan and the international community with a
series of critical decision points, which will define how
we continue to progress together towards our common
goal of a peaceful and sustainable Afghanistan through
the transition period and into the transformation

12-26920

S/PV.6735

decade. Canada looks forward to working with its
partners to further advance those shared objectives. We
are confident that, at the Group of Eight and NATO
summits, as well as at the Tokyo conference, we will
continue to build on the strategic consensus reached in
Bonn this past December — a consensus based on
accountability and the assumption of leadership by the
Afghan Government in its own security, good
governance, and development.
In cooperation with our partners, Canada
continues to endeavour to support Afghanistan in its
efforts to undertake the remaining challenges of
transition. In doing so, Canada continues to invest in
the future of Afghan youth through programming in
health and education; to advance security, the rule of
law and human rights, including through a significant
contribution to the NATO training mission; to promote
regional diplomacy; and to support the delivery of
humanitarian assistance as needed.
(spoke in French)
Canada believes that sustainable economic
growth and constructive regional cooperation are
essential to ensuring a secure and prosperous future for
Afghanistan and the region. Economic growth will
only be sustained by concrete efforts on the part of
Afghanistan
to
establish
a
business-friendly
environment and enact measures to strengthen effective
and transparent economic governance. In that
connection, Canada recognizes the commitments that
the Government of Afghanistan has made with regard
to that goal in its economic transition strategy.
Canada of course continues to support
Afghanistan in pursuit of its development goals. The
country must never again become a haven for terrorists
and a breeding ground for terrorism. To that end, the
real long-term measure of success will be determined
by the extent to which Afghanistan can create wealth
by attracting and retaining private-sector investment,
both from within Afghanistan and abroad, and
appropriately leverage it to benefit the Afghan
population in a just and broad-based manner.
Furthermore, in order to be sustainable, Afghanistan’s
economic growth must be accompanied by poverty
reduction and increasing productive employment, as
well as improved access to education and health care.
However, Afghanistan’s economic potential
reaches beyond its borders and its prosperity will, in
large measure, be influenced by the extent to which it

12-26920

can harness its strategic position at the crossroads of
markets in the heart of Asia. That will require the
constructive support of its regional partners in
promoting stability, security and prosperity in both
Afghanistan and the region. In that regard, we
commend the recent consensus in the context of the
Istanbul Process to focus on a series of confidencebuilding measures aimed at strengthening an agenda
based on mutual benefit and trust. We also look
forward to the fifth ministerial meeting of the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan.
Canada strongly believes that regional leadership in the
planning and execution of a common prosperity agenda
must be at the centre of Afghanistan’s continued
transformation.
To that end, Canada will continue to promote
regional cooperation as one of its four pillars of
engagement over the next two years, in particular
through the ongoing facilitation of the AfghanistanPakistan cooperation process — which we continue to
believe can make tangible progress in strengthening the
management and security of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
border region.
(spoke in English)
Among the most notable successes in Afghanistan
of the past decade are the tremendous gains made by
Afghan women and girls. Those gains must not be lost.
Canada views the status and role of women as a key
barometer by which the success of Afghanistan’s
progress will be measured. The recent Ulema Council
statement, as well as cases of heinous abuse of Afghan
women, represents a dramatic step backwards for
Afghan women. Although we noted President Karzai’s
remarks on 11 March reiterating his full support of
Afghan women’s religious and constitutional rights,
Canada will remain vigilant. We expect the
Government of Afghanistan to uphold its Constitution
and to distance itself from those outrageous remarks.
The protection and advancement of women’s
rights has been and continues to be a key pillar of
Canada’s foreign policy. That is especially true in
Afghanistan, where promoting and protecting
fundamental freedoms, including women’s rights, is a
central theme of Canada’s post-2011 engagement.
Respect for the freedoms and rights of all Afghan
citizens is fundamental to Afghanistan’s security and
its future prosperity.

25

S/PV.6735

All Afghans must, in our view, also have the right
to practice personal religious beliefs in safety and
security. Canada would like to underline the
importance of tolerance and pluralism in establishing a
peaceful and cohesive Afghan society, based on the
principles established by the Afghan Constitution.
Afghanistan has accomplished impressive
progress towards developing a representative and
sustainable democracy. Canada recognizes that
Afghanistan’s democratic development faces many
challenges, and we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to renew its commitment to transparency
and impartiality in all electoral and appointment
processes.
An important element in ensuring sustainable
Afghan peace still resides in the achievement of an
Afghan-led reconciliation process, the outcome of
which must be in accordance with the principles
confirmed at the Bonn Conference. In this respect,
Canada supports an inclusive national peace dialogue
that encourages the participation of Afghan civil
society, victims’ groups and, especially, Afghan
religious and ethnic minorities and women in
determining the shape of what we all hope will be a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Permit me to conclude by noting that Canada
remains committed to our common goal of a peaceful,
sustainable Afghanistan led by Afghans with vision,
confidence and hope in their future. In order to achieve
this vision, Canada stands ready to continue working
with the Government of Afghanistan, as well as all our
international partners in meeting this goal.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries
Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Like others, I would first like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2012/133), and in particular Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his briefing and
for the excellent work that he and his team are doing

26

under truly difficult circumstances. I would also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his clear statement here today.
The Bonn Conference confirmed international
long-term engagement in Afghanistan beyond the end
of the transition and through the transformation decade
from 2015 to 2024. The signing of a number of
bilateral partnerships manifests that. On our part, we
are firmly committed to that objective as well, as
specified in the European Union Council conclusions
of 14 November 2011. The commitments made in Bonn
were mutual. As we prepare for the Chicago and Tokyo
conferences, we must ensure that those mutual
commitments are swiftly implemented. We note with
satisfaction that transition in the security sector
remains on track, with the implementation of the
second tranche progressing well.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will continue to play a critical
role in supporting the Afghan Government, and will do
so with a mandate reviewed in line with the progress
made in Afghanistan, in full consensus with its
Government and informed by the helpful review
conducted by the Secretary-General. UNAMA’s good
offices, including support for the Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process, and for strengthening human
rights and for regional cooperation, will remain
cornerstones. Similarly critical is its role in supporting
the Afghan Government in the coordination and
management of international assistance. In that regard,
greater coherence of international assistance with the
national priority programmes identified by the
Government of Afghanistan is necessary.
A continued United Nations role in long-term
electoral reform will contribute to strengthening the
role of the Afghan Government and institutions. The
importance of that was underlined in the Kabul
Conference communiqué, and most recently at Bonn,
where there was agreement that strengthening and
improving Afghanistan’s electoral process would be a
key step in Afghanistan’s democratization.
Finally, we highlight the continued importance of
UNAMA support for the Afghan authorities’ efforts to
increase transparency and accountability. For all those
support efforts, a continued UNAMA presence
throughout the country is needed.
Progress in the peace process will be sustainable
only if the peace and reconciliation process is truly
inclusive, if it proactively seeks balanced gender and

12-26920

S/PV.6735

social-status representation and if it involves civil
society. Both the process and its outcome must respect
the Afghan Constitution, including its human rights
provisions and, notably, the rights of women and girls.
At the present time, we encourage particular
attention to the continued implementation of the law on
the elimination of violence against women. In that
vein, we wish to reiterate our firm commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions
on women, peace and security. In that respect, we
welcome the commitment of the Afghan Government
to the resolution’s full implementation through the
establishment of the inter-ministerial steering
committee on resolution 1325 (2000).
Follow-up to the Istanbul Conference on regional
cooperation is encouraging. The February senior
officials’ preparatory meeting in Kabul laid the
groundwork for the June Kabul ministerial meeting by
firming up some of the Istanbul commitments. Further
progress is necessary to translate those promises into
tangible improvements in regional security and
economic development. As the recent Paris Pact
Conference stressed, regional cooperation will also be
indispensable to address common threats, such as drug
trafficking.
In conclusion, I once more assure you,
Mr. President, of our firm commitment to remain
engaged as a strong and reliable partner for
Afghanistan after the transition has been completed.
The aim of our joint efforts in Afghanistan remains
clear, namely, to support the Afghan Government as it
puts the many years of conflict behind it and offers all
Afghan people the prospect of a better future. To that
end, we support the proposed extension of a strong
UNAMA mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. White (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Council today. I particularly thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš and
Ambassador Tanin for their remarks earlier.
Australia welcomes the opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to international efforts in Afghanistan,
and strongly supports a renewal of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) mandate
for another year.

12-26920

The foundations of the international community’s
long-term commitment to Afghanistan, which must
extend well past 2014, will need to be further
consolidated this year through strong and clearly
defined outcomes on security transition at the
forthcoming NATO summit in Chicago, as well as on
support for Afghanistan’s sustainable development at
the Tokyo conference later in the year.
When we last gathered to discuss the UNAMA
mandate, the international community was looking
forward to President Karzai’s announcement on the
first tranche of provinces to begin transition to full
Afghan security leadership. Now, one year later, more
than 50 per cent of the Afghan population lives in a
province or district that is undergoing the transition to
full Afghan security leadership.
Australia commends the efforts of President
Karzai, the Afghan Government and the people of
Afghanistan as they work towards the goal of full
Afghan leadership of the security sector, as well as the
vital pillars of governance and development. Australia
joins the international community in fully supporting
the goal of Afghan leadership. We encourage the
Council to ensure that this message is given
prominence in the revised UNAMA mandate.
Australia welcomes the continued presence of
UNAMA and other United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan’s provinces and underlines the importance
of United Nations agencies working in close
coordination with the Afghan Government. The United
Nations physical presence is an appropriate reflection
of the Organization’s leadership of the civilian effort
on the ground in Afghanistan and the Security Council
mandate that underpins the international presence.
Australia supports a continuing role for UNAMA
in
supporting
electoral
capacity-building
in
Afghanistan. The ongoing development of democratic
institutions based on the rule of law and the separation
of powers is crucial to a stable Afghanistan.
Democratic, transparent and credible elections will be
crucial to shoring up sustainable transition in
Afghanistan.
Now is the time for the international community
to support Afghanistan as it prepares for presidential
and parliamentary elections in 2014 and 2015.
Australia has provided extensive assistance in the past
to support Afghan electoral institutions, civic education
and election monitoring, and will continue to do so.

27

S/PV.6735

Without the strong and constructive support of its
neighbours and regional partners, Afghanistan’s
prospects for a secure and stable future are much
diminished. Australia commends the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote regional engagement in accordance with
UNAMA’s mandate. Australia particularly welcomes
the Istanbul Heart of Asia process as an important step
towards building stronger regional engagement,
including improved economic ties across the Central
Asian region. We look forward to concrete progress,
including on confidence-building measures, at the
ministerial meeting in Kabul in June.
In terms of Australia’s own engagement in
Afghanistan, Prime Minister Gillard announced in
November 2011 that Australia would conclude a longterm bilateral partnership with Afghanistan. This will
underpin our long-term relationship, extending well
beyond 2014, and cover a broad range of bilateral
activities, including development assistance. I am
pleased to say that we anticipate that the agreement
will be concluded shortly.
Australia’s substantial and growing aid
programme will be an important part of our long-term
commitment. Australia will deliver $165 million in
development assistance to Afghanistan in 2011-2012.
The main goal of our aid is to build the Afghan
Government’s capacity to deliver services and
economic opportunities for its people.
To conclude, over the past decade we have seen
remarkable progress in Afghanistan, including strong
gains in vital sectors such as health and education. This
progress has been achieved with the strong support of
the international community, including UNAMA. Our
continuing priority must be to maintain and build on
these achievements and to continue to support
Afghanistan’s
trajectory
from
transition
to
transformation.
The President: I
representative of Japan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Kubiš for his comprehensive and
informative briefing. I also thank Ambassador Tanin
for his statement.
Japan highly appreciates the comprehensive
review of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), conducted by the

28

Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 1974
(2011). Based on the review, it is critically important
that UNAMA continue to play an appropriate role,
together with the international community, in support
of Afghanistan’s leadership and ownership and towards
building a promising future for Afghanistan.
While we welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General and its description of the second
phase of the transition as having progressed as planned,
we also witnessed some shocking incidents very
recently. We must not allow such incidents to recur and
we must stop the cycle of violence. We should also
remind ourselves that it is incumbent on both
Afghanistan and its international partners to tackle the
common challenges of improving security in
Afghanistan and also to consolidate the Afghan-led
political process.
In this regard, Japan continues to provide its
assistance in such areas as security to strengthen the
capacity of the Afghan police and the reintegration
process. Last month, Japan decided to provide
assistance amounting to $585 million, which includes
$231 million for police assistance and $5 million for
promoting reintegration. Japan welcomes the fact that
3,825 ex-combatants have been enrolled formally in
the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme,
as described in the Secretary-General’s report.
Building on the Bonn and the Istanbul
Conferences last year, we are set to make this year
even more fruitful. There will be the NATO summit in
Chicago, focusing on security issues in May, the first
follow-up on the Istanbul Conference, focusing on
regional cooperation in June, and the Tokyo
Conference in July. These conferences will be the best
occasions to discuss the future of the country.
Notably, the Tokyo Conference, co-hosted by
Japan and Afghanistan, is expected to be an occasion to
build a solid foundation for Afghanistan’s sustainable
economic development through the transition period
and beyond. That foundation is to be based on the
mutual commitments made between the international
community and Afghanistan at the Bonn Conference,
which are aimed at prioritizing the country’s national
priority programmes and providing concrete assistance
within those prioritized programmes, as well as
promoting regional economic cooperation.
At the same time, in order to conduct meaningful
discussions and produce tangible outcomes through the

12-26920

S/PV.6735

Tokyo Conference, it is expected that, prior to the
Conference, the Afghan side will make its utmost
efforts to tackle issues of governance, such as
corruption, and show concrete improvements. In this
regard, we welcome the fact that the Afghan
Government recently organized a forum to discuss
governance. It is indispensable that in our efforts we
maintain a long-term view towards establishing good
governance in the country. We commend UNAMA’s
proactive role in facilitating our discussions in this
area.
UNAMA continues to play an important role, and
Japan supports the extension of UNAMA’s mandate in
accordance with the draft resolution scheduled to be
adopted soon. In order to make the Tokyo Conference
successful, Japan is determined to exert its utmost
efforts and cooperate with Afghanistan, international
partners and UNAMA.
In conclusion, we would like to once again
express our sincere appreciation for the dedication of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš,
and reiterate our commitment to supporting UNAMA’s
efforts, together with Special Representative Kubiš,
and all the men and women of UNAMA, who have
demonstrated a deep commitment to this very difficult
mission.
The President: I
representative of Turkey.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by warmly
greeting Special Representative Jan Kubiš and take this
opportunity to thank him for his comprehensive
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2012/133). I would also
like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his insightful
statement.
The present debate comes at a time of sorrow for
my country. Just a couple of days ago, we lost 12
Turkish soldiers in a helicopter crash in the Afghan
capital. Our soldiers were in Kabul to help their
Afghan brothers build a secure and stable Afghanistan.
We are all united in this common goal. I would like to
express our sincere appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his statement of condolence and sympathy.
On this occasion, I would like to reaffirm our strong
commitment to Afghanistan.
Important events relating to Afghanistan have
taken place over the past six months. The Istanbul

12-26920

Conference for Afghanistan, held on 2 November,
presented a new vision for regional cooperation and
good-neighbourly relations across the region that
surrounds the country. Recognizing the crucial role
played by Afghanistan in connectivity and cooperation
across the region, the Istanbul process recommits
Afghanistan and its neighbours to a new vision of
partnership for peace, stability and prosperity.
Let me repeat that in Istanbul, the parties
recognized the central role of the United Nations. They
also welcomed Afghanistan’s willingness and
determination to use its regional and historical position
to do its part to promote security and peaceful
economic cooperation in the region. It is a regionally
owned process for our common future that has
Afghanistan at the centre.
Since the Istanbul Conference, Afghanistan has
been actively leading the follow-up process. We are
encouraged by the regional support for the Afghan-led
follow-up steps on the Istanbul process. Within that
framework, the senior officials meeting of 29 February
in Kabul took place in a very constructive atmosphere.
At the preparatory meeting, regional actors continued
to confirm their ownership of the process for building
greater confidence and cooperation in the region. They
worked on the concept paper drafted by the Afghan
side with a view to shaping a new vision of regional
cooperation. We sincerely believe that this regional
vision will enable Afghanistan to play its long-desired
role as a regional hub for trade and transit.
We are now looking forward to the ministerial
conference to be held on 14 June in Kabul. That
meeting will enable Afghanistan and its regional
partners to continue to shape a forward-looking agenda
for regional cooperation. We think that the Istanbul
process, together with the long-term international
engagement confirmed at the Bonn Conference, will
further contribute to our success in Afghanistan.
We will continue to extend our support to
Afghanistan in order to consolidate the gains of the past
decade and to realize greater security and economic
sustainability in the future. Therefore, in the lead-up to
two major events on Afghanistan this year — the
Chicago summit and the Tokyo Conference — the
international community should work on a clear
message to strengthen the hopes and expectations of the
Afghan people. In this context, I would like to express
our satisfaction with the Afghan-led security sector
transition, whereby the Afghan National Security

29

S/PV.6735

Forces now have full responsibility for nearly half of
the population.
We welcome the review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
mandate, conducted in consultation with the Afghan
Government and related partners. UNAMA plays a
crucial role in supporting the Afghan Government and
will continue to coherently assist and strengthen
Afghan institutions in order that they may fulfil their
mandated responsibilities to the Afghan people. The
realities of the transition process, Afghanistan’s
political and development agenda, and the priorities of
the Afghan Government in the coming years should
continue to guide UNAMA in its activities.
We believe that Afghan ownership and leadership
should be at the centre of our collective efforts. In that
regard, the United Nations should continue to be a
strong partner for Afghanistan in the Afghan-led peace
and transition processes. In the meantime the United
Nations should also continue to support regional
cooperation and to promote a coherent international
engagement behind the Government’s development
agenda.
Before I conclude, I would like to acknowledge
once more the dedicated and outstanding work
UNAMA is carrying out in fulfilment of its mandate, in
the face of very real and serious threats in Afghanistan.
We are particularly grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubiš. We trust in his wisdom
and leadership at the helm of the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan. UNAMA’s work in
Afghanistan is critical now and will remain so. The
Mission has our full support.
The President: I
representative of Norway.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Smith (Norway): Let me first thank Special
Representative Kubiš for his briefing today and express
our firm support to him and the dedicated staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We welcome the renewal of UNAMA’s
mandate to be adopted this week. The essence of that
mandate is political, not technical. As we gradually
transfer power from international to Afghan ownership,
UNAMA’s role as the guarantor of the integrity of the
transition process becomes indispensable. UNAMA
serves the purpose both of supporting the Afghan
Government and of empowering the Afghan people in
their tireless efforts to build a peaceful and democratic
future.

30

Good offices and political outreach in supporting
an inclusive, Afghan-led process for a political
settlement and monitoring human rights remain
essential to UNAMA’s mandate. It is also vital that the
United Nations continue to promote the capacity of
Afghan electoral institutions and the integrity of future
electoral processes as the key to empowering
democratic institutions. Building robust electoral
institutions that can hold elections that meet
international standards remains a key area of reform. In
parallel to assisting with capacity-building and
promoting increased aid coherence in international
assistance, UNAMA should focus on supporting the
Afghan Government in becoming more accountable,
transparent and inclusive.
Today’s debate takes place during an important
transition period for Afghanistan. The security
transition is progressing and will be reviewed at the
upcoming NATO Chicago summit on Afghanistan in
May. Well-performing Afghan security forces are a key
to stability and peace. Another equally important factor
is the ability of the Afghan Government to properly
perform its functions. Progress on good governance,
the rule of law and the protection of the human rights
of all Afghans is vital to a sustainable security
transition and a durable peace. Promoting the
accountability of Government institutions, including
separation of powers, will be necessary to build a
viable Afghan State.
Moving towards transition, it is equally important
that efforts to promote human rights also strengthen the
Afghan State’s ability to fight impunity and protect the
rights of its citizens. It is also vital that the necessary
monitoring and watchdog functions of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, civil society
groups and free media are not undermined. In that
regard, we expect that the appointment process of the
new commissioners to the Commission will be
finalized shortly in a transparent and inclusive manner.
Afghan civil society has a crucial role to play, but the
Government should also improve its own institutionbuilding and internal cooperation.
Afghanistan needs a political settlement that
brings the insurgents and key political and social
groups, including civil society, on board to address the
root causes of the conflict. A political settlement will
not be viable unless it is supported by a majority of
Afghans across the political and social spectrum. In the
long run, the most sustainable basis for a peaceful
future is formed by a broadening of the political space.
The strengthening of political parties, civil society

12-26920

S/PV.6735

groups and free media will be crucial, as will the
establishment of the rule of law and the fulfilment of
the demands of the Afghan people for justice.
Furthermore, all parties must respect the
achievements of the past decade, in particular
Afghanistan’s international human rights obligations
and core principles enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution. Women’s rights and the empowerment of
women should be critical elements of the peace
process, and must remain on the top of our agenda.
Violence against women remains a major challenge,
and the legal rights that Afghan women now enjoy
need to be protected through the transition. In that
regard, we welcome the Afghan Government’s recent
publication of its first report to the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
At the Tokyo Conference in July, we must make
progress on the development cooperation with the
Afghan Government by making tangible and
sustainable commitments based on Afghanistan’s own
national priority programmes. Norway’s development
assistance to Afghanistan is long-term and based on
mutual promises of governance reforms.
In conclusion, a peaceful and stable Afghanistan
depends upon good relations with its neighbours. We
therefore fully support the follow-up to the Istanbul
process and the regional confidence-building measures
that are being developed. Norway strongly encourages
Afghanistan and its neighbours to develop and expand
political, security and economic relations.
The President: I
representative of Finland.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Finland aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.
Afghanistan is going through three challenging
and intertwined processes: a security transition, political
reconciliation and the reintegration of ex-combatants. It
is crucial that improvements in human rights and gender
equality, which are guaranteed in the Afghan
Constitution, not be compromised in the reconciliation
process. Finland believes that women’s meaningful
participation is a key component of a successful
transition. The full and equal participation of women at
all levels of society is a prerequisite for democracy and
human rights. Women are also the keystone of
sustainable development, economic success and social
stability.

12-26920

Afghanistan has made remarkable gains since the
overthrow of the Taliban, such as improved access for
girls to basic education. However, women remain on
the margins of political decision-making and progress
on women’s rights has not been sufficient. Today,
Afghan women still face insecurity in public spaces
and at home, including inadequate protection against
gender-based and sexual violence, as well as lack of
access to an unbiased justice system and legal
representation.
Since November 2010, Afghanistan and Finland
have been cooperating in the field of women, peace
and security through the establishment of a twinning
programme. We are guided by strong Afghan
ownership and leadership. Our aim is inclusive and
transparent coordination among the relevant ministries
and an Afghan national action plan on women, peace
and security. An Afghan 1325 National Steering
Committee has been established and meets regularly. In
January, the Committee visited Finland. That provided
new ideas on how to ensure better implementation of
Security Council resolutions and mandates.
Finland will increase its annual development
funding for Afghanistan by 50 per cent ─ from
€21 million this year to €30 million by 2014.
Afghanistan will remain a most important development
cooperation partner for Finland. In our cooperation, we
focus on three main sectors: first, good governance,
democracy and the rule of law; secondly, human rights
and gender, with a special focus on the education of
girls; and thirdly, the Afghan economy and its growth,
in particular in the mining sector.
We all must work harder to build up better
governance, better respect for human rights and a
viable economy in Afghanistan. People must see
positive changes in their daily lives and be able to trust
the authorities. The voices of civil society need to be
heard and the rights and security of human rights
defenders and journalists ensured.
The international community needs to do its part
and give full support to the Afghan Government
beyond the transition period. Finland remains
committed to do that.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

31
