A/60/PV.63

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

63rd plenary meeting
Thursday, 15 December 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: reports of the General Committee
Fourth report of the General Committee
(A/60/250/Add.3)
The President: In the first paragraph of the
report of the General Committee contained in
document A/60/250/Add.3, the Committee informs the
General Assembly that, by a vote of five to three, with
17 abstentions, the Committee decided not to
recommend the inclusion of the item entitled
“Protracted conflicts in the Black Sea-South Caucasus
region and their implications for international peace,
security and development” in the agenda of the sixtieth
session.
The second paragraph of the same report
concerns a request by Costa Rica for the inclusion in
the agenda of the current session of an additional item
entitled “Follow-up to the recommendations of the
Independent Inquiry Committee into the United
Nations Oil-for-Food Programme”.
The General Committee decided to recommend to
the General Assembly that the item, amended to read
“Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-forFood Programme”, be included in the agenda of the

(Sweden)

current session under heading I, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Kelley: I would like to inform members that,
should the General Assembly decide to include this
new item in its agenda, that by itself would not give
rise to financial implications. Should the Assembly
subsequently decide, under this agenda item, that the
Volcker report or parts therefore be translated and
reproduced in all official languages, the financial
implications would be the following.
Official translation and reproduction in five
volumes of the whole Volcker report, including the
report of the Working Group, in the six official
languages would amount to $2,717,300.
Official translation and reproduction in four
volumes of the Volcker report, minus the report of the
Working Group, in the six official languages would
amount to $2,250,800.
Official translation and reproduction in one
volume of volume I of the Volcker report in the six
official languages would amount to $258,800.
Reproduction of the whole Volcker report in
English only would amount to $82,000.
Reproduction of volume I of the Volcker report in
English only would amount to $8,400.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

05-64493 (E)

*0564493*

A/60/PV.63

The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to include this item in the agenda of
the current session under heading I?
It was so decided.
The President: In the same paragraph, the
General Committee further recommends that the item
be considered directly in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to consider this item directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: I would like to inform members
that the item entitled “Follow-up to the
recommendations on administrative management and
internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry
Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
Programme” becomes item 160 on the agenda of the
current session.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance: draft
resolution (A/60/L.37)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolutions (A/60/L.34, A/60/L.38 and
A/60/L.39)
Amendment (A/60/L.35)
(d) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution (A/60/L.36)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly already held the debate on agenda item 73
and its sub-items (a), (c) and (d) at its 51st and 52nd
plenary meetings on 14 November 2005, and adopted
three resolutions under the item at its 52nd plenary
meeting.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nigeria to introduce draft resolution A/60/L.34.
Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): It gives me great
pleasure to introduce the draft resolution contained in

2

document A/60/L.34, entitled “Assistance to survivors
of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans,
widows and victims of sexual violence”, in our
capacity as the representative of the Chairman of the
African Union and on behalf of the African Group,
which has strongly endorsed this draft resolution.
In addition to the sponsors listed in the document,
the following States have joined in sponsorship:
Angola, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Jamaica, Kenya,
Mauritius, Netherlands, Sudan, Sweden, Timor-Leste
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
The tragic events that occurred in Rwanda from
April to July 1994 are among the darkest and most
dreadful in human history. Up to one million lives were
lost. One million ordinary men, women and children
were condemned to die for no other reason beside the
fact that they belonged to a particular ethnic group or
identified with a particular ethnic group.
The Rwandan genocide inflicted untold suffering
on those who survived it. The most vulnerable groups
of survivors were children and women. The children,
apart from the trauma of watching their parents and
siblings being slaughtered, were orphaned by the
genocide and left alone in the world to fend for
themselves. Most of these children have since had to
live in child-headed households. Similarly, women not
only watched their husbands and children being killed,
but also underwent unspeakable physical abuse, in
particular, sexual violence, which resulted in HIV
infection in more than 60 per cent of the cases.
The draft resolution before us is intended to
achieve two main objectives. First, it intends to
encourage the international community to provide
assistance to these vulnerable groups. Secondly, it sets
out, through the capacities of the United Nations, to
build awareness of the events of 1994 so that the world
will be a better place in which to live.
It should be noted that, despite the best efforts of
the Government of Rwanda and the support of the
international community, many survivors remain very
vulnerable and live in conditions of extreme poverty.
We, the international community, must ensure that we
do not disappoint the survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda by failing to come to their assistance, once
more, in their hour of need.

A/60/PV.63

My delegation coordinated four informal
meetings to negotiate the draft before us. Much of the
language in this draft resolution is agreed language
from last year’s General Assembly resolution 59/137,
which was adopted without a vote. Two new operative
paragraphs are included in this draft. These paragraphs
deal with the creation of educational and outreach
programmes on the prevention of genocide and contain
language identical to a resolution adopted by consensus
during this session of the General Assembly.
My delegation commends this draft resolution for
the consideration of the General Assembly and looks
forward to its adoption without a vote.
The President: In connection with draft
resolution A/60/L.34 and the amendment thereto
contained in document A/60/L.35, I would like to
inform Members, after consultations, that action on
these two documents is postponed to a later date to
allow time for the review of their programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): It is my
pleasure, on behalf of the European Union (EU), to
introduce draft resolutions A/60/L.36, which is entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian People”, and A/60/L.37,
entitled “Safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and protection of United Nations personnel”.
With regard to draft resolution A/60/L.36, the
European Union reiterates its commitment to the
provision of assistance to the Palestinian people.
Sustained donor support from the international
community, working with the parties, is crucial if we
are to see an improvement to the Palestinian economic
and social infrastructure and to address the
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people.
For its part, the European Union has undertaken
to provide the “third party” role described in the recent
Agreement on Movement and Access issues reached
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. The
European Union will monitor the operations of the
Rafah border crossing point and provide assistance to
reinforce Palestinian border management capacities.
Capacity-building, through training, equipment and
technical assistance, is being taken forward through the
European Community’s assistance to the Palestinian
Authority.
The European Union, alongside other Quartet
members and international partners, is ready to assist

the Palestinian Authority financially, technically and
politically with their forthcoming multiparty elections
for the Palestinian Legislative Council. We are
prepared to send an observer mission to ensure that the
elections are carried out in line with international
principles for genuine democratic elections.
The European Union will also continue to
provide technical and economic aid to the Palestinian
people and contribute to the strengthening of
Palestinian institutions, with the aim of seeing a
peaceful and democratic State governed by the rule of
law.
The European Union will continue to work with
Israel, the Palestinian Authority and the international
community to achieve the shared vision of a two-State
solution set out in the road map. Both parties can count
on the sustained support of the European Union in the
ongoing effort to find a peaceful, durable and just
settlement of the conflict.
One country, in addition to the sponsors on the
tabled draft resolution, has requested to be included as
an additional sponsor of draft resolution A/60/L.36 on
“Assistance to the Palestinian People”, and that
country is Zambia.
With regard to draft resolution A/60/L.37, it is
important to recognize that humanitarian personnel and
United Nations personnel provide an invaluable service
to millions of civilians and vulnerable populations
around the world, often in very difficult and
challenging circumstances and often at great personal
risk. The fact that such personnel have become
increasingly exposed to security-related attacks and
incidents, and that the perpetrators of such acts
seemingly operate with impunity, clearly demonstrates
why this issue demands our most urgent attention.
The draft resolution highlights, in particular, the
need to strengthen the normative framework for the
safety and protection of humanitarian personnel and
United Nations personnel. In this regard, the draft
resolution calls on all States to consider becoming
parties to, and to respect fully their obligations under,
all relevant provisions of international law, including
the United Nations Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and its Optional
Protocol.
The draft resolution also highlights the need to
promote and enhance security management within the

3

A/60/PV.63

United Nations system, as well as cooperation and
coordination with other relevant organizations with a
view to addressing mutual security concerns. In that
regard, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue his good work, including by
further enhancing security consciousness within the
Organization and by further developing and
implementing a strengthened and unified security
management system for the United Nations.
The informal consultations on the draft resolution
were conducted in a positive manner, and we thank all
interested
delegations
for
their
constructive
engagement on the text. It is our sincere hope that this
draft resolution will help contribute to wider efforts to
provide the security and protection required for
humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel
to assist those in need.
Finally, in addition to the countries listed, the
following countries have requested to be included as
sponsors of draft resolution A/60/L.37, on safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel: Andorra, Brazil, Chile,
Hungary, Latvia, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste and Uruguay.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/60/L.38.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, draft resolution
A/60/L.38, on strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations.
It is a particular honour, Sir, to introduce this
draft resolution under your presidency, as it draws
upon the groundbreaking work for United Nations
humanitarian assistance in which you once took the
lead, which resulted in the often-referred-to resolution
46/182 of 1991. The draft before us today would lead
to further progress in strengthening the coordination of
the United Nations humanitarian system, which you
helped to create in 1991.
I should like to announce that, since the draft
resolution was submitted to the Assembly, the
following countries have become sponsors: Albania,
Andorra, Australia, Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Chile,

4

Croatia, Hungary, Jamaica, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Nicaragua, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Samoa, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and the United States of America.
My delegation is grateful for the improvements
made in the text by delegations through a series of
informal consultations. We would like to thank the
sponsors and other delegations for the good and
constructive spirit of cooperation and partnership in
which the consultations were held. I would also like to
take this opportunity to thank the Ambassador of
Luxembourg, Mr. Jean-Marc Hoscheit, for ably guiding
our work.
The draft resolution addresses both issues of
important principle for humanitarian assistance and
issues related to efforts to further strengthen
international humanitarian response.
With regard to the first category, I would like to
emphasize that the draft reaffirms the principles of
neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence for
the provision of humanitarian assistance and calls upon
Governments and parties in complex humanitarian
emergencies to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies and organizations and
to ensure safe and unhindered access to affected
populations. It expresses the General Assembly’s grave
concern about violence deliberately directed against
civilian populations in many emergency situations. It
calls upon States to adopt preventive measures and
effective responses to acts of violence against civilian
populations and invites States to promote a culture of
protection. It also expresses deep concern at the
number and scale of natural disasters and their horrific
impact, which we have witnessed this year in the
Indian Ocean region and more recently in Pakistan, the
United States and Central America.
In the second category, the main issue is the
upgrading of the current Central Emergency Revolving
Fund to a Central Emergency Response Fund — a
measure that will ensure a more predictable and timely
response to humanitarian emergencies. Its objectives
will be to promote early action and response aimed at
reducing loss of life. It will enhance the response to
time-critical requirements and will address situations in
which humanitarian response is underfunded.
The draft urges Member States — and invites the
private sector and all concerned individuals and

A/60/PV.63

institutions — to consider making contributions to the
Fund. Many generous pledges have already been made,
totalling more than $107 million. And I am pleased to
announce that today, the Swedish Government decided
to contribute $40 million before the end of the year, so
that the new Fund can become operational almost
immediately after we take a decision here. Our
collective aim should be to reach $500 million.
The draft resolution also encourages the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
continue its efforts to strengthen the coordination of
humanitarian assistance, and calls upon relevant
humanitarian actors to strengthen humanitarian
response capacity at all levels and coordination at the
field level and to enhance transparency, performance
and accountability. It also calls for improvement of the
consolidated appeals process.
In its final paragraph, the draft resolution
requests the Secretary-General to report to the next
session of the General Assembly, through the
Economic and Social Council, on progress made in
strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations.
I would like to make two technical corrections to
the text. At the end of operative paragraph 15, the
comma between the words “State” and “as” should be
deleted. In paragraph 17, the words “that” and “is”
after first word, “Affirms”, should be deleted; the
paragraph would thus begin, “Affirms its role to
provide”.
My delegation and the other sponsors hope that
the draft resolution contained in document A/60/L.38
will be adopted by consensus.
The President: I noticed the beginnings of a
round of applause at the statement just made by the
representative of Sweden, which I think was in tribute
to the setting up of the Central Emergency Response
Fund, which will make a great difference. I will come
back to that issue later when the Secretary-General
joins us. But I am also grateful for the draft
resolution’s reference to resolution 46/182, adopted on
20 December 1991. It was finalized at about 1 a.m. of
the night of 17 and 18 December 1991. I was the Chair
of those negotiations. I only want to say that at that
time the goal was to achieve a huge fund of $50
million. The Central Emergency Revolving Fund, as it
was called, became operational on 1 May 1992. We
received the last $1 million on 30 April 1992. We were

extremely happy when that took place; we had the
Fund on 1 May 1992.
It is a sign of how serious these issues have
become when one realizes that here we are talking
about a fund 10 times that size. It is both a sad and a
joyful occasion — sad to note that we have huge
disasters in the world that require such great resources,
but also a good sign that there is enough solidarity in
the world to make sure that such a fund is to be put in
place. I think that at Christmas, at holiday time, we
need to have that sign of solidarity, but also a sign that
we are on the way to fulfilling one issue after another
of the summit outcome document.
I just made a little bit of an excursion from the
normal functions of the presidency; I hope members do
not consider this a Swedish conspiracy to influence the
agenda, but it was in a good cause.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Jamaica to introduce draft resolution A/60/L.39.
Mrs. Bowen (Jamaica): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
draft resolution A/60/L.39, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”.
We are pleased to announce that in addition to
the sponsors listed in the text — Greece, Japan, the
Russian Federation, Sweden and the United
Kingdom — the following countries have also joined
as sponsors: Austria, Belarus, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Iceland,
Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia and Turkey.
I wish to make a slight editorial correction to
operative paragraph 10 of the English text. In line 7,
delete the “s” in the word “notes”, so that the relevant
phrase reads “takes note in this regard”.
Natural disasters have always been a part of our
reality; however, over the last year in particular, we
have witnessed an increase in the frequency and scale
of their occurrence, creating serious challenges for
many countries suffering their adverse effects. Some of
the consequences are long-lasting, especially in
developing countries where they can seriously affect
social and economic development. We are well aware
that it may not be possible to totally eliminate the
suffering caused by natural disasters, but we believe

5

A/60/PV.63

that the international response should not only focus on
immediate response but also on the long-term
rehabilitation and developmental needs of States
recovering from them.
The draft resolution is based on the substance of
previous texts on the same subject and attempts have
been made to streamline and update it, based on recent
developments. To begin with, the text, inter alia,
reaffirms resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991,
which sets out the guiding principles for the
strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations system.
We also recall your outstanding role, Mr. President, in
finalizing that resolution.
The draft also emphasizes the role of the
concerned State in minimizing the impact of a natural
disaster, while also recognizing the importance of
international cooperation in supporting the efforts of
affected countries which may have limited capacities to
fulfil that requirement. The Group of 77 and China also
recognizes the necessity of coordination among
respective partners, including affected States, regional
and international organizations and civil society,
throughout relief operations in medium and long-term
rehabilitation and reconstruction, in a manner that
reduces vulnerability to future natural hazards.
The Group of 77 and China attaches importance
to strengthening the efforts of countries, in particular
developing countries, to enhance their capacities at all
levels in order to prepare for and respond rapidly to
natural disasters and to mitigate against their harmful
effects.
We are grateful to our partners for the
constructive, compromising and friendly spirit in
which our informal consultations on the draft took
place. That has led to a reasonable outcome which we
hope will be confirmed by the adoption of the text by
consensus.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge the outstanding
work of the Indian delegation, in particular Ms. Ruchi
Ghanashyam, in facilitating the text.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolutions A/60/L.36, A/60/L.37, A/60/L.38, as
orally corrected, and A/60/L.39, as orally corrected.
Before giving the floor to the representative of
Cuba, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
before action is taken on the draft resolutions, may I

6

remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Cumberbach Miguén (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation’s explanation of vote will
refer to draft resolution A/60/L.38. Cuba considers
with special attention the question of humanitarian
assistance. If one lives in a region where climatic
occurrences are increasingly frequent and each time
leave behind greater destruction, then efforts in that
area are essential to help mitigate the effects of those
disasters. Moreover, we have extended our cooperation
to our neighbours in the Caribbean and the Gulf of
Mexico to cope with the consequences of hurricanes
that afflict the area.
We believe, however, that the urgent needs of
those caught in emergency situations should not be
used to introduce notions that do not enjoy consensus
among the members of the General Assembly, such as
the so-called culture of protection referred to in
operative paragraph 3.
Furthermore, we would like to make it clear that
operative paragraph 9 should not be understood as
reinterpreting the agreement on the triennial
comprehensive review of programmes, that there must
be no attempt to expand the mandates and functions of
United Nations officials present in particular countries
and that the use of the terms “appropriate authority,
resources and accountability” in this case refers strictly
to the internal functioning of agencies in the field.
Lastly, we sincerely hope that the expansion of
the Central Emergency Revolving Fund will help
tackle the funding requirements of humanitarian
emergencies and that the resources that are distributed
in an equitable manner are not earmarked in advance.
Disbursement of funds should be carried out with
respect for resolution 46/182, which sets out guiding
principles for the provision of such humanitarian
assistance.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolutions A/60/L.36, L.37, L.38, as
orally corrected, and L.39, as orally corrected.
We will first take action on draft resolution
A/60/L.37, which is entitled “Safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”.

A/60/PV.63

Angola, Cape Verde, Fiji, Grenada, Mali, Malta,
Spain and Ukraine have added their names to the list of
sponsors.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/60/L.37?
Draft resolution A/60/L.37
(resolution 60/123).

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution A/60/L.38 is
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations”.
Angola,
Belize,
Cape
Verde,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Israel, Mali, the Marshall Islands, Pakistan,
the Republic of Moldova, the Seychelles, Spain,
Timor-Leste, Thailand and Ukraine have added their
names to the list of sponsors.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/60/L.38, as orally
corrected?
Draft resolution A/60/L.38, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 60/124).
The President: Draft resolution A/60/L.39 is
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/60/L.39, as orally
corrected?
Draft resolution A/60/L.39, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 60/125).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
A/60/L.36, entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian
people”.
I call on the representative of the United
Kingdom.
Ms. Brazier (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to propose a revision to the fourth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/60/L.36.
The new paragraph would read as follows:
“Gravely concerned at the deterioration in
the living conditions of the Palestinian people, in
particular children, throughout the occupied
territory,
which
constitutes
a
mounting
humanitarian crisis”.

The revision was agreed in informal consultations
and has not been reflected in the text submitted.
The President: Cape Verde has become an
additional sponsor of draft resolution A/60/L.36.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/60/L.36, as orally
revised?
Draft resolution A/60/L.36, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 60/126).
The President: Before giving the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the draft resolution just adopted, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I call on the representative of Israel.
Mr. Cohen (Israel): Israel has maintained
longstanding support for humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people, and we are pleased to join the
consensus on this resolution. We worked closely with
the European Union, the United States and the
Palestinians in order to be able to support this
resolution and we are very happy that these issues can
be affirmed in this context.
I would like to emphasize that the drafting of this
resolution was an example of a process that has
fostered mutual respect and compromise. Unlike so
many resolutions that target Israel in a biased,
unbalanced manner, this resolution demonstrates that
finding the middle ground is beneficial to our mutual
endeavours, and we hope that such a mechanism will
be replicated in future resolutions that address the
Middle East.
We believe that alleviating human suffering and
enhancing the security, welfare and prosperity of all
peoples in the Middle East are crucial components of
successful peace initiatives, and the Israeli Government
sets those goals as vital objectives. We have taken a
number of steps to improve the humanitarian welfare
of our Palestinian neighbours, such as working to the
greatest extent possible in an environment marred by
terrorism, to transport food, medicine, humanitarian
assistance and other necessities to Palestinian areas.
Israeli and Palestinian civilians have endured
great difficulty and pain as a result of ongoing terrorist
activity during the past five years. We believe that this

7

A/60/PV.63

dangerous phenomenon continues to serve as the
largest obstacle to improving the humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian people. The fact that
terrorist organizations freely operate within the
Palestinian Authority serves as a direct threat to Israeli
and Palestinian civilians and the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance.
Moreover, humanitarian efforts are all too often
exploited by terrorist organizations. Several weeks ago,
an important agreement between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority regarding the border crossings
was agreed upon. Currently, arrangements are being
made to enable passage from Gaza to the West Bank.
Unfortunately, Israel is receiving reports that known
terrorists are freely crossing the Rafah border from
Egypt into the Gaza Strip. The underlying cause of the
violence in the region and the root of the humanitarian
situation of the Palestinian people remains that
unfortunate, yet preventable type of violence.
Having said all that, and despite the horrific
terror act in Netanya a few days ago, it should be
emphasized that, as of 12 December 2005, 23,000
Palestinian employees — 7,000 from the Gaza Strip
and 16,000 from the West Bank — are approved to
work in Israel in different sectors. In addition, 14,200
Palestinians who are international organization
employees are crossing into Israel every day — 12,500
from the West Bank and 1,700 from the Gaza Strip.
Israel believes that humanitarian assistance must
be provided without selectivity or politicization.
Israel’s decision to join consensus on this resolution
should reflect that non-political good will. It should not
be misconstrued as an endorsement of certain items
within the text that contradict both the language
expressed in the agreements of the parties and the
underlying spirit of those agreements. Furthermore, it
is important to emphasize that civilians on both sides
in the conflict endure pain. No one party has a
monopoly on suffering, and we must ensure that both
peoples live without violence or fear.
The well-being of Palestinian and Israeli civilians
alike will come about only through the mutual
fulfilment of the obligations set out in the road map.
The first phase of the road map requires the Palestinian
Authority to put a stop to terrorism. Israel realizes that
dismantling the terrorist infrastructure represents a
difficult course of action. However, in order to advance
towards peace, it is a necessary course of action. Israel

8

remains hopeful that, with responsible leadership and
effective institutions, the dismantling of terrorist
organizations and a commitment to peaceful
coexistence, Israelis and Palestinians can work together
to improve the humanitarian conditions of both our
peoples.
The President: I welcome the Secretary-General
to the General Assembly.
We all have reason to warmly welcome the
General Assembly’s adoption today of several
important resolutions in the humanitarian area. I want
particularly to highlight the landmark resolution on
strengthening the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, which
establishes the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF). This represents a major modernization and a
great step forward for the basic framework of the
United
Nations
coordination
of
international
humanitarian assistance that was set out in General
Assembly 46/182, adopted in 1991.
All members, whom I wish to thank, have worked
hard on achieving that important outcome. I would like
to express particular thanks to Ambassador Anders
Lidén of Sweden and to the coordinator of the
resolution, Mr. Pelle Enarsson, for successfully
concluding the negotiation on that matter.
I would also like to express my gratitude here to
the overall coordinator of these important humanitarian
resolutions considered directly in plenary, Ambassador
Jean-Marc Hoscheit of Luxembourg, for his able
leadership in ensuring coherence and the timely
conclusion of the humanitarian resolution. All of them
have done a great job, and I thank them.
By today’s action on the Central Emergency
Response Fund, we have fulfilled the mandate given by
our leaders, who last September called upon us in the
summit outcome document to make concrete
improvements to the humanitarian response system,
including the timeliness and predictability of
humanitarian funding. Today therefore also marks a
day when we are moving from words to deeds and to
the implementation of what our leaders decided in
September.
By establishing the CERF, we have taken a
critical decision to ensure that the international
response to today’s humanitarian crises is more
effective and more equitable. Moreover, we have

A/60/PV.63

demonstrated that the States Members of the United
Nations are willing to meet the demands of the twentyfirst century in this important area in a flexible and
responsible way. I am grateful to Member States for
their generous contributions to the Fund.
With this resolution, a sizeable grant element has
been added to the existing CERF to help launch relief
operations in the crucial days of a crisis, to prevent a
crisis from spiralling out of control, and to address
imbalances in emergency funding. We have called
upon the Secretary-General to make the necessary
managerial, administrative and advisory arrangements
to launch and implement the new CERF. We have also
affirmed the importance of the General Assembly and
of the Economic and Social Council in providing
guidance for the use of the Fund, in line with the
principles laid down in resolution 46/182 of 1991.
Improved humanitarian financing, however, is
only one of the key components of the humanitarian
reform process. We also need to strengthen the
capacity of the global humanitarian system and
continue to improve the coordination of humanitarian
activities in the field. Work will proceed on that in the
General Assembly in the spring.
These components of the humanitarian reform
agenda must be taken forward together, across the
Secretariat, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, if they are to be effective. All three
areas deserve the continued attention and support of
Member States.
We have adopted this resolution today with the
support of donor and recipient countries, from those
most prone to disasters and those most able and willing
to lend assistance. Such broad ownership of this
resolution demonstrates the truly global nature and
impact of humanitarian crises and reinforces the need
to act with common resolve. It is through our collective
action and continued support of these reforms that we
will succeed in improving the global humanitarian
system and, by that, make a difference for human
beings in dire need.
I am gratified that we are ending a particularly
difficult year in terms of humanitarian crises on a more
positive note. Images of the devastating effects of giant
hurricanes in the Caribbean, of the mudslides in
Central America and the horrific earthquakes in South
Asia are still before us and are engraved in our minds
and in our souls.

Here I would like to pay tribute to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
under the strong leadership of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Jan Egeland, and to all the humanitarian
organizations and staff who have helped alleviate the
pain and suffering brought about by far too many manmade and natural disasters around the world.
The year 2005 demonstrated, in lives lost and in
livelihoods
destroyed,
just
how
destructive,
indiscriminate
and
widespread
humanitarian
emergencies can be. But today we have also seen that
there is solidarity, there is passion in acting, there is
compassion in acting. Without passion, nothing
happens in life. Without compassion, the wrong things
happen. Let us make a strengthened humanitarian
response system our common commitment and our
goal for 2006.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I am delighted that
Member States have approved the standing Central
Emergency Revolving Fund mandated by the outcome
document of the world summit. As a result of this
resolution, the upgraded Fund will become known as
the Central Emergency Response Fund. The
Assembly’s action today ensures that in the critical
realm of humanitarian assistance, the United Nations
will do more and do it sooner.
As the States Members of the United Nations
know better than anyone, the World Summit Outcome
was a very ambitious document, and its follow-up is a
daunting task. That was clear from the start, but it was
also clear that a bold vision was necessary to prepare
the United Nations for the twenty-first century. Today,
thanks to the efforts of President Eliasson and of the
entire membership, we celebrate our first success.
The Emergency Fund has been a critical part of
broad humanitarian reform. As outlined in my report
"In larger freedom", such reform must provide for
more timely and predictable funding, a strengthened
humanitarian response capacity and better field
coordination.
For far too long, humanitarian assistance for
disaster victims has remained a reactive process. Relief
funds have been sought only after disaster has struck.
Equally unacceptable is the unequal funding of
different crises, with televised or strategically situated
suffering receiving disproportionate attention. This has

9

A/60/PV.63

meant that, all too often, as money trickled in, lives
which could and should have been saved were lost.
That is why I am especially encouraged by the
broad General Assembly consensus in favour of this
new stand-by fund. I hope that this support will
translate into generous and immediate funding. If it
does, it will allow more equitable distribution of relief,
based on demonstrated need. It will also allow us to
make emergency grants for rescue work in the
aftermath of disasters. Quite simply, it will save lives.
Already, at September's summit, donor nations
have pledged $175 million in indicative support for the
fund. Most of this money has been pledged by the
European Union States. I thank them for their
generosity and call on other Member States to
contribute no less wholeheartedly.
For our part, we in the Secretariat will consult
with Member States and with other stakeholders to
work out detailed administrative and management
arrangements for the stand-by Fund. We promise to
manage it with utmost transparency. We will be
accountable, and we shall provide full public
disclosure of all donations and expenditures. I think
that, as the President has indicated, this will allow the
Humanitarian Coordinator and all our humanitarian
staff to respond much more quickly, and it will provide
an essential means of doing so that they have lacked
over the past year, as we have seen in one crisis after
the other.
I hope that more pieces of the summit follow-up
puzzle will fall into place soon. In that regard, I look
forward to next week's adoption by Member States of
the revised draft resolution to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission.
In the meantime, let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the Assembly on today's historic
achievement.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement and for his encouragement and
support for humanitarian work and for the
humanitarian workers, out there in the field, here at
home at Headquarters and all over the world. I wish
also to thank him for his expression of solidarity with
the victims of disasters, whom we should always keep
in mind.
I give the floor to the observer of Palestine.

10

Ms. Rasheed (Palestine): On behalf of the
delegation of Palestine, allow me to extend our thanks
to the European Union for putting forth the resolution
which was just adopted by consensus, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”, and to thank all
delegations for having supported this resolution.
We should also like to thank the European Union
for the inclusion of language on Palestinian children in
this resolution, following the outcome of successful
negotiations held during this session. We believe that
such an inclusion of language on Palestinian children
in a consensus resolution in the General Assembly
sends a very strong message to the Palestinian people
that the international community has recognized and
addressed the detrimental effects of the Israeli
occupation on the lives of Palestinian children.
We believe also that this resolution will send a
strong message of solidarity to the entire Palestinian
population living under Israel’s 38-year-long brutal
occupation and will indeed greatly assist in
ameliorating their tragic plight.
We look forward to the day when the Palestinian
people will not have to depend on humanitarian
assistance from the international community and will
be able to live in their own independent State of
Palestine, free from occupation, free from fear and
State terrorism committed by Israel, the occupying
power, and free from Israeli subjugation.
The President: With this, we can conclude these
deliberations on these issues. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 73?
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
73 and its sub-item (a).
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Agenda item 10
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Report of the Secretary-General (A/60/556)

A/60/PV.63

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now consider agenda item 10,
entitled “Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies”. The report of the
Secretary-General has been circulated in document
A/60/556.
Mr. Choisuren (Mongolia): It is a great privilege
and a distinct honour for me to speak here,
representing the host country of the fifth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies
(ICNRD), held in Ulaanbaatar in 2003. I speak here
also in my capacity as current ICNRD Chair.
The global momentum towards democratization,
generated over the last three decades, during which
many States, including my own, have embarked upon a
process of democratization and many others have
moved to restore their democratic roots, is truly
remarkable in its scope and strength. Democracy today
is firmly established as a universal value. This was
most recently reaffirmed by the world leaders in the
outcome document of the recent world summit.
The movement of new or restored democracies,
now global, was a product of the “third wave of
democratization”. Since its inception 17 years ago, the
movement has, in its turn, played a prominent role in
further promoting the process of democratization that
has swept the world. The conferences of new or
restored democracies have been a source of inspiration
for many fledgling democracies in their struggle to
build modern and functioning democratic societies
based upon the principles of pluralism, respect for
human rights, freedom of the press and democratic
governance. The conferences have adopted important
declarations and plans of action and have facilitated the
exchange of views, experiences and lessons learnt
among a wide array of new, restored and mature
democracies.
Declarations and plans, though important, are not
enough. They must be followed by concrete actions or,
to borrow the words of the Secretary-General in his
report In larger freedom, “commitments must be
matched by performance”. My country, Mongolia, with
assistance from the United Nations Development
Programme, has therefore initiated, for the first time in
the history of ICNRD, the pioneering experience of
implementing practical follow-up activities to the
outcome documents of the conference and catalysing a

process of national adaptation and development of the
international democracy agenda. Information on the
innovations that Mongolia is piloting within the
framework of the ICNRD-5 follow-up is contained in
the Secretary-General’s report under this agenda item
contained in document A/60/556. Allow me,
nevertheless, to touch briefly upon some of these
innovations.
The Government of Mongolia has launched a
pilot programme aimed at: first, formulating a national
plan of action to consolidate democracy, and secondly,
developing nationally-owned democratic governance
indicators and preparing a country information note for
Mongolia to measure its democratic performance, thus
establishing the baselines for and benchmarking the
democratic process in the country. This programme
will facilitate the design and piloting of methodologies
that other new or restored democracies can use in the
preparation of their national action plans, country
information notes and democracy indicators databases,
as agreed under the Ulaanbaatar Plan of Action.
In the context of developing democratic
governance indicators and the national plan of action,
Mongolia held its very first national state-ofdemocracy conference in June of this year. It brought
together representatives of Government and civil
society in an all-inclusive discussion of the quality of
democracy in the country, its opportunities and
challenges, and democratic solutions to crucial
development issues Mongolia is now facing. Regional
dialogues and consultations are now being planned to
share Mongolia’s follow-up experiences with other
new or restored democracies.
Let me underline the importance of the growing
need to assess progress in democratization. Improving
the quality of democracy has become a political
requirement in both the new or restored democracies
and the mature democracies. Today, a general
commitment to the norms of democracy is no longer
enough. The development of democracy assessment
methodologies and governance indicator exercises
contributes to the systematic assessment of a country’s
political life by the people in democracies and helps to
answer the question: how democratic is a society in
practice? How far have we progressed and what needs
to be done to strengthen democracy in the future? So
far, it is only in the Fifth ICNRD outcome documents
that the Governments of new or restored democracies,
along with their counterparts from mature democracies,

11

A/60/PV.63

have expressed their willingness to develop nationallyowned democratic governance indicator databases to
be better able to monitor their progress in democratic
and social development over time. The development of
such indicators in Mongolia will be the first attempt to
produce a democracy assessment under the aegis of a
governmental institution — the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, in our case.
Democracy is not an abstract value; it has a direct
impact on the everyday lives of people. As our leaders
stressed in the outcome document, democracy,
development and respect for all human rights and
fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing; therefore, the socio-economic dimension
of democratization must be fully taken into account
lest we put to risk the very credibility of that process.
Accordingly, the democratic governance indicators in
Mongolia will be specifically tailored to the
requirements of Mongolian policymakers and
responsive to priorities for reforms on the policy
agenda from the point of view of the people, especially
the poor and other disadvantaged groups.
My delegation expresses its gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his observation that significant
progress has been made by Mongolia in ensuring a
more effective follow-up to the recommendations
adopted at the Fifth International Conference. I would
like especially to note the group of friends of the Chair,
which was established during the Fifth ICNRD with
the purpose of assisting the Chair in the run-up to the
next ICNRD, as an important innovation in that
respect. We also agree with the Secretary-General on
the necessity to further discuss the strengthening and
broadening in scope and substance of the
implementation process of the decisions taken at each
Conference.
The Secretary-General, in his report on support
by the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies, also touched upon the
coordination between the International Conference of
New or Restored Democracies and other global and
regional intergovernmental democracy movements or
organizations,
including
the
Community
of
Democracies. Indeed, mutually supportive language
has been adopted by both the ICNRD, with its allinclusive composition, and the Community, with its
more limited approach to membership. The

12

Ulaanbaatar
encouraged

Declaration

of

the

Fifth

ICNRD

“the two forums to work closely together in the
pursuit of the common goal of developing and
deepening democracy throughout the world”,
and the Community of Democracies, at its third
ministerial meeting held earlier this year in Santiago,
took a commitment to
“encourage cooperation with the ICNRD as an
intergovernmental forum to promote and
consolidate democratic governance in emerging
and new democracies”.
Mongolia, in its capacity as ICNRD Chair, a
participating State of the Community of Democracies,
and now a member of the Convening Group of the
Community, has been proactive in its efforts to bring
the two global intergovernmental movements aimed at
democracy promotion and consolidation closer
together. For example, Mongolia, as ICNRD Chair,
participated earlier this year in the Community-led
delegation to Georgia to share democratic experiences.
Moreover, my delegation recently developed a nonpaper on possible ways of bringing the two
movements — ICNRD and the Community of
Democracies — closer together and distributed it
among the wide membership of the ICNRD, seeking
their views. One of the first practical steps for the two
movements, in our view, could be the participation of a
Community of Democracies delegation in the regional
activities on the exchange of experiences in follow-up
to the Fifth ICNRD that Mongolia is planning to
organize.
In the same vein, Mongolia can only
welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General to
initiate a study on the comparative advantages,
complementarity and desirable distribution of labour of
various intergovernmental democracy movements,
organizations and institutes, be they global or regional,
and on how the United Nations system has worked and
could further work with them in a mutually supportive
way. Such a study, we hope, will be conducive to the
global democracy promotion and consolidation effort
by presenting concrete proposals and recommendations
on streamlining and bringing more coherence into the
actions of different stakeholders in that process, as well
as the role and possible support of the United Nations
system.

A/60/PV.63

Democratization is not an event; it is a process
that takes years or even decades of relentless effort.
Democracy is also a process that grows from within
societies, but can and should be supported from
outside. The United Nations, as an embodiment of the
collective will of the world’s peoples, has a natural role
to play in supporting democracy around the globe. It
was reassuring to witness this year an important
development in that particular field of United Nations
activities — the establishment of the Democracy Fund
at the United Nations, which my country was among
the first to welcome.
The role of well-designed development and
democracy-building assistance in the circumstances of
an
underdeveloped
democracy
cannot
be
overestimated. We must always bear in mind that there
is no “one size fits all” democracy recipe, just as there
are no absolutely similar recipes for development
challenges. The best assistance is one that is sensitive
to national specificities and also mindful of universal
lessons that we have all accumulated in the past
30 years of the third wave of democratization. My
delegation therefore welcomes the fact that the primary
purpose of the Fund will be to support projects that
consolidate and strengthen democratic institutions and
facilitate democratic governance in new or restored
democracies within the particular historical and
cultural context of the country and region concerned,
and looks forward to its early operationalization.
Guided by Mongolia’s post-communist transition
experience and its responsibility as Chair of the Fifth
ICNRD, we believe that capacity-building and
institution-building related to democratic governance
and the rule of law, including aspects relevant to the
implementation of international legal instruments on
human rights and freedoms, should be the focus of the
first-generation activities of the Democracy Fund. I
would also like to emphasize that ICNRD, as an allinclusive movement reflective of the composition of
the United Nations membership, and with a serious
substantive agenda on democratic governance and civil
society, could also become a Democracy Fund partner
in advancing the international democracy agenda.
In conclusion, let me note that my delegation will
introduce in the near future a draft resolution under this
agenda item, the text of which we shall distribute to all
delegations early next week. We sincerely hope that the
draft resolution will be able to command the same or

greater support and number of sponsorships from
among the Member States than in previous years.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 25 countries of the
European Union. A number of other countries have
aligned themselves with this statement. They are
Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, Iceland, Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova.
The European Union (EU) is committed to the
implementation and promotion worldwide of
democratic principles. The EU warmly welcomes the
reaffirmation, contained in the outcome document of
the world summit, that democracy is a universal value
and that democracy, development and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms are all
interdependent and mutually reinforcing. The
promotion and protection of human rights are
prerequisites for the existence of a democratic society,
while democracy is the best means of ensuring the full
realization and implementation of all human rights in
the long term. Together, they help deliver genuine
prosperity, progress and sustainable development. It is
for this reason that the protection and advancement of
democracy and the rule of law are among the top
priorities for the international community.
The European Union considers that international
peace and security can best be served by the spread and
consolidation of democracy. A well coordinated policy
within the framework of the United Nations can help to
achieve peaceful solutions to the conflicts that are
threatening stability in different areas of the world and
to enable democracy to take root where it has never
existed before, or where it has been eliminated by war,
dictatorship or the breakdown of civil society.
It is equally necessary to shore up democratic
institutions in countries in transition and to support
democracy in all countries that have recently moved to
a democratic system. We share the assessment of the
Secretary-General in his report entitled “In larger
freedom” that “The United Nations does more than any
other single organization to promote and strengthen
democratic institutions and practices around the world”
(A/59/2005, para. 151).
Because of the authority of the United Nations,
the European Union considers the United Nations the
most appropriate international framework within which

13

A/60/PV.63

to work to enhance and promote democracy and human
rights throughout the world. In particular, we would
like to underline the role played by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and her focal point
on democracy. The European Union welcomes the
establishment of the United Nations Democracy Fund
to take forward that vital work. We encourage the
Secretary-General and the Fund to take stock of the
experiences and activities of the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations in that
field and to cooperate closely with them in that task.
Spreading good governance, supporting social
and political reform, dealing with corruption and abuse
of power, establishing the rule of law and protecting
human rights are the best means of strengthening the
international order. Accordingly, the European Union is
committed to promoting democratization through its
own cooperation programmes and in support of the
United Nations.
The representative of Mongolia has just referred
to the fifth International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies, held in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia,
from 10 to 12 September 2003. The European Union
noted that the outcome of that Conference proved there
was growing support for strengthening democracy in
all the regions of the world. A system of government
which is based on the rule of law, democracy allows
the free expression of political opinions through
electoral and other participatory mechanisms, and
guarantees the independence of the judiciary, freedom
of the media and the promotion of human society,
including the fight against exclusion and poverty.
The participants in the Ulaanbaatar Conference
endorsed
those
democratic
principles
while
acknowledging that there was no one, ideal model for
democracy. The European Union agrees. The
Conference also addressed the many challenges to
democracy, among which are poverty, international
terrorism, transnational economic crime, HIV/AIDS
and blatant disregard for human rights. It was agreed
that while it is crucial to fight such threats effectively,
that must be done without eroding human rights or
resorting to repression.
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The European Union would like once again to
thank Mongolia for successfully hosting the 2003
Conference. We look forward to the sixth International

14

Conference that is due to take place in Qatar in
November 2006 as an opportunity to consolidate the
gains that have been made and to tackle the challenges
ahead.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 57/32 of 19 November
2002, I call upon the Observer of the InterParliamentary Union.
Mrs. Filip (Inter-Parliamentary Union): I am
pleased to take the floor and to refer to the report of the
Secretary-General under consideration today on the
efforts under way to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies (A/60/556), and to expand a bit
on the contribution that the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU) is bringing to that process.
Back in 1997, the member parliaments of the IPU
developed and adopted a Universal Declaration on
Democracy which has since guided much of our action,
particularly as it relates to providing relevant
assistance to young parliamentary institutions and
building capacities therein. Parliament is, after all, the
main institution of the State where the voices of all,
majority and minorities, should be heard and their
interests adequately articulated. It is in parliaments that
the diverging interests of a nation compete and are, or
should be, channelled towards the single objective of
ensuring the common good, which inevitably includes
the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
On the occasion of the fifth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies, held in
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, some two years ago, the IPU
worked together with the Parliament of Mongolia in
organizing a parliamentary forum aimed at looking at
the role of parliaments in promoting democracy.
Indeed, as the overall theme of the fifth Conference
was democracy, good governance and civil society, the
theme was reflected in the parliamentary forum and
participants focused on how parliaments could
strengthen democracy in partnership with civil society
and how that role could be fulfilled in a coherent and
coordinated manner at the national and international
levels. The overarching focus of the debates was
participation as a cornerstone of democracy.
At the end of their deliberations, members of
parliament who attended the event, numbering some
120 from over 50 countries, adopted a declaration that
was subsequently endorsed by the IPU’s full

A/60/PV.63

membership. That declaration reiterates the core
principles and values of participation, transparency and
accountability and outlines the key ingredients of any
democracy — respect for human rights, including
freedom of expression and association, the rule of law,
partnership between men and women in political life
and the existence of a vibrant civil society.
The Declaration also contains a menu of
proposed parliamentary action in support of
democracy. It includes, but is not limited to,
undertaking structural and legislative reforms at the
national level to facilitate the greater participation of
women in decision-making, fostering integrity and
public trust and confidence in public institutions
through more rigorous application of codes of conduct,
and generally seeking more effective parliamentary
oversight processes and structures. Also, there was a
strong sense that democracy should not remain a
theoretical concept.
The forum spent a great deal of time debating
ways in which democracy could be translated into
concrete and practical reality. For instance, democracy
should help to combat corruption through more
transparency in the management of public affairs as a
means of ensuring accountable, honest and effective
government.
The Ulaanbaatar parliamentarian forum was the
first such event at the International Conference. It was
thus an innovative and successful experience as
evidenced by the agreement of the main Conference for
it to become a permanent feature of the Conference.
Therefore, on the occasion of the sixth
International Conference next year in Doha,
parliamentarians will provide an important opportunity
to take stock of the progress achieved in the
restoration, establishment and consolidation of
democratic processes at the national level — for
example, more countries holding free elections,
establishing representative institutions, including
parliaments, and allowing for the plurality of
expression. It will also allow for a review of the areas
where more efforts will need to be deployed, including
through more balanced representation of men and
women in political processes.
For its part, the IPU has been following up on a
number of the recommendations of the forum. It is

currently in the process of updating its standards in the
area of elections. It has recently published a
compendium of expert papers on developments in the
electoral field, including innovative mechanisms by
which to judge elections. Early next year, it expects to
publish an updated version of its publication Free and
Fair Elections: International Law and Practice. That
publication was first issued 10 years ago, and contains
the text of the Declaration on Criteria for Free and Fair
Elections, which has been used worldwide as a guide
for those involved in organizing and monitoring
elections.
Another exercise on which the IPU has embarked
as a direct follow-up to the parliamentarians’ forum in
Ulaanbaatar is a project to establish a framework for
democracy from the parliamentary perspective. That
project is identifying good practices by parliaments in
promoting democracy, with a specific focus on
representation at both the national and international
levels. The resulting framework should serve as a
guide for encouraging the promotion by parliaments of
processes and mechanisms that enhance democracy.
That project is expected to be concluded by the middle
of 2006 and will serve as an important contribution to
the sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies and the related parliamentarians’ forum,
to be held in Doha, Qatar, in November 2006.
Last but not least, in addition to those efforts the
IPU has continued its work to assist in strengthening
capacities in parliaments in emerging democracies such
as Afghanistan, Burundi, Equatorial Guinea, TimorLeste, Albania and — hopefully very soon — Iraq.
In conclusion, I would like to mention that the
IPU welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General to
call for a study on the comparative advantages,
complementarity and desirable distribution of labour of
various intergovernmental and inter-State democracy
movements, organizations and institutes, whether
global or regional, and on how the United Nations
system has worked and could further work with them
in a mutually supportive way. The IPU stand ready to
be part of that process and looks forward to a more indepth discussion on this issue next year in Doha.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 10.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

15
