v.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ment Programme and other relevant United Nations
agencies and organizations:
(a) To assist Governments in the implementation of
those provisions;
(b) To take all necessary measures to initiate research, projects and programmes which will facilitate the
integration of women in rural development, by addressing themselves, inter alia, to:
(i) The problems experienced by women as a resu It
of migration from rural to urban areas;
(ii)

The need for training programmes which will
enable women to take advantage of all aspects
of new agro-technology;

. •.)
( 111

The impact of agro-business on women's traditional work in rural areas;
(iv) The need to encourage women's participation
in the co-operative movement and to ensure
their access to land, credit and marketing
facilities;
2. Welcomes also resolution 2, entitled "Women,
science and technology", adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Science and Technology for Development on 31 August 1979, 199 and reque8ts the SecretaryGeneral to proceed wi th th e implementation of th at
resolution and to report th ereon to th e General Assembly at its thirty-six th session;
3. Emphasizes the importance of the integration
and participation of women in the process of industrial
development and requests the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization at its Third General Conference, to be held at New Delhi from 21 January to
8 February 1980, to consider this question, giving particular attention to:
(a) The impact of new technology and the deployment of modern industries on women's traditional skills
and occupations, which may be endangered;
(b) The identification of ways and means to enhance
and facilitate the equal participation of women in industrial development, in both rural and urban areas;
4. Welcomes further Economic and Social Council
resolution 1979 / 11 of 9 May 1979, in which the Council
recommended that the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
should be located in a developing country and requested
the Institute to give priority in its programme of work to
the question of the effective mobilization and integration
of women in development;
5. Calls upon the World Conference of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace to include in the Programme of Action for the
second half of the Decade concrete measures for the
effective mobilization and integration of women in all
sectors of development, which will contribute to the
economic and social development of their countries;
6. Stresses the important role of the interagency
programme in the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace with regard to the
co-ordination of activities relating to the integration and
participation of women in the process of development
and requests the participating United Nations agencies
and organizations to proceed with the implementation
of the interagency programme;
1 0 9 See Report of the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda),
chap. VI, sect. A.

143

7. Requests Governments to provide information
on successful projects or programmes aimed at ameliorating the present situation of women in development
through, inter alia:
The effective mobilization of women in development;
(b) The facilitation of the integration and active
participation of women in development, including development planning;
8. Notes with regret that it has not been possible for
the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session the comprehensive
report requested in its resolution 33/200;
(a)

9. Urges the Secretary-General to prepare the report as soon as possible and to submit it to the Preparatory Committee for the New International Development
Strategy at its fifth session and to the Preparatory Committee for the World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women at its third session;
1O. Urges the United Nations agencies that have not
already done so to submit to the Secretary-General without delay the information called for in resolution 33/200
and requests the Secretary-General to submit the report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session; 200
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to pay
due attention, in preparing his analytical report to the
General Assembly at its special session in 1980, to the
importance of the effective mobilization and integration
of women in development.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/205.

Action programme in favour of developing
island countries 201

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3338 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 dealing, inter alia, with efforts to meet the special problems
of developing island countries,
Reiterating the specific action in favour of developing
island countries envisaged in resolution 98 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 202
Recalling its resolutions 31/156 of 21 December
1976 and 32/185 of 19 December 1977,
Mindful that further specific action is needed in the
case of developing island countries to assist them in
offsetting their major handicaps, in particular those developing island countries which suffer handicaps due
especially to smallness, remoteness, constraints in transport and communications, great distances from market
centres, highly limited internal markets, lack of marketing expertise, low resource endowment, lack of natural
resources, heavy dependence on a few commodities for
their foreign exchange earnings, shortage of administrative personnel and heavy financial burdens,
Emphasizing the need for a more effective response
by the international community to the various resolutions
Issued as document A/35/82.
See also sect. I, foot-note 11.
202 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
2 0°
2 01

General Assembly-Tbirty-fourtb Session

144
---------------

adopted by the General Assembly and its related organs
in favour of developing island countries,

1. Welcomes resolution I 11 (V) of 3 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development208 on specific action related to the particular needs
and problems of island developing countries;

2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the action programme in favour of developing island
countries ;204
3. Calls upon the international community to implement urgently the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of developing island countries envisaged in resolutions 98 (IV) and 111 (V) of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
4. Further calls upon the international community
to ensure that the criteria, terms and conditions governing the flow of bilateral and multilateral financial and
technical assistance to the developing island countries
shall be geared to the special needs and problems of the
countries concerned;
5. Invites the competent organs of the United Nations system to consider taking effective steps to enhance
their capacity to respond positively to the specific needs
of developing island countries at the national, regional
and interregional levels, for c;xample by strengthening
their technical and advisory services on behalf of those
countries;
6. Further invites the Preparatory Committee for
the New International Development Strategy to take
fully into account, in the formulation of the strategy for
the third United Nations development decade, the
particular needs and problems of developing island
countries;
7.

Requests the United Nations Development Pro-

gramme and invites international development institu

tions and bilateral institutions to consider increasing
their assistance to developing island countries;
8. Invites the United Nations Development Programme and other competent institutions to co-operate
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the programme ot activities envisaged in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of resoh1 1 ion 11 J (V) of the
Conference; 203
,
9. Recommends that developed countries, international development institutions and those developing
countries which are elaborating programmes of assistance in favour of other developiug countries should give
particular attention to request.•, for assistance from developing island countries;
. 10: Calls up'?n the r:egio_nal commissions urgently to
identify appropnate act10n m favour of the developing
island countries in their respective regions;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to include an
assessment of the situation in the developing island
countries in his analytical report to the General Assembly at its special session in 1980 on the establish-ment of the new international economic order called for
in Assembly resolution 13/ I 98 of 29 January' 1979.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
203 Ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No, E,7'JJLD.14), part one, sect. A
2o 4 A/34/ 544 and Add I and 2

34/206.

Implementation of section IV of the annu to
General Assembly resolution 32/ 197 on the
restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 197 4, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, by which it, inter aUa, established the Ad
Hoe Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic
and Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprehensive and
effective manner, and to make it more responsive to the
requirements of the provisions of the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order as well as those of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 32/ 197 of 20 December
1977, by which it, inter alia, endorsed the conclusions
and recommendations of the Ad Hoe Committee,
Recalling further its resolution 33/202 of 29 January 1979, in which it, inter alia, requested certain
actions and measures within the framework of the implementation of the conclusions and recommendations
of the Ad Hoe Committee,
Reaffirming that the process of restructuring the economic and social sectors of the United Nations system is
an integral part of the efforts required to ensure the
equitable, full and effective participation of the developing countries in the formulation and application of all
decisions within the United Nations system in the field of
development and international economic co-operation,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the decentralization of economic and social activities to,
and the strengthening of, the regional commissions205
and the progress report of the Secretary-General for
1979 on the restructuring of the economic and social
sectors of the United Nations system, 206
1. Takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/ 64 of 3 August 1979, entitled "Regional
co-operation and development";
2. Emphasizes the need for more vigorous action to
enable the regional commissions to play their role fully
as the main general economic and social development
centres within the United Nations system for their respective regions, through full and effective implementation
of the provisions of paragraphs 19, 23 and 26 of section
IV of the annex to General Assembly resolution 32/197;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance
with section V, paragraph 4, of General Assembly resolution 33/202, to intensify, through inter alia the
redeployment of existing posts from United Nations
Headquarters to the regional commissions, the development and application of the decentralization measures
contemplated in his reports on the restructuring of the
economic and social sectors of the United Nations system, submitted to the Economic and Social Council at
205
206

A/34/649.
E/1979/81.
