S/2018/831

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 September 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 4 June to 1 September 2018)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2406
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 March 2019 and, in accordance with prior
resolutions, requested me to report on the impleme ntation of the mandate every
90 days. It covers political and security developments between 4 June and 1 September
2018, the humanitarian situation and progress in the imp lementation of the Mission
mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
During the reporting period, efforts to revitalize the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan of 2015 gained momentum,
while on the domestic front, Parliament passed constitutional amendment bills
incorporating the peace agreement into the Transitional Constitution and extending
the mandate of the Transitional Government of National Unity. Meanwhile, the
national dialogue secretariat prepared for the next round of regional conferences.
Peace process
3.
Following the decisions of the Council of Ministers of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), at its 62nd Extraordinary Session, held on
31 May, the mediators further revised the proposal aimed at bridging the divergent
positions of the parties on critical outstanding issues in relation to governance and
security arrangements. The parties engaged in proximity talks from 18 to 20 June in
Addis Ababa, and on 20 June, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed, facilitated
a face-to-face meeting between the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir and the
leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition,
Riek Machar. This was the first meeting of the two principals since the resumption of
hostilities in July 2016. The following day, the IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and
Government, at its thirty-second extraordinary summit, held in Addis Ababa,
welcomed the face-to-face talks and mandated the President of the Sudan, Omer
Hassan Al-Bashir, to facilitate further discussions within two weeks to resolve the
remaining outstanding issues and to discuss measures to rehabilitate the South
Sudanese economy through bilateral cooperation between South Sudan an d the
Sudan. Thereafter, Kenya would facilitate a final round of talks to conclude the

18-14157 (E)

130918

*1814157*

S/2018/831

process. Riek Machar was also permitted to enter and exit the Sudan and Kenya for
the duration of the peace process.
4.
Face-to-face talks between the President and Riek Machar resumed in Khartoum
on 25 June and concluded with the Khartoum Declaration of Agreement between
Parties of the Conflict of South Sudan on 27 June, signed by the two principals, as
well as representatives of the South Sudan Opposition Alliance, the SPLM “Former
Detainees” and the Other Political Parties. In the Declaration, the signatories
announced a permanent ceasefire, set objectives for transitional security
arrangements and signatories to reach an agreement on the IGAD revised bridging
proposal, improve infrastructure and basic services in South Sudan and restore oil
fields in Unity. On the same day, the parties issued ceasefire declarations to take effect
from 30 June.
5.
Meeting on the margins of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government o f
the African Union in Mauritania on 30 June, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, the African Union High-level Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan and
the IGAD Council of Ministers welcomed the Khartoum Declaration. The Peace and
Security Council issued a communiqué urging continued support for the IGAD -led
mediation process and calling on the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism to provide verifiable evidence of ceasefire
violations to support punitive measures against culpable parties.
6.
Following continued proximity talks facilitated by the Sudanese mediators, on
6 July, the parties signed an agreement on outstanding issues in relation to security
arrangements, with provisions on the implementation of the permanent ceasefire and
transitional security arrangements. Of note are commitments to universal cantonment
of all fighting forces; training and redeployment of a core of “unified” forces within
a pre-transition period of eight months, and the establishment of a new national army
during the formal transition period of 36 months. On outstanding governance matters,
the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, and the President of the Sudan, hosted a
one-day consultation in Entebbe, Uganda, on 7 July, with the part icipation of the
President of South Sudan and opposition leader Riek Machar, at which a proposal on
the composition of the presidency and responsibility-sharing in the Cabinet and
Parliament was discussed. Notable was the proposed reinstatement of Riek Mac har
as First Vice-President in a future transitional government and the addition of four
other Vice-Presidents. While the proposal attracted swift criticism from other
opposition parties, who characterized it as a deal between only two of the warring
parties, it nevertheless enabled progress in discussions on governance that had
hitherto been at a standstill.
7.
Talks continued in Khartoum throughout July to secure a more inclusive
agreement. The most contentious issue, however, remained the number of state s and
their boundaries. Meanwhile, on 13 July, expressing deep concern about the continued
and flagrant violations of the cessation of hostilities agreement and slow progress
towards a viable political settlement, the Security Council adopted resolution 2428
(2018), imposing an arms embargo on South Sudan, as well as additional targeted
sanctions on two individuals, the former Chief of General Staff of the Sudan People ’s
Liberation Army (SPLA), Paul Malong, and the former SPLA Deputy Chief of
General Staff for Logistics, Malek Reuben Riak. On 19 July, following the annual
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council, the two bodies issued a joint communiqué, reaffirming their belief
in a political solution to the conflict and welcoming the efforts of IGAD and regional
initiatives, but also condemning the violations of the cessation of hostilities
agreement and insisting on the need to hold violators accountable, fight impunity and
promote peace and reconciliation.

2/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

8.
Amid mounting pressure to conclude talks on governance, the parties were
persuaded to defer negotiations on the determination of the number and boundaries
of states until the final round of talks. On 5 August, in a ceremony attended by all
IGAD members, the South Sudanese parties signed the agreement on outstanding
issues of governance. The Presidents of the Sudan and Uganda signed as co-guarantors,
while representatives of IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations signed as
witnesses. Delivering a statement on my behalf at the signing ceremony, my Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, welcomed the progress
made in Khartoum; underscored the importance of a fair and incl usive process; and
cautioned that the support of the international community depended not simply on
reaching an agreement but on reaching an implementable one.
9.
In the light of recent progress, IGAD agreed that discussions would continue in
Khartoum to finalize a revitalized text of the peace agreement and related
implementation matrices and timelines. From 13 to 19 August, talks resumed with
discussions, including on the status and incorporation of the documents agreed upon
in Addis Ababa and in Khartoum in the preceding months. On 18 August, the
mediators circulated a draft revitalized text of the peace agreement to the parties for
comment before adjourning for the Eid holidays. Talks resumed in Khartoum on
25 August and continued into September, with the parties initialling a draft revitalized
peace agreement between 28 and 30 August and subsequently beginning to discuss
related implementation matrices. The SPLM/A in Opposition and the South Sudan
Opposition Alliance, however, publicly conditioned the initialling of these documents
on the resolution of four “reservations” at a forthcoming extraordinary summit of the
IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government. The areas of concern are
government decision-making mechanisms and quorums, the number and boundaries
of states, the permanent constitution-making process and mechanisms for the
guarantors and other countries from the region to contribute to transitional security
arrangements. Meanwhile, on 20 August, the former President of Botswana, Festus
Mogae, announced his resignation as Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, stating that the transition phase warranted new leadership.
Other national political developments
10. On 20 June, Parliament adopted a constitutional amendment bill, incorporating
the peace agreement into the Transitional Constitution of South Sudan of 2011; it
received the President’s assent and entered into force on 4 July. Shortly thereafter, on
13 July, Parliament passed another bill extending the tenure of the executive and
legislative arms of the national and state government until 12 August 2021. This
action was widely criticized by opposition groups, civil society organizations and the
Troika (Norway, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and U nited
States of America) as being counterproductive to the peace process.
11. On 18 July, the President dismissed the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Deng Alor
Kwol, a post allocated under the peace agreement to the SPLM “Former Detainees”,
and replaced him with the Senior Adviser and Presidential Envoy, Nhial Deng Nhial.
On 27 July, the President appointed Gok Makuach Mayol as the new Deputy Minister
of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. On 24 August, the President
dismissed the Minister of Labour and Public Services, Gathoth Gatkuoth, and
replaced him with the former SPLA Chief of General Staff, James Hoth Mai.
12. During the reporting period, the national dialogue secretariat proceeded with
preparations for the holding of regional conferences. On 20 August, the Co -Chairs of
the national dialogue steering committee, Abel Alier and Angelo Beda, welcomed the
progress in the high-level revitalization forum and invited opposition groups to
submit their views on issues to be included in the forthcoming regional conferences.

18-14157

3/18

S/2018/831

Economic developments
13. The economic situation remained very poor, despite a tentative strengthening of
the parallel market value of the South Sudanese pound against the United States
dollar, from around 300 pounds to the dollar in early June to 210 pounds to the dollar
in mid-August. However, food and basic commodity prices did not decline, with
inflation in the 12 months to July being estimated at 123 per cent. Oil production
continued at a rate of around 130,000 barrels per day, with the authorities anticipating
an increase in production in subsequent mo nths following the resumption of
production in Unity State. On 20 August, Parliament passed the draft national budget
for the fiscal year 2018/19, in the amount of 81.59 billion South Sudanese pounds,
approximately $526 million.

III. Security situation
14. During the reporting period, violent clashes between government forces and
armed opposition groups continued to occur, but with less intensity and frequency
than in preceding months. At least 19 incidents of ceasefire violations, including
incidents of fighting between the parties, were verified by the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. Meanwhile,
intercommunal violence, including cattle-raiding in Lakes, Warrap and Jonglei, led to
civilian casualties, displacement, abductions and looting.
Greater Upper Nile region
15. In central and southern Unity, attacks were consistent with the pattern in
previous months, when government forces attempted to clear the route from Koch to
Leer and further to the south and south-east of Unity. UNMISS patrols also came
under fire on two occasions. On 4 June, an UNMISS patrol encountered small arms
fire from unidentified armed men near Rubkway in southern Unity. Subsequently, on
8 June 2018, an integrated UNMISS patrol came under direct and sustained fire in
Rubkway from between 80 and 100 armed men, later confirmed to be members of
SPLA. UNMISS returned fire in self-defence. On 5 June, SPLA and pro-Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition forces reportedly clashed in Guar and Bieh villages, Koch
County. On 6 June, government forces and pro-government armed youth led by the
former Commissioner of Gany County, Gordon Koang, reportedly attacked Buok,
south-east of Koch. Alleged SPLA attacks continued on 12 and 13 June, in Dablual
and Buaw, with four civilians reported dead and several injured, civilian structures
burned and properties looted. On 14 June, there were reports of attacks on vehicles,
including the use of a rocket-propelled grenade to attack a truck north of the town of
Koch, by alleged opposition elements in the area, killing two people. In the Leer area,
between 18 and 19 June, SPLA allegedly attacked opposition positions along the
Pilling-Thonyor-Adok axis, with clashes in Thonyor, Pilling, Panei, Bow, Thor,
Rubkong and Touch Riak. The fighting led to three reported civilian deaths. UNMISS
verification patrols in Leer County noted a limited civilian presence. On 28 and
29 June, the opposition allegedly attacked Paguir, Guit County, and Buaw, Thaker and
Manga. There were reports of clashes on 30 June in Thaker and Rubkway, Mayendit
County, and SPLA allegedly shelled Pibor and Chot Jok, Rubkona County. On 3 and
4 July, armed youth, allegedly commanded by Gordon Koang, reportedly clashed with
the opposition in Gandor, Nyoat, Kuui, Lual and Padeah, Din Din, Kueidok and Yang,
Leer County, and Bieh, Koch County. On 14 July, reported clashes on the outskirts of
Buaw, Koch County, resulted in three fatalities. On 21 August, government and
opposition forces reportedly clashed in Bil Payam and Nimni, Guit County.

4/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

16. In Jonglei, on 4 June, SPLA allegedly attacked an armed group in Manypugkul,
Akello Payam, east of the town of Pibor, injuring three civilians. On 26 June, SPLA
forces based in Wa‘at allegedly attacked the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition in
Luony and Kuernyoun villages in Nyerol and Akobo, killing four and injuring five
civilians. In Upper Nile, SPLA and the opposition reportedly clashed on 6 June in
Arabet, Manyo County, killing four opposition soldiers.
Greater Equatoria region
17. In greater Equatoria, clashes between SPLA and opposition forces and armed
attacks and criminality along the main roads continued to cause civilian casualties
and displacement. In Western Equatoria, on 7 June, alleged SPLA and opposition
attacks reportedly resulted in one civilian death in Li-Rangu Payam and one in
Gangura Payam. On 10 June, an armed group reportedly attacked civilians in
Bazungua village, killing two civilians. Clashes were also reported on 17 June in
Makpandu, and on 19 and 20 June in Saura and Nambia, leading to civilian
displacement, while on 24 June, opposition forces allegedly attacked the SPLA
barracks in Nangondi, Nzara County. Thereafter, on 26 and 27 June, suspected
opposition forces reportedly attempted to forcibly recruit 25 youth in Bazungua
village, looted civilian property and abducted civilians in Bazumburu. On 8 and
9 July, armed ambushes were also reported on SPLA vehicles near Mundri and
Rimenze, resulting in four deaths and five injuries.
18. In Central Equatoria, on 8 June, SPLA forces reportedly attacked the opposition
base in Mugwo County, with further allegations of fighting between the two forces in
Payawa on the same day. On 12 June, suspected opposition forces allegedly stopped
a civilian vehicle travelling from Yei to Kaya and abducted 13 civilians. Fighting also
threatened United Nations personnel: on 26 June a humanitarian convoy with
UNMISS force protection was fired upon by unidentified gunmen on the Juba -Yei
road, killing one peacekeeper. Reports of fighting between government and
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces continued on 29 June and on 1 and 12 July
in Livolo County. On 17 and 20 July, respectively, reports surfaced of clashes between
the South Sudan National Movement for Change and the pro -Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition in Mukaya County. On 23 July, an armed opposition group reportedly
attacked an SPLA position at Logobero village, along the Yei-Maridi road. Additional
SPLA troops were reportedly sent to the area to bolster security. On 29 August ,
clashes were reported at Jamara in Lainya County. In Eastern Equatoria, on 4 June, a
vehicle was reportedly ambushed on the Torit-Kapoeta road resulting in two deaths,
and on 10 June, two civilians were reportedly killed while returning to Torit from
Osile village.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
19. During the reporting period there was a deterioration in security in some parts
of Western Bahr el-Ghazal. Between 11 and 15 June, SPLA forces allegedly attacked
opposition positions in Kuarjena and Bagari. Fighting was also reported in Bagari and
Wadhalelo, Jur County, between 14 and 18 June, resulting in civilian displacement to
Agok. On 23, 26 and 27 June, fighting was reported south of Wau, spreading to Mboro
and the greater Bagari area. Between 29 and 30 June, SPLA allegedly attacked the
opposition in Mboro and Bisselia, while the opposition allegedly ambushed SPLA in
Bagari, Mboro and Bisselia on 5 July. Sporadic clashes between 19 and 21 July, with
reports of heavy gunfire emanating from Bringi and Bagari, and between 21 and
25 July around Wadhalelo, led to civilian displacement. Attacks and counter-attacks
reportedly continued throughout August in Bringi, Ngobagari, Mboro and Raja.
Persistent access denials imposed by SPLA and local authorities in Wa u impaired the
ability of UNMISS to verify the situation in affected areas.
18-14157

5/18

S/2018/831

Intercommunal conflict
20. In the greater Lakes area, an upsurge in cattle-raiding incidents involving the
Dinka Agar Pakam community was reported in late June and July. The D inka Agar
Pakam allegedly carried out attacks, together with the Dinka Ciec, against Dinka Agar
Rup communities in areas including Rumbek Centre, Rumbek East and Cueibet,
killing at least 12 people. Violence precipitated by the Dinka Agar Pakam and Dinka
Ciec continued into August, with an attack on the Dinka Agar Panyar in Paloc Payam,
Rumbek East, which resulted in nine deaths.
21. In Warrap, on 5 June, armed youth suspected to be Nuer from Northern Liech
and Bul South County from Unity reportedly attacked Kongor and Lou communities
of Alabek and Aliek counties in Tonj, resulting in at least 32 people dead and an
undetermined number injured. Suspected members of the Apuk community in Gogrial
reportedly attacked a cattle camp in Aguok territory, killing si x people. SPLA forces
were deployed along the border area between Apuk and Aguok to deter revenge
attacks. On 11 and 12 August, violent clashes involving the Thiik and Luanjang
communities against the Jalwau and Gok communities were reported in Tonj East.
Reportedly, the clashes resulted in 42 fatalities and 60 persons injured. The fighting
was allegedly triggered when armed Luanjang youth killed a Jalwau community
member and looted his cattle.
22. Meanwhile, in Jonglei, clashes between two Lou Nuer subclans, the Cie-Yol and
the Cie-Nyak, in early July, in Akobo, reportedly resulted in 14 deaths. Local
authorities and community leaders intervened to mitigate the conflict. In the border
area of Boma and Kapoeta, fighting over access to land and water resource s was
reported between the Murle and the Jie on 6 and 7 July. Government reports indicate
that 26 people were killed and 24 were injured. Murle attackers allegedly abducted
three boys and three girls, while a significant number of Jie community members wer e
displaced, thousands of cattle were stolen and houses were burned.

IV. Humanitarian situation
23. The humanitarian situation remained dire. Nearly 2,000 people were forcibly
displaced because of fighting in the greater Bagari area, Western Bahr el-Ghazal. In
Western Equatoria, approximately 18,000 were registered as in need of assistance and
protection, including at least 10,000 people fleeing to Tambura owing to fighting
between government forces and SPLM/A in Opposition since 17 May. By the end of
July, 1.8 million persons were displaced within South Sudan, and some 2.5 million
persons were living in neighbouring countries. South Sudan has one the highest rates
of out-of-school children in the world, with up to 2.2 million children not receiving
education services.
24. Almost 60 per cent of the population was expected to be suffering acute food
insecurity at the peak of the lean season. Even with humanitarian assistance, more
than 6 million people remained classified as being in a “crisis” (phase 3 of the
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification) or “emergency” (phase 4) situation,
which is a 20 per cent increase from the same period in 2017. In June and July, food
insecurity (phases 3 and 4) persisted in Upper Nile, Jonglei and Northern Bahr
el-Ghazal, with some improvement in Western Equatoria. Significant concerns remain
in Mayendit and Leer, which are expected to be in phase 4 and which humanitarians
reached in July for the first time since April with small -scale interventions; “famine”
(phase 5) was declared in these areas in February 2017. Mass displacement from the
greater Equatoria region, which traditionally has the highest agricultural production,
has exacerbated existing stressors in the food security situation. Meanwhile,

6/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

approximately 1.1 million children under the age of 5 years are at risk of acute
malnutrition.
25. In July, 80 humanitarian access incidents were reported, particularly in Upper
Nile, Unity and Central Equatoria (35 per cent of these were attributed to criminal or
unknown actors, 26 per cent to state security forces and 15 per cent to state civil
authorities and civilians). For the third consecutive year, South Sudan remains the
most violent context in the world in which to deliver humanitarian assistance. Over
the last six months, around 50 per cent of reported access incidents involved violence
against humanitarian workers and assets. In June, three humanitarian workers were
killed in Rubkona and Mayom counties of Unity, while two aid workers were killed
in July in Terekeka, Central Equatoria and Rumbek East, Lakes, bringing the number
of humanitarian workers killed in the country since January 2018 to 12. In June,
blockages and bureaucratic challenges impeded humanitarian operations in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, and humanitarian agencies operating in Wau County reported
increasing access denial by State armed forces to areas outside Wau experiencing
conflict. Access outside the town of Yei in Central Equatoria remained limited owing
to the lack of safety and security assurances.
26. Violence against humanitarian workers and assets escalated during the reporting
period. In June and July, community leaders in the UNMISS protection of civilians
sites in Bentiu and Malakal interfered with operations and mobilized youth gr oups to
disrupt humanitarian operations. In Bentiu, those actions forced the closure of three
of five clinics for over three weeks, and access to safe water was jeopardized for an
estimated 50,000 people. Humanitarian workers were also assaulted by communi ty
leaders and members of the community watch group. Following extensive
negotiations, humanitarian activities resumed. In Malakal, youth groups threatened
aid workers, allegedly over the lack of employment opportunities, leading to the
suspension of life-saving health assistance. In July, a protest by youth against a
perceived lack of employment opportunities in Bunj, Maban County, in Upper Nile,
quickly became violent and led to attacks, looting and the burning of humanitarian
premises and damage to humanitarian vehicles. Humanitarian operations were
severely disrupted as significant damage was caused to property and approximately
400 humanitarian workers were relocated.
27. Despite challenges, by the end of August, humanitarian partners had provided
life-saving assistance to over 3.8 million of the 6 million people targeted. As the main
planting season progressed amid continued fighting, partners scaled up efforts to
provide farmers with seeds and tools. More than 4,530 tons of crop seeds were
distributed to approximately 312,000 families — the largest quantity of seeds
distributed during the main planting season to date.
28. At the time of reporting, the humanitarian response plan was 50 per cent funded,
with $854 million received of the $1.7 billion req uired.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
29. UNMISS continued to use a three-tiered approach to its mandated task of
protection of civilians. Under tier one, protection through dialogue and political
engagement, the Mission continued to emphasize the primary responsibility of
national authorities to protect civilians and to reiterate its availability to assist
authorities in fulfilling that responsibility. On 10 July, my Special Representative
travelled to Yambio, where he met with the Governor of Gbudwe State and faith based leaders to discuss ongoing recovery and resilience initiatives. On 12 July, my

18-14157

7/18

S/2018/831

Deputy Special Representative and Humanitarian Coordinator travelled to Tambura,
Western Equatoria, to address tensions surrounding the arrival of approximately
18,000 persons who were fleeing fighting in Nagero, Western Equatoria. He engaged
with the state Governor to prevent their further forced relocation to another site within
the town of Tambura. On 1 and 2 August, my Special Representative travelled to
Malakal, Upper Nile, to address tensions in the UNMISS protection of civilians site
over hiring practices that were perceived to be unfair, emphasizing the principle of
non-discrimination in United Nations recruitment. He also visited Bunj to assess the
levels of damage to humanitarian assets and engage state and civil society actors to
quell tensions following the violent youth demonstrations.
30. Elsewhere, UNMISS delivered 19 workshops at the subnational level on social
cohesion, reconciliation, conflict management and the role of traditional leaders,
women and youth in peacebuilding. A total of 5,085 participants attended (1,369
women), including representatives from UNMISS protection of civilians sites and
host communities, state and county officials, members of organized armed forces and
armed groups, traditional leaders and youth and women ’s representatives. For
example, in Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, UNMISS continued to support the joint border
peace committee in managing cattle migration between the Sudan and South Sudan.
In Akobo, with UNMISS support, conflicting Lou Nuer subclans resolved to cease
hostilities and address root causes of the conflict. In Juba, UNMISS facilitated
dialogue between the Jieng Council of Elders (Dinka) and the Council of Elders of
Jubek State to address heightened tensions between host communities and migratory
Dinka Bor cattle keepers. As a result, a joint committee was formed to address
communal tensions and support the implementation of the presidential decree of
23 October 2017 on repatriation of Dinka Bor cattle to Jonglei. In Bor, UNMISS
facilitated a cultural event for displaced members of the Nuer community from the
protection of civilians site and host Dinka community to promote reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence.
31. Under the second tier, protection from physical violence, as at 1 September, the
Mission was protecting 198,446 internally displaced persons at UNMISS protection
of civilians sites, including 114,652 in Bentiu, 39,199 in Juba, 24,415 in Malakal,
2,300 in Bor and 17,880 in Wau. The decongestion of the Wau protection site led to a
15 per cent decrease in the population of the site by July, compared with May (20,702).
The temporary protection area in Leer, Unity, provided refuge to 2,500 displaced
persons.
32. To reinforce the civilian character of the sites, UNMISS engaged with
community leaders to inform them of the Mission’s response to security incidents, to
promote active community involvement in curtailing criminal activity and to support
peaceful coexistence. This included a meeting chaired by my Special Representative
on 9 August with over 50 community leaders from the Juba protection sites to reiterate
community responsibility for the internal security of the sites. During the reporting
period, a total of 506 crimes and security incidents were recorded at the protection
sites (Wau, 191; Bentiu, 161; Juba, 99; Malakal, 45; Bor, 10). The most commonly
reported offences were theft, assault and domestic violence. UNMISS conducted
272 search operations, confiscating items such as weapons, ammunition, illicit drugs
and stolen United Nations property. Of note during the reporting period was the
increase in hostilities at the Juba protection site. On 13 and 14 August, fighting
occurred between youth from the Rubkona and Mayom communities at protection
site 3. While UNMISS increased security and engaged with community members and
leaders to ease tensions, fighting between the two groups led to the injury of
179 people, and the displacement of between 1,000 and 2,000 people from within the
protection sites to the surrounding weapons-free zone, and the erection of 19 shelters.
Fighting escalated further on 22 August. UNMISS continued to engage humanitarian
8/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

partners, national authorities and leaders from the fighting communities to calm the
tensions.
33. A total of 133 persons suspected of involvement in serious security incidents
were detained at UNMISS holding facilities in Bentiu, Juba and Malakal. UNMISS
also responded to two requests from the authorities in respect of persons in the Juba
protection of civilians site suspected of serious crimes. Under the second phase of the
UNMISS project to promote accountability, the national director of public
prosecutions accepted 16 cases of alleged sexual violence committed at the Juba,
Malakal and Bentiu sites for uptake into the formal justice system.
34. Beyond the protection of civilians sites, UNMISS continued to focus on
deterring and mitigating violence against civilians across South Sudan. During the
reporting period, a total of 10,387 patrols (short and long duration, dynamic air,
riverine and foot) were conducted, including 146 patrols to support the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. A company of troops
was redeployed to Yei, Central Equatoria, to respond to increasing criminality and
fighting. UNMISS continued regular integrated long-duration dynamic air patrols in
SPLM/A in Opposition-held areas of Akobo (Jonglei) and Kodok (Upper Nile), to
support the delivery of humanitarian aid and enhance understanding of the local
situation. The Mission also conducted patrols to Yirol and Maper (Lakes), Panyagor Poktar and Pochala (Jonglei), Raja and the Wau triangle area (Western Bahr el-Ghazal),
Boma (Jonglei), Kajo-Kaji (Central Equatoria) and Tambura (Western Equatoria).
35. Under the third tier, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
continued to engage with authorities and civil society to create an environment
conducive for the return of displaced populations. In Wau, UNMISS and humanitarian
actors continued implementing a joint action plan to create an enabling environment
for displaced populations to return. In Bentiu, UNMISS also continued to promote
the expansion of the weapons-free-zone concept: a 200-metre radius around the base
was cleared and a perimeter road is under construction. In Malakal, UNMISS
continued to engage with the Upper Nile security committee to contribute to reducing
the armed presence in the town centre.
36. UNMISS conducted workshops across the country to build the capacities of
local organizations to implement UNMISS quick-impact projects to renovate basic
infrastructure in key areas of return, with a total of 170 participants from national and
civil society organizations and government personnel. The Mission implemented and
handed over 15 of the 23 projects for the 2017/18 funding cycle, including
6 UNMISS-supported projects to construct and renovate police posts and stations in
Juba, Kuacjok, Wau and Aweil.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
37. During the reporting period, UNMISS verified 253 incidents that posed a threat
to human rights and protection. These included instances of unlawful killing or
wounding of civilians, abduction, looting and destruction of civilian property, attacks
against the United Nations, arbitrary arrest and prolonged detention, recruitment
and/or use of children by armed groups or forces, forced displacement, extortion and
sexual violence. The incidents resulted in the deaths of 320 individuals, the wounding
of 197 and the abduction of 128 (the victims included 98 women and 50 minors).
These were attributable to SPLA (231), pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition (225),
pro-Taban Deng SPLM/A in Opposition (9), the National Prison Service (8),
government security forces engaged in disarmament (4), the National Security
Service (1) and other armed elements (167).

18-14157

9/18

S/2018/831

38. Of all the incidents recorded, 53 involved conflict-related sexual violence,
including rape, gang rape and abduction of women and girls for sexual slavery. The
53 incidents, which affected 188 people (176 women and girls, 12 men and boys), are
attributable to SPLA (27 incidents affecting 133 survivors), pro -Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition (19 incidents affecting 46 survivors) and other armed groups (7 incidents
affecting 9 survivors). Most of the incidents occurred in Western Equatoria and Unity
States, although limited access and underreporting may prevent a full picture from
being obtained.
39. From 23 to 27 July, a Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict deployed by the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, together with UNMISS, provided technical
support to SPLA and the South Sudan National Police Service to strengthen the
prevention and deterrence of and the response to conflict -related sexual violence.
40. On 10 July, UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights jointly published a report documenting alleged serious violations
of international human rights law and international humanitarian law in April and
May 2018 perpetrated by government and allied forces, and abuses by armed youth
in parts of southern Unity. The report identified three individua ls, including the
Commissioner of Gany County, who may bear the greatest responsibility for these
violations. Following the release of the report and other advocacy efforts by the
United Nations and the international community, the Commissioner was removed
from his functions.
41. Incidents of hate speech and incitement to violence continued to be reported,
fuelled by the ongoing political developments and the perceived exclusion of
communities from opportunities, including employment. To fight hate speech, the
Defy Hate Now organization launched a social media hate speech mitigation field
guide.
42. Challenges to free speech continued to affect individuals expressing opinions
perceived as being critical of the Government, damaging to the reputation of the
country or on topics considered to be sensitive. As a result, cases of intimidation,
arbitrary arrest and detention continued to be documented. During a workshop held
by UNMISS in Juba on 8 June, journalists and human rights defenders, including 21
women, acknowledged the challenges of reporting publicly on several issues,
including sexual violence in South Sudan, owing to intimidation and reprisals by state
authorities.
43. Physical conditions in state detention facilities remained poor, with
overcrowding observed in Juba, Torit and Yirol. Prolonged, arbitrary and proxy
detention remained common across the country.
44. Lack of respect for fair trial standards and due process, including in cases
involving the death penalty, remains a serious concern. As at 6 June, 345 prisoners
(335 male and 10 female) were reported to be on death row in prisons across the
country. UNMISS continued to advocate that national authorities should adopt a
moratorium on executions.
45. On 8 August, the President declared a “general amnesty” for Riek Machar and
“other estranged groups”, and on 20 August, 21 detainees were reportedly released in
compliance with the Khartoum Declaration. The appeal of the death sentence of James
Gatdet Dak, the former Press Secretary of the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition,
has remained pending since 12 February. Meanwhile, on 6 September, after the
reporting period, the President of the Special General Court Martial is expected to
deliver the verdict in respect of the trial related to the events at the Terrain Hotel.

10/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

46. Through quick-impact projects, UNMISS refurbished the first juvenile
reformatory centre in Juba to provide facilities to separate young offenders from adult
male prisoners. UNMISS continued to provide technical assistance to justice sec tor
institutions to address prolonged and arbitrary detention and assisted the national
prison service to launch a prison development committee to make recommendations
for the reform of the prison system.
47. In compliance with the human rights due diligence policy on support for
non-United Nations security forces, UNMISS undertook risk assessments, vetting and
profiling of recipients, in response to three requests for support from government
security forces.
48. UNMISS facilitated 165 human rights capacity-building and sensitization
activities, benefiting 9,558 participants (of whom 3,957 were women), including
individuals from SPLA, South Sudan National Police Service and civil society, as
well as other stakeholders. As part of the internal mainstreaming of human rights,
UNMISS facilitated sessions on the human rights mandate for 1,426 UNMISS
uniformed personnel, including 273 women.
49. Access issues continued to have an adverse effect on the Mission’s ability to
investigate alleged human rights violations and abuses. During the reporting period,
UNMISS human rights teams experienced 11 incidents of access denial across parts
of Upper Nile, Unity, Western Bahr el-Ghazal, and Western and Eastern Equatoria.
Eight incidents were attributable to government fo rces and authorities and three to
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition elements.
50. During the reporting period, the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting on children in armed conflict documented 129 incidents of
grave violations, of which 76 were verified, affecting at least 2,091 children (1,113
boys, 972 girls and 6 children whose sex is unknown). Pro -Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition was responsible for 43 per cent of the verified incidents, and SPLA was
responsible for 39 per cent. From 26 to 27 June 2018, the task force conducted a two day workshop for 50 high-ranking officers from the 10 SPLA divisions across the
country, in addition to officers from the general headquarters in Juba. The outcomes
of the workshop included the signing of a revised action plan with the United Nations.
UNMISS also provided child protection training to parties to the conflict, including
568 members (of whom 45 were women) of the government security forces and
40 members of the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces. It also facilitated
74 training and child protection mainstreaming sessions for 4,556 participants (of
whom 1,940 were women), drawn from government-organized forces, public
authorities, community members and UNMISS personnel. The United Nations, in
coordination with the South Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, facilitated the release of 149 children (51 girls; 98 boys) from the ranks
of the South Sudan National Liberation Movement and the former pro -Taban Deng
SPLM/A in Opposition. This brings the total number of children released this year
to 955.

C.

Creating the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
51. UNMISS continued to provide force protection to enable humanitarian partners
to carry out vital service delivery, with an increase in requests for support for
operations in higher-risk areas. Road repair work supported by UNMISS also enabled
humanitarian efforts to expand their reach. Following renewed conflict in southern
Unity, UNMISS facilitated humanitarian assistance in and around the Leer temporary
protection area. Under the Beyond Bentiu reintegration strategy to encourage

18-14157

11/18

S/2018/831

voluntary and safe return, UNMISS accompanied two humanitarian organizations to
deliver medical supplies to communities in Nhiadiu. In Western Equatoria,
humanitarian organizations delivered assistance to displaced populations with
UNMISS force protection in Tambura. UNMISS supported the delivery of
humanitarian assistance through patrols in and around camps in Rimenze and
Makpandu, and by engaging the state government to provide security on main roads
to aid civilian movement. In Lakes, UNMISS coordinated with the education cluster,
and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) provided materials to four schools
to establish temporary learning spaces for the children of 1,000 returnee families.
52. The Mine Action Service responded to several requests for searches of UNMISS
protection sites in Bentiu, Bor, Juba and Wau and participated in patrols in Jonglei,
Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Unity and Upper Nile. The Mine Action Service disposed of
explosive hazards in the Bentiu and Malakal protection sites and in proximity to the
Malakal airstrip. At the Mission’s request, the Mine Action Service destroyed
weapons and ammunition held by SPLA in Opposition and SPLA. It surveyed and
destroyed an item of unexploded ordnance located within a school in Aweil, Northern
Bahr el-Ghazal. During the reporting period, 27 mine action teams were deployed
across the country. A total of 4,234,240 m 2 was surveyed and released, and a further
4,781 explosive hazards and 19,189 rounds of small arms ammunition were removed
and destroyed.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Agreement and the
peace process
53. My Special Representative continued to use his good offices in support of the
peace process in South Sudan. He met with the President, Riek Machar and other
senior government and opposition officials to advocate adherence to the permanent
ceasefire and to emphasize the need for compromise and political will to secure a
lasting and inclusive political settlement to the armed conflict. During regular visits
to states in South Sudan, he met with state and local authorities and civil society
representatives, as well as community representatives in protection sites to keep them
apprised of developments in the peace talks. In regular engagements with the
diplomatic community in Juba, my Special Representative promoted the need for
coordinated support for the ongoing peace process. On 27 June, UNMISS supported
a one-day debrief on the high-level revitalization forum for civil society
organizations. The outputs were shared with the stakeholders participating i n the talks
and the mediators. In coordination with the United Nations country team, UNMISS
also continued to engage with the steering committee and secretariat of the national
dialogue to promote an inclusive, participatory and credible process. In August , as
talks between the parties resumed in Khartoum, both my Special Envoy for the Sudan
and South Sudan and an UNMISS team travelled to the Sudan to monitor efforts to
streamline the agreed text into a revitalized peace agreement. As discussions turn
towards the implementation matrix of the agreement, including revised security
arrangements, UNMISS will dispatch a technical team to engage directly and provide
technical assistance where required.
54. UNMISS continued to provide logistical support, force pro tection and air
transport for the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism to fulfil its mandate, including monitoring and reporting violations and
identifying responsible parties. To enhance awareness, the Mission distributed
information products to local audiences on the cessation of hostilities agreement.
55. Upon request from the South Sudan Law Review Commission, UNMISS, in
coordination with relevant United Nations agencies, initiated a review of key

12/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

legislation relevant to the implementation of the peace agreement. UNMISS
supported national authorities in establishing a mechanism to coordinate their efforts
to increase transparency and public reporting. UNMISS also continued to strengthen
parliamentary oversight, conducting a preliminary needs assessment of specialized
parliamentary committees mandated to advance the rule of law.
56. By 4 July, the technical committee for the establishment of the Commission for
Truth, Reconciliation and Healing had completed two rounds of consultations. The
3,700 participants consulted expressed their opinions freely, citing challenges such as
the lack of adequate mobilization and sensitization prior to consultation and a
perceived lack of a genuine commitment by the Government. Internally displaced
persons were reluctant to participate in the process, questioning its timeliness,
relevance, credibility, legitimacy and independence.

E.

Women and peace and security
57. On 3 and 4 July, a joint high-level delegation, led by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and accompanied by the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Population Fund, my Special Adviser on Africa, my Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict and other high-level representatives, visited South Sudan. The delegation,
which also travelled to Wau and Malakal, met with cabinet ministers, state
government officials, women and faith-based leaders, women’s civil society groups,
populations at the UNMISS protection of civilians sites, United Nations partners and
the diplomatic community to solicit views on the peace process, promote the
meaningful participation of women in all aspects of conflict resolution, development
and humanitarian interventions, and highlight urgently needed measures to address
sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence.
58. In a meeting with the President, the Deputy Secretary-General re-emphasized
the primacy of a political solution to the conflict and shared messages received from
women’s organizations, women leaders and conflict-affected communities. My
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict remained in the country from
5 to 7 July, to engage the Government on the need to accelerate the implementation
of the commitments of South Sudan on conflict-related sexual violence. The Mission,
United Nations agencies and development partners and the Government have worked
towards facilitating access to comprehensive, survivor-centred services for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual violence through a
one-stop centre in Juba. In the first eight months of its operations, the centre was
accessed by 366 women, girls and boys and has contributed to the pursuit of criminal
proceedings in two cases.

VI. Mission staffing, the status of deployments and conduct
and discipline
59. On 1 September, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,646: 894
international staff members (233 women, 26 per cent), 1,376 national staff members
(195 women, 14 per cent) and 376 United Nations Volunteers (118 women, 31 per
cent).
60. The police strength stood at 1,807 (of an authorized 2,101 officers): 642
individual police officers (147 women, 23 per cent), 1,099 personnel in formed police
units (224 women, 20 per cent) and 66 corrections officers (19 women, 29 per cent).

18-14157

13/18

S/2018/831

61. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, including up to 4,000 for the regional
protection force, UNMISS troop strength stood at 14,572 military personnel: 218
military liaison officers (27 women, 12 per cent), 399 military staff officers
(56 women, 14 per cent) and 13,955 military contingent personnel (452 women, 3 per
cent). A total of 2,220 regional protection force personnel have been inducted to date,
including 34 out of the 38-person headquarters element and 13 of the 20 planned
military liaison officers. Full complements of the Bangladesh Engineering Unit, the
Nepalese High Readiness Company and the Chinese and Rwandan infantry battalions
have been deployed. The main body of the Ethiopian infantry battalion arrived in Juba
on 20 July.
62. UNMISS continued to strengthen and enhance measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse. The inter-agency task force on protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse and the UNMISS sexual exploitation and abuse task force
reviewed current measures and assessed whether any changes in t he risk environment
were evident, necessitating amendments to the existing action plan. Newly arrived
UNMISS personnel participated in mandatory induction training on prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse and efforts were made to increase rates of co mpletion
of mandatory e-learning courses. “No excuse” cards were issued to all personnel.
Community-based complaint mechanisms were established across South Sudan to
ensure that allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse are received in a timely
manner to ensure an effective response. Community outreach remains a high priority
for UNMISS. The UNMISS Conduct and Discipline Advisory Group, chaired by the
Head of the Mission, met during the reporting period to discuss the prevention of
misconduct and the enforcement of applicable United Nations standards of conduct
for all personnel.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
63. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 52 incidents constituting
violations of the status-of-forces agreement, some involving multiple violations.
Particularly concerning were three armed attacks directed at UNMISS and
humanitarian operations on 4 and 8 June in Unity and on 26 June in Central E quatoria,
resulting in the death of an UNMISS military liaison officer.
64. UNMISS recorded 31 incidents of movement restrictions attributed to the
Government that affected UNMISS operations, 11 of which were directed at UNMISS
personnel monitoring and reporting on the human rights situation. Six new cases of
arrest and detention of UNMISS personnel and contractors by government agents
were also reported. In one case, an UNMISS contractor was taken from his house in
Torit by the National Security Service, who tortured him over a private dispute, before
releasing him days later. In two other cases, UNMISS personnel were detained in Bor
and Juba, respectively, for approximately three hours, before being released. In three
other cases occurring in Lakes, Eastern Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal, the
affected staff members were released after being detained for one to two days. The
whereabouts of two staff members arrested in 2014 remain unknown. The
Government has neither granted UNMISS access to them nor p rovided information
about their condition, despite regular requests.
65. Violations of the obligation to facilitate the entry of UNMISS personnel into
South Sudan continue to occur. Of particular concern is the continuing delay in
granting entry visas to nine UNMISS military staff officers, who have been waiting
for between one and six months. The delay continues to hamper the full force
deployment as mandated. Aside from these incidents, there were four recorded cases
14/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

of UNMISS personnel and contractors being threatened, harassed or assaulted and
one recorded case of United Nations property being seized. An UNMISS vehicle that
was impounded in Juba on 25 January by the National Police Service has not been
returned, despite repeated requests.
66. Nine incidents involving interference with UNMISS activities by the
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition were recorded in Upper Nile, Unity and Central
Equatoria. UNMISS continues to notify the Government about violations through a
monthly record of incidents and in-person meetings with officials.
67. UNMISS continued efforts to strengthen the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, premises and assets by implementing its Mission-level action plan
based on the recommendations on reducing peacekeeper fatalities c ontained in the
report by Lieutenant General (retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz entitled
“Improving security of United Nations peacekeepers”. UNMISS continues to
strengthen security risk management measures, including enhancing the physical
protection of United Nations premises, the use of alert and staff tracking systems and
closer cooperation, information-sharing and liaison with government security
agencies.
68. To build public understanding of the Mission’s mandate and the role of
peacekeepers in building peace and protecting civilians in South Sudan, UNMISS has
enhanced the use of multimedia communications and outreach channels, including
social media. Radio Miraya continues to deliver programming and messages of peace.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
69. With the sustained efforts of IGAD, considerable progress has been made to
revitalize the South Sudan peace process and to reach a negotiated settlement of the
conflict in the country. The signing of the Khartoum Declaration and agre ements on
outstanding issues on governance and security arrangements during the Sudan facilitated phase of the high-level revitalization forum are indeed important steps
forward. I urge the parties to continue to engage with the mediators to resolve the
remaining critical issues and conclude a revitalized agreement. At the same time, they
must begin to implement the signed agreements to demonstrate good faith and build
confidence. Silencing the guns and returning South Sudan to a path of peace and
development remains the key priority for the people of South Sudan, who have
suffered for far too long.
70. While I am encouraged by the constructive engagement of the Government in
the revitalization forum, recent efforts to unilaterally extend its tenure by
constitutional amendment will not help the peace process. In that respect, I urge the
Government to maintain its focus on ongoing talks and to make the concessions
necessary to conclude an inclusive and implementable political settlement. I equally
encourage the parties in opposition and civil society groups to constructively engage
in the process with the same spirit.
71. I remain deeply concerned about the continuing impact of the conflict on the
people of South Sudan. The situation in the greater Upper Nile region, and southern
Unity in particular, and the deterioration of the situation in the greater Bahr el -Ghazal
and greater Equatoria regions, in spite of the recommitments to a ceasefire, are
indicative of the devastation that the conflict continues to inf lict on the civilian
population. Forced displacement, direct and targeted attacks on civilians, including
women and children, and the resulting insecurity remain the grim reality in South
Sudan. In that regard, I welcome the joint report of the Office of t he United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and UNMISS that was published on 10 July

18-14157

15/18

S/2018/831

and call on the Government to undertake a thorough investigation into all allegations
of serious human rights violations and abuses, as well as the violations of
humanitarian law committed in southern Unity, and to hold accountable anyone found
to bear responsibility for the crimes committed.
72. The imperative for peace is starkly reflected in the humanitarian situation.
Viewed against the potential resources of the country to provide for the needs of its
citizens, it is unacceptable that some 1.8 million persons are internally displaced,
while another 2.5 million South Sudanese are seeking refuge in neighbouring
countries, making this the third largest refugee crisis in the world. Moreover, about
60 per cent of the population is suffering acute food insecurity and South Sudan now
has one of the highest rates of out-of-school children in the world because of the
conflict. The future generation of South Sudan deserves better.
73. During the reporting period, the operating environment remained one of the
most dangerous in the world. I pay tribute to the colleagues that were lost during this
period. In separate incidents in June and July, one peacekeeper and five humanitarian
workers were killed. I condemn these attacks and call upon the parties to desist from
targeting peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel and to remove all obstacles that
disrupt the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the implementation of the
UNMISS mandate. Individuals that target United Nations operations must be held
accountable for their actions.
74. Despite the encouraging progress made in the Khartoum phase of the high -level
revitalization forum, much work remains to be done to finali ze the details of the
agreements reached, including a viable implementation matrix. In many ways, the
peace process, South Sudan and the collective efforts of the international community
are at a crossroads. Further progress now depends on the consolidatio n of an inclusive
agreement that resolves the outstanding difficult governance issues and ambiguous
security-related issues, addressing, in particular, the security gap during and after the
pre-transition and the wider reform of the security sector. I urge the parties to continue
to show demonstrable commitment to overcome the challenges ahead and I reiterate
that support and a display of unity of purpose from the Security Council, the African
Union and IGAD to the peace process, coupled with incentives and disincentives to
the parties, are critical to concluding a sustainable and implementable agreement.
75. As South Sudan makes progress towards a settlement of the conflict, it is critical
to bear in mind that for peace to be sustainable, the structure, functions and leadership
of the security sector will need to answer and become accountable to an elected
civilian authority and obey the rule of law. I urge the South Sudanese leaders to work
sincerely towards this goal and call upon the international commun ity to support their
efforts in this regard.
76. In conclusion, I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for leading a joint United
Nations-African Union delegation to South Sudan in July to highlight the role of
women in all efforts relating to conflict resolution, peacebuilding, development and
humanitarian interventions and the issues of gender-based violence and conflictrelated sexual violence. I also convey my sincere appreciation to UNMISS military,
police and civilian personnel. Under the leadership of my Special Representative,
David Shearer, they work courageously to protect civilians in vulnerable situations,
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, safeguard human rights and support
the peace process. I particularly thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
that have provided much-needed uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I
further commend the United Nations country team and non-governmental
organization partners for their tremendous courage and sacrifice in providing v ital
humanitarian assistance to the population, in arduous and often dangerous conditions.
I also thank my Special Envoy, Nicholas Haysom, for his support to the peace process
16/18

18-14157

S/2018/831

at the regional level. Lastly, I commend the tireless efforts of the IGAD Specia l
Envoy, Ismail Wais, as well as those of the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, the former President of Botswana, Festus Mogae, and the
African Union High Representative for South Sudan, the former President of Mali,
Alpha Oumar Konaré, for their commitment to addressing the plight of the civilian
population of South Sudan in partnership with the United Nations. I also wish to
express my sincere appreciation for the active engagement of the Chair of the African
Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, in the collective effort for peace in South
Sudan.

18-14157

17/18

S/2018/831

18/18

18-14157
