A/64/PV.39

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

39

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 5 November 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 64 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Human Rights Council
(A/64/53/Add.1)
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/64/490)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.11)
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): For more than six
decades we have been debating about the peace process
in the Middle East. Despite our continuous efforts, we
are still far from a lasting peace in the region.
The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statements made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference. We would,
however, like to highlight some points of interest to us.
In that connection, my delegation thanks the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict for its investigation into documented
allegations of criminal activities and for presenting a
comprehensive and objective report (A/HRC/12/48)
addressing all alleged violations. Our conscience is
shaken by the serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law committed by Israel, as
reported in the context of its military operations in
Gaza from 27 December 2008 to 18 January 2009.

We believe that the findings and conclusions set
out in Judge Goldstone’s report will help create an
opportunity to put an end to impunity for violations of
international law in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territory and thus to eventually address the
dispossession experienced by the people of Gaza. My
delegation endorses the findings and recommendations
of the Goldstone report and expresses its appreciation
for their objectivity and fairness.
The Goldstone report clearly confirms that Israel,
whose people themselves had suffered oppression in
Europe, committed serious human rights violations and
violations of humanitarian law amounting to war
crimes and crimes against humanity, while using
disproportionate force and deliberately targeting
civilian
buildings
and
installations,
causing
unspeakable losses in terms of property and the lives of
civilians, many of them women and children.
According to the Goldstone report, all inhabitants of
Gaza were targeted, without distinction between
military personnel and civilians. The scale of the
crimes described in the report should be a wake-up call
for the international community. If its findings were to
be disregarded, the promotion of human rights would
take a step backwards and criticism of others for
human rights violations would be a mockery.
The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict, headed by Judge Richard
Goldstone, made a number of recommendations aimed
at ensuring accountability for perpetrators and redress
for victims. It called on the Government of Israel to
resolve to conduct independent and credible

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-59485 (E)

*0959485*

A/64/PV.39

investigations into the many allegations of serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law that had taken place during the Gaza conflict
at the beginning of the year. The report also called on
Hamas to initiate genuine and effective inquiries into
and proceedings to deal with the many allegations of
violations. In addition, the report called for the cases to
be referred to the International Criminal Court in The
Hague if Israel and Hamas do not investigate the war
crimes allegations against them within six months.
We urge Israel and Hamas to conduct full, neutral
and credible investigations into the allegations
contained in the report. We call upon the General
Assembly
to
discharge
its
Charter-mandated
responsibilities with respect to the issue. We also look
forward to the results of the consideration of the report
by the Human Rights Council.
Serious follow-up to the report at all levels is
imperative in order to bring an end to this immoral and
repugnant impunity and to prevent the recurrence of
such crimes against the Palestinians. Israel should
allow access to humanitarian goods and freeze
settlements. We express our deep concern over the
precarious humanitarian situation, and we urge Israel
to lift its embargo against the Palestinians and
immediately open all border crossings to allow for the
free movement of goods, persons and humanitarian aid.
Humanitarian access to Gaza must be allowed in order
to avoid a humanitarian disaster. An international
monitoring mechanism must be established to ensure a
ceasefire.
We urge Israel to immediately end settlement
activities, including so-called natural growth. If we are
to achieve a lasting settlement, it is very important to
address the root cause, which is the Israeli occupation
of the Arab territories. The solution, therefore, requires
Israel’s complete withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and
all other occupied Arab lands. We reiterate that the
creation of a Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully
alongside Israel on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, is the only sustainable
solution to the conflict. The Road Map, the Arab Peace
Initiative and relevant resolutions are the best
parameters for achieving a two-State solution. Thus,
Israelis and Palestinians could live in peace and
harmony. I am hopeful that that dream will come true.

2

We would like to restate that it is only through
negotiations that a fair and lasting peace can be
established in the Middle East. Intensive and sincere
work is needed to ensure a resumption of negotiations.
Let me conclude by echoing the words of Judge
Goldstone:
“Now is the time for action. A culture of
impunity in the region has existed for too long.
The lack of accountability for war crimes and
possible crimes against humanity has reached a
crisis point; the ongoing lack of justice is
undermining any hope for a successful peace
process and reinforcing an environment that
fosters violence. Time and again, experience has
taught us that overlooking justice only leads to
increased conflict and violence.”
Mr. Al Nafisee (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
On behalf of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
Mr. President, I have the honour to thank you for your
efforts in convening this urgent meeting to discuss the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48), prepared for the
Human Rights Council by the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, which
investigated violations perpetrated during the Israeli
war against Gaza last December and the human rights
situation in Palestine and the occupied Arab territories.
My country associates itself with the statements
made, respectively, by the representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic on behalf of the Arab Group, and the
representative of the Republic of Sudan on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
In the view of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
Goldstone report is clear and transparent and demands
appropriate action by the General Assembly, in view of
its condemnation of Israel for war crimes committed
during its recent aggression in Gaza. The Assembly is
now in the process of discussing the report and will
soon be voting on endorsing it.
The investigation conducted in Gaza by Judge
Goldstone and his international team shows that Israel
committed war crimes and crimes against humanity in
a war that caused the death of more than 1,400
Palestinians, most of them civilian women and
children, and the wounding of thousands more.
Furthermore, Israel committed deliberate acts of

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

aggression against United Nations facilities in Gaza
and used bombs and rockets that increased the toll of
death or injury of unarmed Palestinians who had
sought shelter there.

country or military organization should be above the
law. A failure to achieve justice in the face of the
serious violations committed in the war on Gaza would
have disastrous consequences for international justice.

On 12 January the Human Rights Council
adopted its resolution S-9/1, condemning Israel for its
attacks on Gaza and its serious violations of human
rights, and requesting that a fact-finding mission be
established to investigate violations against unarmed
civilians in the area. We support the Mission’s findings
in Gaza and the occupied territories, and its
condemnation of the violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.

The Arab world, including the State of Palestine,
has made every possible effort to achieve a genuine
and lasting peace. The Arab Peace Initiative is still on
the table; it offers a comprehensive route to ending the
Arab-Israeli conflict and reaching an agreement on
reciprocal recognition, normal relations and peaceful
coexistence for all States in the region. It is completely
in line with the peace process and embodies the
commitment of the Arab side to peace as a strategic
option, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

Judge Goldstone described fairly and objectively
the scale of destruction committed by Israel in a war in
which it used weapons of every kind. He met with
injured and displaced Palestinians, was shown pictures
of the burned bodies of dead women, children and old
people and saw for himself how Israel had deliberately
targeted them. At a press conference Judge Goldstone
said,
“The aim of holding these public hearings
… was to show the human side of the suffering;
to give a voice to the victims so they are not lost
among statistics. No written words can by
themselves convey human stories the way people
can do it in their own voice and words”.
He has also said that the Mission wanted to show the
effect of violence on communities, especially the
psychological effects on children.
We endorse Judge Goldstone’s words when he
presented the report to the Human Rights Council:
“A culture of impunity in the region has
existed for too long … the ongoing lack of justice
is undermining any hope for a successful peace
process and reinforcing an environment that
fosters violence.”
We reiterate that the Goldstone report aims to
strengthen a culture of accountability and to draw
attention to disturbing violations of international
principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law. With the publication of the report, a
growing culture of accountability is becoming more
apparent.
The international community must shoulder its
responsibility and take action to achieve justice, for no

09-59485

If everyone recognizes such a solution, they
should also recognize why peace has still not been
achieved. That is because of Israel’s perpetration of
massacres, arbitrary bombardments and attacks against
the Palestinians in the occupied territories. Israel has
deliberately prevaricated and procrastinated in order to
avoid any commitment to peace. Peace cannot be
achieved by imposing punishment and preconditions
on a people whose country has been occupied and
whose rights have been violated in contravention of all
the principles and norms of international law. No
conditions should be imposed before a peace
settlement is reached. The aggressor cannot be
rewarded before negotiations even begin. All the
international initiatives and efforts in this context have
consistently faced a blank refusal from the Israeli side,
embodied in its unilateral measures. This is contrary to
international law and Security Council resolutions.
Instead of seeking genuine peace, Israel continues
its daily humiliation of the Palestinian people and its
building of settlements, the separation wall and bypass
roads. These are all actions that violate international
law and attempt to change reality on the ground, to
change the geographic and demographic makeup of
Palestinian land, especially in Jerusalem and its
environs, in grave violation of international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Settlements
encircle most Palestinian cities in the West Bank, and
also use more than half of its water resources.
Saudi Arabia is deeply concerned about the
ongoing Israeli blockade of Gaza, resulting in the
continued deterioration of Palestinian living conditions
in the face of restricted access to services, goods, food,

3

A/64/PV.39

fuel and building materials. In addition, Israel has
blockaded East Jerusalem and prevented people from
getting to their homes and houses of worship. Israeli
acts against Islamic sites represent daily aggression
against unarmed Palestinians, provoking distress
among Muslims all over the world. Israel’s grave
assaults on the Al-Aqsa mosque can only have a direct
and serious impact on international peace and security.
In this regard, my Government calls upon the
international community, through the General
Assembly, to take a stand against this wanton
aggression, act together and vote to adopt the draft
resolution (A/64/L.11) concerning the Goldstone report
in order to prevent any future repetition of these
crimes.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): The comprehensive report
of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) has concluded that there
is evidence indicating serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law,
committed both by Israel during Operation Cast Lead
and in the West Bank, as well as by Palestinian armed
groups and their repeated launching of rockets into
southern Israel. The report deserves serious
consideration and follow-up. The conclusions drawn
require concrete action, including the establishment of
a credible system of investigation into the alleged
violations. We reiterate our shared principle that every
Member State must commit itself to full cooperation
with the United Nations.
My delegation fully recognizes Israel’s legitimate
security concerns, including concerns over weapons
smuggling and the unacceptable firing of rockets from
Gaza, which destroy and endanger the lives of innocent
civilians. At the same time, we take the view that such
violations do not justify the disproportionate use of
force or the breaching of international humanitarian
and human rights law. The conflict continues to
threaten stability far beyond the region and the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory remains
of grave concern. The people of Gaza continue to be
besieged through limited freedom of movement, import
and export restrictions and the worsening economic
situation. The situation remains unacceptable by
international standards.
Meanwhile, the closure regime is still operating
in the West Bank. Here also the situation, including
violence and evictions in East Jerusalem, gives cause

4

for deep concern. Settlement activities must be ended.
The prolonged climate of impunity has created a crisis
of justice in the occupied Palestinian territory that
needs to be addressed. In that regard, the system of
investigation recommended by the report of the FactFinding Mission would be a welcome step in the right
direction.
In line with the report, my delegation urges both
the Israeli and the Palestinian parties to launch
independent investigations, in conformity with
international standards, into the allegations of serious
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. We also support the requests to the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to report to the
next session of the Human Rights Council on the
situation in the occupied Territory and to the SecretaryGeneral to report to the Assembly on further
developments.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting on the report of
the Human Rights Council pertaining to the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/64/53/Add.1). The information contained in that
report deserves the General Assembly’s full attention
given not only the seriousness and the implications of
the conflict in Gaza, but also on the grounds that
respect for international law and international
humanitarian law should be upheld at all times and
under any circumstance.
The report of the Fact-Finding Mission
(A/HRC/12/48), headed by Judge Richard Goldstone,
is a document that cannot be disregarded and whose
recommendations should be responsibly and seriously
considered by all parties, since impartial and credible
investigations in conformity with international
standards were carried out with regard to the
accusations of serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights committed during
the conflict in Gaza. Its greatest merit is that it seeks a
balanced approach, taking into account the actions of
all parties involved.
The civilian populations affected by that conflict,
both Palestinians and Israelis, deserve to know that
those kinds of acts will not go unpunished and that
their rights will be respected under any circumstance,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
That guarantees them a better future.

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

Justice should always go hand in hand with the
pursuit of peace. Furthermore, justice, accountability
and the fight against impunity are essential elements in
any settlement of conflict, since they facilitate the end
of hostilities and, at the same time, lay the foundations
for stability and reconciliation.
The main conclusion of the report of the FactFinding Mission is that both the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian factions should establish
investigation mechanisms that will make it possible to
obtain a better understanding of the alleged serious
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law committed during that conflict. We
are not going to debate the composition of the FactFinding Mission. Rather, we wish to focus on the fact
that those acts should be investigated and, if need be,
duly punished.
The Government of Israel, like any democratic
State, has the resources and the institutional and legal
means to act in conformity with its international
obligations. Mexico recognizes the right of legitimate
self-defence of Member States of the United Nations,
in accordance with Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter. However, that right does not in any
circumstance exempt the parties to a conflict from
fulfilling their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Israel has the right and the
obligation to protect its population. However, it also
has the obligation to comply with international
humanitarian law.
With respect to the Palestinian side, taking into
account the responsibility of the factions involved in
that conflict as non-State entities, we believe that
innovative mechanisms should be put in place that
provide an institutional approach ensuring credibility
and trust in accountability and in establishing
responsibilities, with the active contribution of the
international community.
In any case, the investigations of both sides
should begin as soon as possible and should have a set
deadline for submitting their results in order to bring
about the necessary trust to overcome that tragic
chapter of the conflict in the Middle East. Mexico
believes that the international community should
ensure that that process takes place in the best possible
conditions and, for that, considerable effort and
commitment on the part of the sides involved is
needed.

09-59485

Consideration of the Mission’s report reminds us
that Middle East peace talks must not be postponed yet
again, nor should they be subject to preconditions. The
goal, as everyone knows, is clear: to achieve a
comprehensive and definitive solution to the Middle
East conflict that reasserts the recognition of Israel’s
right to exist and allows the establishment of an
economically and politically viable Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace with Israel, within secure,
internationally recognized borders, in compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Road
Map, the Madrid Principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Today we have an opportunity to serve both
peace and international justice. Let us not let this
unique opportunity pass.
Mr. Ould Hadrami (Mauritania) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, I would like at the outset to
thank you for organizing this important meeting so
quickly at the request of the Group of Arab States to
study the war of 27 December 2008 to 18 January 2009
and the report on that war. The report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48) that was prepared pursuant to Human
Rights Council resolution S-12/1 is our topic today.
That report consists of more than 450 pages and it
looks at the impact of the catastrophic Israeli war on
the Gaza Strip that took place over a three-week
period.
The international community must organize a
comprehensive inquiry into the suffering of the
Palestinian people over the past 60 years. The report
has shown some conclusive facts and findings that
have demonstrated the terrible nature of the Israeli
crimes. More than 1,400 people died in a three-week
period. The initial act of aggression took place at 11.30
in the morning. That shows that it was a deliberate
attack, as it targeted children who were going to
school — because children have to go to school — and
came at a time when the streets are crowded with
people. The Israeli army killed Palestinians, not
distinguishing between civilians and combatants. There
is proof that shows that United Nations facilities were
also the victims of that aggression. The report shows
the terrible impact of the unfair blockade of the Gaza
Strip that is still in place today and that has a direct
impact on the vulnerable segments of society, be they
elderly people, women or children. The report also
shows that at the end of this past June — that is, six

5

A/64/PV.39

months after the end of the war — the catastrophic
consequences were still clearly in evidence. We could
see the destruction of buildings, industries, wells,
schools, hospitals, police stations and the only flour
mill in Gaza. International assistance and construction
materials are not reaching civilians, because of the
closure of crossing points. That is extremely important
because winter is coming and the suffering will only
continue.
Since the United Nations was founded,
resolutions and legislation have been adopted to
promote
international
law
and
international
humanitarian law. Unfortunately we are facing various
sorts of difficulties in implementing those resolutions,
which requires more political resolve. The last Israeli
war against Gaza, which also caused a great deal of
killing and destruction, proved the existence of a
climate of legal impunity and the lack of legal
responsibility. The suffering of the Palestinian people
is as old as the United Nations itself — 60 years. The
Palestinian people are still suffering from injustice,
unfair treatment and displacement. We call on the
international community to put an end to their
suffering and tragedy.
The State of Israel, which is the occupying
Power, must accept the Arab Peace Initiative, which is
based on the principles of land for peace and an
independent, sovereign and secure Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, peacefully coexisting
with the Israeli State. The State of Israel must
withdraw from all occupied Arab land, including the
Golan Heights and the Lebanese Shab’a farms. The
Goldstone report is extremely comprehensive and
objective and gives new hope for implementing its
recommendations. We call on all relevant United
Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council, to
take the measures necessary to implement those
recommendations and enforce justice in order to
promote accountability and to punish the perpetrators
of the crimes.
Finally, my delegation supports draft resolution
A/64/L.11 and calls on the General Assembly to adopt
it. It will promote peace, strengthen the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and promote
international justice. Such crimes and their origins
must not be repeated in the future. Furthermore, those
crimes are not subject to any statute of limitations.

6

Mr. Ali (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
align itself with the statements delivered by the
representatives of Egypt and Syria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively. We would like to
thank the Human Rights Council and the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict for
their reports (A/64/53/Add.1 and A/HRC/12/48).
The report of the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict, also known as the
Goldstone report, has clearly shown the brutality of
Israeli actions in the execution of Operation Cast Lead,
unleashed in Gaza for more than three weeks, from
27 December 2008 until 18 January 2009. Therefore,
while the purpose of our meeting is ostensibly to
discuss and take action on the two reports before us, its
real purpose is much greater. It is to ensure that Israel
can no longer shed Palestinian blood with impunity.
I say this because the Goldstone report makes for
grim reading. The report, which speaks for itself,
highlights Israel’s record of unbridled barbarity
towards the people in Gaza. Due to the paucity of time,
I would like to point out just some of its most salient
points. First, the military operation in question is not
an aberration. Rather, it fits into a continuum of
policies, based on or resulting in violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Secondly, Operation Cast Lead was qualitatively
different from any previous military action by Israel in
the occupied Palestinian territory by dint of its
unprecedented
severity
and
its
long-lasting
consequences. The visible destruction of houses,
factories, wells, schools, hospitals, police stations and
other public buildings proves that it was the deliberate
aim of Israel to inflict as much damage and suffering
as possible.
Thirdly, Israeli military actions, premised on a
deliberate policy of disproportionate force, were aimed
not at a specific enemy, but at the supporting
infrastructure. In practice, that meant the civilian
population in Gaza.
Fourthly, this operation, which led to killings and
destruction, was carefully planned and executed. That
also indicated that all aspects of the operation were
deliberate. Therefore, all killings must have been
conducted in cold blood.

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

However, despite the gruesome situation, we
were struck by the courage of the Palestinian people.
The assiduous work of Palestinian non-governmental
and civil society organizations in providing support to
the population in such extreme circumstances, and in
giving voice to the suffering and expectations of
victims of violations, deserves to be fully
acknowledged.
We note with interest that there were also
dissenting voices in Israel against the operation,
expressed through demonstrations and protests, as well
as public reporting on Israel’s conduct. Those voices
understood that Israel could not purchase peace and
security for itself with the blood and suffering of the
Palestinian people.
We, the international community, have thus far
failed to act to ensure the protection of the civilian
population in the Gaza Strip and the occupied
Palestinian territory. Hence, we must break this inertia
by undertaking concrete actions in order to ensure that
justice for the people of Palestine is neither delayed
nor denied.
The Goldstone report provides us with two
options: either take action to achieve justice for the
Palestinians or allow the abhorrent, illegal actions of
Israel to remain unpunished. In that regard, as a
responsible member of the international community,
we choose the former. Accordingly, we urge all
Member States to work together in implementing all
the recommendations stipulated in the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting to consider the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, also known
as the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48).
Early this year, the international community was
horrified by the events surrounding three weeks of
Israeli aggression in the occupied Gaza Strip. The
report of the Human Rights Council on its twelfth
special session (A/64/53/Add.1) and periodic reports of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights
corroborated other independent reports on those events.
The Goldstone report only authenticated those reports
with evidence.

09-59485

The Human Rights Council, after detailed
discussions at its twelfth special session, referred the
Goldstone report to the General Assembly. The Council
also requested the Secretary-General to submit at its
thirteenth session a report on the status of the
implementation of the Goldstone recommendations. I
believe that, against that backdrop, the present session
of the General Assembly has three-faceted
significance.
First, the General Assembly must actively and
constructively consider the Goldstone report, in terms
of implications and future follow-up action. It is our
hope that the Assembly will discharge that
responsibility in an efficient and just manner.
Secondly, pursuant to the request of the Human
Rights Council, the Secretary-General has been asked
to submit a report on the status of the implementation
of the Goldstone recommendations to the Council. We
may rightfully expect him to keep the General
Assembly informed on the subject. Therefore, the
Assembly’s present session can give him requisite
inputs and guidelines for the preparation of his report.
Thirdly, the General Assembly, through this
session, has an opportunity to position itself behind the
growing concern of the international community at the
stalled peace process in the Middle East. In the absence
of a meaningful and durable peace process, violence
will continue and respect for human rights will remain
a distant dream. We sincerely believe that our
meaningful deliberations on the issue will help to
revive the peace process.
From the discussions in the Human Rights
Council, it is evident that many Member States have
greatly appreciated the Goldstone report for being
objective, impartial and comprehensive. We see the
deliberations on the report as an opportunity for the
international community to address the suffering of the
Palestinian people and for Israel to rectify its past
actions and policies.
Achieving lasting peace in the Middle East is a
long-held common objective of the international
community. This meeting should bring us closer to that
objective. Thus, the overarching message of the need
for a revival of the peace process with firm
commitment to a two-State solution must resonate from
our deliberations.

7

A/64/PV.39

During last month’s debate in the Security
Council, Pakistan outlined four parameters for
international engagement with a view to achieving a
sustained peace process in the Middle East. We called
upon the Security Council and the Middle East Quartet
to utilize their full potential in support of the peace
process through transparent and objective engagement.
They must prevail upon Israel to cease all settlement
activity and illegal excavation in East Jerusalem, as the
two actions have so far proved the largest stumbling
blocks on the road to peace. We will reiterate that
message. There is also a pressing need to address the
plight and suffering of the Palestinian population and
to rebuild Palestinian institutions battered by conflict
and violence.
The foregoing measures must be supplemented by
addressing the root cause of all trouble — that is, by
ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories. Such a
framework for peace is not new. It has already been
determined in the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, as well as in the Madrid terms of reference,
the Road Map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
understanding reached in Annapolis in 2007.
I wish to conclude by expressing Pakistan’s
sincere hope that the Goldstone report will ultimately
strengthen the initiative for peace in the region and that
the General Assembly will be able to utilize that
important document to find a meaningful basis for
lasting peace and security in the Middle East.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): The Maldives would
like to welcome the report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
headed by Judge Richard Goldstone, that was
presented to the Assembly today. It is regrettable that
the Government of Israel, as the occupying Power,
decided not to cooperate with the Fact-Finding Mission
in its compilation of the report.
As a firm believer in the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, the Maldives is
disheartened by the continued suffering of the people
of Palestine, who have been denied their very basic
right to self-determination and the right to live in peace
and freedom in their own State, their own homeland.
The Maldives also supports the inalienable right of the
people of Israel to live in peace and security alongside
a sovereign and independent State of Palestine.
The protection of civilians, especially women and
children, is one of the most sacred obligations resting

8

upon the parties to a conflict under international law.
Thus, the onus rests with us, as responsible members of
the international community, to ensure that we uphold
the legal standards and norms that we have prescribed
for ourselves. For any hope of peace and stability in
the Middle East, it is crucial that accountability be
established for the clear and manifest violations of
human rights and humanitarian law that have been
highlighted in the report. Justice must be pursued
independently for the violations by both sides to the
conflict. It is also essential that such investigations and
subsequent prosecutions be monitored by the Security
Council.
The Maldives strongly believes that a negotiated
outcome based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions is the only way to ensure long-term peace,
security and stability in the region. To this end, we
support the current efforts by the United States to
revive the peace talks between the two parties. The
Maldives therefore calls for a final, just and
comprehensive settlement with the realization of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and within secure and recognized borders.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of
Israel must be brought to justice for crimes committed
against the Palestinian people. Those responsible for
that operation of terror and death, known as Cast Lead,
and for the criminal blockade against the people of
Gaza, must not go unpunished. How many more
genocides will be necessary before the United Nations
decides to act? How long will the occupying Power
continue to flout the resolutions adopted by this forum?
We have heard the answers from the
representative of Israel. In her speech, she lashed out
against the findings and recommendations of the
Goldstone report, claiming that it was “conceived in
hate and executed in sin” (A/64/PV.36), and that its
consideration by the General Assembly was in response
to cynical political manoeuvres and not principles.
The Human Rights Council is clear and
unambiguous in its resolution when it strongly
condemns all policies adopted by Israel, the occupying
Power. It also condemns the recent violations of human
rights committed by Israel in East Jerusalem. For
Venezuela, the report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict and the Human
Rights Council resolution are worthy of recognition.

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

The recommendation of the Goldstone report is
commendable in that it seeks to create a fund to
guarantee compensation to the Palestinian victims of
Israel’s criminal acts, with the understanding that the
funding should come entirely from the Government of
that country.
The
aforementioned
report
conclusively
demonstrates
the
organization,
planning
and
implementation of the policy of extermination carried
out by the Israeli State against the Palestinian nation.
According to the report, these acts of violence generate
individual criminal responsibility. Those on the Israeli
side responsible for the thousands of dead and
wounded should be brought to justice.
In its conclusion, the report emphasizes the
multiple and massive violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which are considered to be war crimes
committed by the Israeli occupying forces. The report
concludes that the prolonged blockade of Gaza by the
Israeli Government, which includes the deprivation of
the basic means of sustenance, could be considered
crimes against humanity.
Israel’s military operations in Gaza are a
lamentable example of the disastrous Dahiya doctrine,
put into practice by Israel during its invasion of
Lebanon in 2006 and which is characterized by the use
of disproportionate force, the mass destruction of
civilian property and infrastructure and the suffering
inflicted on civilians. Indeed, the Israel Government
itself has declared that the Gaza invasion was planned
in a comprehensive manner and on a large scale.
The international community must acknowledge
the willingness of the Palestinian authorities to
cooperate with the work of the Fact-Finding Mission,
which is in stark contrast to the position of the Israeli
leaders, who repeatedly have ignored all resolutions of
the main organs of the United Nations on the
Palestinian issue. They have also refused to cooperate
with the 23 United Nations-appointed fact-finding
missions since 1947. That clearly demonstrates the
gross violation of international law by the Israeli
regime.
The report we are discussing today reinforces the
need for the General Assembly to continue to review
regularly all those topics in the area of international
peace and security that the Security Council cannot or
will not resolve.

09-59485

The complicit tolerance shown by some members
of the Security Council with respect to the systematic
aggression and crimes under international law
committed by Israel against the Palestinian people,
nation and State is alarming.
Venezuela is concerned that some members of the
Security Council, in exercising their right of veto,
could block an initiative that could be conducive to
prosecuting Israeli genocide. Our concern further
increases when a super-Power and permanent member
of the Security Council is the main ally of the country
responsible for genocide and is the chief architect of
the irrational and disproportionate arms build-up
developed by Israel and which has turned this nation
into a nuclear Power.
The financial and military resources provided by
the United States to the Government of Israel, as well
as the protection that is afforded it in international
forums, further support the genocide against the
Palestinian people. The ineffectiveness of the United
Nations in the face of a history of Israeli
aggressiveness must cease. Those responsible for the
genocide of the Palestinian people should be promptly
punished for their crimes and brought before the
International Criminal Court.
The policies and practices of the Israeli
Government violate the inalienable right of the
Palestinians to self-determination. It is unjust and
absurd to place on the same level the genocidal
Government of Israel and the Palestinian forces which,
under the protection of their inalienable historical
rights and in the exercise of legitimate self-defence,
resist the criminal aggression against their nation and
their people.
We wish to recall that the revolutionary
Government of President Hugo Chávez Frías
suspended diplomatic relations with the Government of
Israel as a result of the brutal invasion of Gaza by its
armed forces, and is not willing to resume its relations
until the inhuman treatment of the Palestinian people
ceases.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its unequivocal support for the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination. We support their struggle
against the occupying Power, as well as their historical
claims. The Palestinian people have a right to resist the
occupying Power. Their heroism is worthy of
admiration and respect. This is why we wish to recall

9

A/64/PV.39

the words of the great poet of the Palestinian
resistance, Ali Ahmad Said, better known as Adonis,
who wrote that darkness is born kneeling whereas,
light is born standing up.

reached certain factual and legal conclusions to the
effect that Israel, in its aggression against Gaza,
deliberately killed civilians and used them as human
shields.

Venezuela hopes that the resolution that we adopt
will reflects the expectations of the Palestinian people
who demand justice, without delay, for the perpetrators
of war crimes and crimes against humanity who
repeatedly violate international law, in particular,
international humanitarian law.

Israel’s use of disproportionate force and its
attacks against civilian inhabitants, as well as its
destruction of civilian property and infrastructure, are
all illegitimate means to realize military and political
objectives. Such actions undermine international law
and run counter to the United Nations Charter. Israel
continues to act as if it were above the law; not holding
it accountable or responsible encourages impunity and
casts a shadow over the credibility of the United
Nations and that of international law.

Israel does not deserve another opportunity to
continue flouting United Nations resolutions. It should
be brought without delay before the International
Criminal Court. Israel has committed enough crimes. It
is time for it to be held accountable under international
law. The resolution to be adopted by the General
Assembly, therefore, must accept the spirit of the
resolution of the Human Rights Council. It is time for
this Assembly to be the official voice of the Palestinian
State.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 477 (V) of 1 November
1950, I now give the floor to the observer of the
League of Arab States.
Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
affording us the opportunity to participate in the
General Assembly’s debate on the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48).
The seriousness of the military campaign against
Gaza, the blockade imposed by Israel against its
inhabitants and the deprivation of their most basic
needs has prompted the international community to
dispatch a Fact-Finding Mission, under the leadership
of Justice Richard Goldstone, to look into alleged war
crimes and crimes against humanity perpetuated by
Israel during its military campaign in the Gaza Strip
from 27 December, 2008 to 18 January 2009. The
conclusions reached by the Mission were identical with
those reached by the independent fact-finding mission
of the League of Arab States.
In the preparation of its report, the Mission took
into account the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as the
responsibility and obligations of States, particularly of
occupying Powers, towards civilian inhabitants. It

10

The time has come for the international
community to put an end to the culture of impunity and
to Israel’s immunity to the consequences of its
aggression against the region. The time has also come
to hold the perpetuators of violations of international
law and human rights law accountable and to
implement the machinery of international justice.
The objective of the Goldstone report is to
salvage justice and to hold those accused of
perpetuating war crimes accountable for those crimes.
Respect for international humanitarian law and its
application does not impede the peace process; peace
does not run counter to respect of the rights of the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories.
The draft resolution before us (A/64/L.11) was
prepared in a balanced and objective manner and
represents the absolute acceptable minimum for the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Goldstone report. We would like to urge all Member
States to vote in favour of the draft resolution for the
sake of accountability and justice.
We express our deep concern over the serious
humanitarian crisis faced by the Palestinian people in
the Gaza Strip and the other occupied Palestinian
territories due to the Israeli blockade and aggression,
as well as over the continued closing of crossing points
and the prevention of access to humanitarian
assistance. We therefore call upon the international
community to compel Israel to lift its blockade and to
ensure access of humanitarian assistance to the Gaza
Strip.
Israel continues its actions in East Jerusalem in
an attempt to judaize the city and confiscate its land

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

and to isolate it from the remaining Palestinian
territories through intensified settlement activities
within and outside the city. Its blockade, the policy of
house demolitions and its attempts to bring down
Al-Aqsa mosque through continued excavations and
tunnel-digging, all seek to change the features of the
Arab and Islamic Old City.
We would like to call attention to the fact that
Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa mosque are in imminent
danger. We call upon the international community to
put an end to Israel’s flouting of the heritage of the city
and its desecration of the city’s sanctity. We call upon
the international community to oblige Israel to respect
international law, international resolutions and the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
The Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab
territories is the root cause of the suffering in our
region and of so many wars and tragedies. All attempts
and negotiations to put an end to that occupation have
failed due to Israel’s intransigence and its continued
building of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories.
At present, the Middle East question is going
through an extremely delicate stage and current efforts
to establish peace through negotiations seem to have
regressed in an alarming way. The continued faltering
of those efforts will only lead to further deterioration
and instability in the region. The international
community considers Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories illegitimate and an
obstacle to negotiations, as stated by the United
Kingdom’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Miliband,
a few days ago.
Working to put an end to the building of
settlements — all settlements — and ensuring the
re-launching of negotiations on a clear and sound basis
in a serious and credible manner is the only way to find
a permanent and just solution to the Palestinian
question and to establishing peace in the region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/64/L.11.
(spoke in English)
I call on the representative of Israel who wishes
to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): I would like to take this
opportunity before the Assembly proceeds to the vote

09-59485

to seek clarification on an element contained in
operative paragraph 4 of draft resolution A/64/L.11,
which is a matter of concern to us and I suspect to
other delegations as well.
More specifically, we would like to ask, who
exactly would be the accountable “Palestinian side”,
that would be responsible for undertaking investigations
that are independent, credible and in conformity with
international standards? Would it be the Palestinian
Authority that was ousted from Gaza in a violent coup
and is not effectively present there? Or would it be the
Hamas terrorist organization, terrorist entity, which
violates every international standard, promotes
terrorism, rejects the recognition of Israel and tries to
derail the region from the track of the peace process?
Israel, through you, Sir, would like to ask the
sponsors of the draft resolution to clarify this critical
aspect so that Member States of the General Assembly
will know better what they will be voting for.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Egypt, who presented the draft
resolution on behalf of the Arab Group and the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): With regard to operative
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, the Palestinian
Authority itself declared that it is going to conduct its
own investigation which is independent, credible and
in conformity with international standards. And Hamas,
which may be considered in Israel as a terrorist
organization but is considered the legitimately elected
representative of the Palestinian people, has already
expressed its willingness to cooperate and to
investigate and to prosecute those that are responsible
for such crimes.
We would like to hear the same from the
representative of Israel. If he can confirm today that
Israel is willing to undertake investigations that are
independent, credible and in conformity with
international standards, international law and
international humanitarian law, I think this would be
very happy news to the General Assembly before
voting on this draft resolution.
The President: I
representative of Israel.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Carmon (Israel): I thank the representative
of Egypt and will refer to his question later in my
explanation of vote before the vote.

11

A/64/PV.39

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now proceed to take action on draft resolution
A/64/L.11. Before giving the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States remains deeply concerned about the
human suffering of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples
that results from the ongoing Arab-Israeli conflict. The
best way to end that suffering is to bring about a
comprehensive peace in the region, including two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security. The United States is firmly committed to
pursuing that goal.
As we urge the parties to restart permanent status
negotiations leading to the creation of a Palestinian
State, we should all be seeking to advance the cause of
peace, and doing nothing to hinder it. The United
States strongly supports accountability for human
rights and humanitarian law violations in relation to the
Gaza conflict. Our goal is to achieve genuine
accountability in a way that respects internal processes
and the ongoing efforts to restart permanent status
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
As the United States made clear in Geneva, we
believe that the Goldstone report is deeply flawed,
including its unbalanced focus on Israel, its sweeping
conclusions of law, the excessively negative inferences
it draws about Israel’s intentions and actions, its failure
to deal adequately with the asymmetrical nature of the
Gaza conflict, its failure to assign appropriate
responsibility to Hamas for its decision to base itself
and its operations in heavily civilian-populated urban
areas and its many overreaching recommendations.

the 575-page Goldstone report, including findings that
have serious implications for conflicts in other parts of
the world, we do not think it appropriate to endorse the
report in its entirety.
Attempting as this draft resolution does to press
the Security Council to take this matter up is equally
unconstructive. The Security Council is already seized
of the situation in the Middle East and holds monthly
meetings on the topic — the only subject on the
Council’s entire agenda that is discussed with such
frequency. As many Member States have made clear,
the appropriate forum for discussion of this report is
the Human Rights Council.
The draft resolution also unhelpfully introduces
international supervision of the investigations to be
undertaken by the parties that would interfere with the
parties’ ability to conduct their own processes. The
proposed convocation of the High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention is also unnecessary
and unproductive. Convening a conference of the
Contracting Parties to the Geneva Convention for the
purpose of spotlighting one country would only
heighten divisions and could set back the process of
restarting permanent status negotiations. That and other
imbalanced references to the parties throughout the
text, including the failure to mention Hamas by name,
convey the impression that the Assembly is once again
handling Arab-Israeli issues in an unbalanced manner.
For those reasons, we will vote against the draft
resolution, but we believe that life-saving progress can
be made if we can lift our sights and look towards a
more hopeful future. The United States will continue to
work resolutely in pursuit of a just and lasting peace.

First, let me point out that we appreciate that the
draft resolution under consideration calls on both Israel
and the Palestinians, although it does not name Hamas,
to pursue investigations of the allegations that pertain
to each of them in the report. This is an advance over
the original one-sided mandate provided by the Human
Rights Council to the Goldstone Commission.

Mr. Carmon (Israel): Two days after the
revelation of Hamas’s newly improved Iranian-made
rockets and one day after the interception of a ship, the
Francop, loaded with hundreds of tons of rockets and
ammunition destined to be launched at Israeli
population centres, which is a grave event — we have
just submitted our complaint an hour ago to the
Security Council — this draft resolution (A/64/L.11)
mocks the reality faced by democratic States, such as
Israel, that face relentless terrorist threats.

We will continue to call for all parties to meet
their responsibilities and pursue credible, domestic
investigations. Nevertheless, we also have real
concerns about this draft resolution. Given the
far-reaching legal conclusions and recommendations of

The draft resolution before us endorses and
legitimizes a deeply flawed, one-sided and prejudiced
report of the discredited Human Rights Council and its
politicized work that bends both facts and the law. It
disregards Israel’s inherent right to defend its citizens

12

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

in the face of ongoing terrorist attacks. It represents yet
another pretext to bash Israel at the United Nations and
is detrimental to any positive diplomatic engagement in
the region. It attempts to export from Geneva to New
York a campaign of de-legitimization.
While Israel has been conducting professional,
credible and thorough investigations, as part of its
standard operating procedures and irrespective of any
United Nations report, the report before the Assembly
(A/64/53/Add.1) attempts to draw an implausible
equivalence between Israel, a democracy exercising its
inherent right to defend itself from terrorist attacks,
and those who target Israeli civilians and operate from
behind Palestinian mosques, hospitals, schools and
human shields or, alternatively, those who effectively
are absent from Gaza at this point.
The draft resolution, in paragraph 4, refers to the
“Palestinian side”. Yet, although we have received
some clarification that does not resolve the issue, I will
still put the question before the Assembly as to who
precisely that accountable Palestinian side is. Is that
the Palestinian Authority that was ousted from power
in the Gaza Strip in a bloody coup? Is it the Hamas
terrorist organization that violently seized control of
Gaza, an organization that rejects the recognition of
Israel and any peaceful solution of the conflict?
For those and other reasons, Israel has called for
a recorded vote on this draft resolution and will vote
against the draft resolution. And we urge all other
Member States to do the same.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have thus
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before the
vote.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/64/L.11, entitled “Follow-up to the report
of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict”. A recorded vote has been requested.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/64/L.11, the
following countries have become sponsors: Algeria,
Senegal, Somalia, South Africa and the Sudan.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,

09-59485

Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Germany,
Hungary, Israel, Italy, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Netherlands, Palau, Panama, Poland, Slovakia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Japan,
Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
New
Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Spain,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tonga, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay.

13

A/64/PV.39

Argentina wishes to point out that in general it
agrees with the report produced by Judge Goldstone
and the Fact-Finding Mission (A/HRC/12/48), as well
as with the first periodic report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (A/HRC/S-12/1),
especially the emphasis on the need to combat
impunity through the investigation of the facts and the
trial of the perpetrators.
That said, Argentina wishes to highlight that it
continues to believe that the recommendations
contained in the report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission require a level-headed analysis in the
light of their implications and the complexity and
difficulty of implementing some of them.
Mr. Gatan (Philippines): The Philippines has
always been unwavering in its strong support for the
Middle East peace process based on a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace, harmony and prosperity. It firmly believes that
the promotion and protection of the human rights of
both Israeli and Palestinian civilians represent a critical
and crucial element for establishing a just and lasting
peace in the region.
In that regard, the Philippines welcomes the
submission of the report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48)
and its information on the human rights situation in
Gaza. However, in the higher interest of truth, justice
and due process, the report should be considered and
studied seriously and carefully by the appropriate
United Nations bodies acting within their respective
mandates, as well as by all parties concerned.
The Philippines supports resolution 64/10 on the
Mission’s report. In no case, however, should it be
considered as a precedent. It should only apply to the
Gaza situation as part of the Middle East conflict,
which has long been on the agenda of the Security
Council under Chapter VI of the United Nations
Charter.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania voted in favour of
resolution 64/10 believing firmly that its call would
bring the international community one step closer to
ensuring full respect for human life and dignity and to
the fulfilment of justice for those who lost their lives in
the tragic events of Gaza and for those who are
genuinely striving to build a peaceful future.

14

This resolution is not and should not be seen as a
condemnation of anyone. To the contrary, we indeed
see in this resolution an opportunity to strengthen
peace by justice, in the hope that the events of 2008
will not be repeated and will serve as a reminder of the
vital need to respect each other’s fundamental rights to
peaceful existence and prosperity.
We cannot remain silent observers when a United
Nations fact-finding mission has reported grave
violations
of
international
humanitarian
law,
independent of the question of which party committed
them. Both parties involved need to pursue a thorough,
independent investigation, which will serve first and
foremost themselves, will serve all of us and, most
importantly, will serve reconciliation and peace, a goal
the world has been pursuing for decades, unfortunately
without concrete results. Albania voted based on the
principle that the pursuit of justice and truth, respect
for international humanitarian law and the need to end
impunity are fundamental to the development of
healthy democracy and the process of peace-building
within and among societies, countries and regions of
the world.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): The significance of the
decision we have just debated goes far beyond the
Gaza conflict. It is about our responsibility to protect
vulnerable groups in armed conflict. It is about
restoring the role of international humanitarian law and
the importance of full respect for fundamental
principles that are at the foundation of the United
Nations — nothing less.
We believe the main focus of draft resolution
A/64/L.11 was relevant and constructive. The
investigations by the parties should be independent and
credible and comply with international standards. The
United Nations Secretary-General and the Human
Rights Council should be mandated to secure the
international monitoring of the national investigations.
In order for that message to come through, we
presented a very limited proposal that would have
allowed for much broader support. Now we strongly
regret that the main sponsors did not incorporate our
suggestion into the draft resolution. We believe that the
failure to do so demonstrates that the decision was not
only about protecting victims of armed conflict in
Gaza, in southern Israel or indeed elsewhere. We
cannot interpret it as anything but a wish to preserve
the politicization of the Middle East issues, which we

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

see far too often. Yet again we at the United Nations
are turning what is an existential question into a highly
politicized debate. That is not in the interest of the
victims we all claim to speak for. For that reason,
Norway abstained.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation was forced to abstain
in the General Assembly vote on draft resolution
A/64/L.11 on the discussion of the report of the Human
Rights Council (A/64/53/Add.1). The main topic of
that document is the report of the United Nations FactFinding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
headed by Judge Richard Goldstone, detailing human
rights violations committed during that winter conflict.
When the Goldstone report first came out, we
immediately deemed it to contain some conclusions we
could agree with. At the same time, the document
contained assessments that we could not agree with and
that required further work. However, the Goldstone
report was published and submitted to the Human
Rights Council, where work began on a resolution on
the report.
Our delegation, along with a number of other
Missions in Geneva, played an important role in
ensuring that the resolution was political in nature and
that it would support the idea of national investigations
but would not seek to continue a discussion on the
matter in the Security Council. We remain convinced
that that would only complicate establishing conditions
to achieve a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East.
That draft resolution was agreed to but, as we all
know, it was then withdrawn and replaced with a new
text that did not take into consideration the
amendments made by the Russian delegation that
would have kept the discussion of the matter within the
political sphere in the Human Rights Council.
In an emotionally charged atmosphere in Geneva,
apart from the topics addressed in the Goldstone report,
the draft included other important issues for the peace
process, including the need to cease archaeological
excavations in Jerusalem, which risk damaging the
holy sites, and the importance of taking specific steps
to alleviate the blockade of Gaza and to satisfy the
basic needs of the Palestinian people, who are in an
extremely difficult situation. In that regard, guided by
its fundamental stance on those issues, Russia
supported the Human Rights Council draft resolution,

09-59485

but at the same time it made a statement that it did not
agree with a part of the draft resolution that called for
sending the Goldstone report to the Security Council
for consideration and possible future action.
Unfortunately, despite the arguments of many
delegations, mentions of the Security Council were
kept in the General Assembly draft resolution. That is
not conducive to a level-headed, professional analysis
of the Goldstone report’s recommendations, which
should continue primarily in the Human Rights
Council, including the importance of both Israel and
the Palestinians conducting their own investigations.
Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and a participant in the Quartet, continues to
be unswervingly guided by the international legal basis
for a Middle East settlement that has been reaffirmed
in all recent Security Council resolutions as well as by
the four leading mediators and the League of Arab
States. The basis of this is the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
An important element that is now necessary in
order to re-launch negotiations is the first part of the
Road Map, which requires the parties to refrain from
any steps that could prejudice the outcome of final
status issue discussions, namely, the future of
Jerusalem, borders, refugees and settlements. There is
a need to continue our collective work, in particular
within the United Nations, to achieve those goals in the
context of a comprehensive Middle East settlement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
voted in favour of resolution A/64/10, which the
Assembly adopted a short while ago regarding holding
Israel, as the occupying Power, accountable for the
crimes it committed during the aggression against
Gaza. We did this based on our belief in the justice of
the cause of the Palestinian people and their struggle
for liberation, although the resolution does not meet
our minimum expectations.
My delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
responding quickly to the Human Rights Council’s
resolution and for affording the international
community the opportunity to condemn the war crimes
and crimes of genocide perpetrated by Israel in full
view of the States and peoples of the world.
Syria emphasizes that it views the votes of the
Member States on today’s General Assembly resolution

15

A/64/PV.39

as an indicator of the credibility of those States
vis-à-vis one of the important aspects of the work of
our international Organization. We do not believe that
there is any justification whatsoever for not voting in
favour of this modest resolution. The humanitarian
duty and responsibility required of our Organization in
standing up to Israel’s crimes make it plain that States
that allow Israel to continue its violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
have simply shirked their responsibilities. Indeed, they
have gone so far in adhering to double standards that
we may be disinclined henceforth to sit together with
them to discuss issues of human rights or international
humanitarian law.
We must all realize that the picture before us has
become more clear than ever before, as issues of
human rights and, frequently, of international
humanitarian law have become mere tools in the hands
of some, who used them to put pressure on and to
blackmail States with whose political positions,
economic interests and types of rule and authority they
disagree.
For all these reasons, my delegation would like to
register its rejection of any suggestion in the justadopted resolution implying that aggressor and victim
may be equated. Israel is the Power occupying
Palestinian land. It was Israel that used internationally
prohibited weapons to murder women, children, the
elderly and other innocents in Palestine. The distortion
of the facts is a denial of the right of an occupied
people to resist their occupiers. Syria, along with
numerous others who share our conviction, will not
allow the truth to be transformed into falsehood or to
let injustice and murder triumph over justice and the
rule of law.
Finally, my delegation urges all Member States,
as well as the Security Council, to take the content of
this resolution to its logical conclusion and to mete out
punishment to the Israelis, who perpetrated war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Gaza.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
voted in favour of resolution 64/10 because we
acknowledge the need to conduct credible and
independent investigations by all the parties involved
in the Gaza conflict. We would like to stress how
important it is to prevent impunity, guarantee justice,
promote peace and prevent new violations. We would,
however, have preferred language different from the

16

word “endorses” that is used in the report of the
Human Rights Council (A/HRC/12/48), and which is
repeated in operative paragraph 1 of the Assembly’s
resolution, in order to obtain the support of a larger
number of Member States.
Mexico reiterates its conviction that we need to
support United Nations efforts to guarantee
accountability with respect to violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Our vote was
in favour of accountability and not of all the
recommendations contained in this report.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting to discuss the report on the Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
established by the Human Rights Council and chaired
by Justice Richard Goldstone. The report describes and
analyses, in an international framework, the allegations
of the violations of human rights that took place during
Operation Cast Lead. This period saw the undermining
of fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law, such as proportionality in the use of force,
distinguishing between civilians and armed forces, and
precautions against harming civilians.
Chile supports the establishment of a Palestinian
State, as well as the right of Israel to live within secure
borders, as recognized by the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations. We also recognize the right to
legitimate self-defence, in form and principle, as
articulated in Article 51 of the Charter, especially the
principle of proportionality as established in
international law. In this context, Chile supports the
resolution of the Human Rights Council and endorses
the recommendations of the Fact-Finding Mission.
We understand that the purpose of the
recommendations contained in the report should be to
investigate the allegations of serious violations
committed by the Israeli forces and Palestinian
factions. We reiterate that in our opinion, what is most
important is upholding international humanitarian law
and respect for human rights. It is essential that, first,
independent and credible investigations be conducted
into the alleged violations; secondly, that those
responsible be sent to trial; and thirdly, that reparations
be made to the victims. Chile calls on all parties
concerned to comply with their obligations.
Chile would like to take this opportunity to state
that we supported the Assembly’s newly adopted

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

resolution. We would like to emphasize the role that
the Human Rights Council should play in ensuring the
monitoring of compliance with the recommendations
of the Fact-Finding Mission. The Human Rights
Council should be the body that continues to examine
the results of investigations before referring them to
other organs of the United Nations system.
Finally, Chile would like to appeal for an end to
all the obstacles of provocation and incitement to
violence, wherever they stem from, in order to
establish conditions of trust and to renew the
negotiations that all of us desire and have desired for
so long.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favour of resolution 64/10. It was a
decision we had to consider very carefully, because,
like other delegations in this chamber, we noted certain
flaws in the report of the Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) that the authors of the
report acknowledge themselves.
That having been said, we value the fact that the
Mission acknowledged the complexity of the situation
and condemned both sides for serious violations of
human rights of civilians in both Gaza and Israel.
Through our vote, we would like to reiterate our total
rejection of impunity, as well as our unswerving
commitment to reaching a lasting peace in the Middle
East which culminates in the creation of a sovereign,
independent and viable Palestinian State within secure
and recognized borders, like its neighbour, the State of
Israel.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Malaysia voted in favour of
resolution 64/10 because we strongly feel that Israel,
the main perpetrator in the Gaza conflict, should be
held accountable for the war crimes and grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law which it had committed during the
conflict. In fact, we would have wanted stronger
language in the resolution to reflect this view so as not
to equate the victims with the perpetrator.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia was deeply
saddened by the conflict in the Gaza Strip and southern
Israel last December and January, and we are very
disturbed at the loss of momentum in recent efforts to
restart the peace process. We ask the parties to do
more.

09-59485

We voted against resolution 64/10 because of a
number of genuine concerns arising from the language
of the text and from the flawed nature of the report it is
based on, which we simply cannot endorse. However,
this vote in no way reduces our fundamental concern
about the humanitarian situation of the people of Gaza.
Consistently before, during and after the Gaza
conflict, we called on all the parties to take all
necessary steps to minimize harm to civilians, and we
call on the parties now to act to prevent the continuing
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, a situation that is
unacceptable.
During the conflict itself, Australia said clearly
that it supported a proper investigation of any
allegations of breaches of human rights and
international humanitarian law. That is a position we
maintain and one which we convey firmly in our recent
statements to the Human Rights Council and to the
Security Council.
It is crucial that these serious matters be dealt
with properly, and today we join the call on the parties
to credibly investigate all allegations that have been
made of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and to inform the international
community of the results of those investigations.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): Canada was
concerned about the unbalanced nature of the mandate
of the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict when it was first considered in that it did
not clearly call for investigation of both sides and did
not recognize that rocket fire on Israel led to the crisis.
In commissioning this study, the Human Rights
Council pre-emptively assumed Israel’s culpability.
While recognizing that the report that was released
does address issues relating to both parties, we are
nevertheless concerned about its overall unbalanced
nature.
We were further concerned about the decision to
proceed with the twelfth special session of the Human
Rights Council, as we believe that the situation in the
Middle East must be addressed in a balanced and
non-politicized manner — one that promotes a
negotiated solution rather than one that further
antagonizes the parties.
For these reasons, Canada voted no on resolution
64/10. That said, Canada continues to call on all parties
to respect their obligations under human rights and

17

A/64/PV.39

international humanitarian law. We expect all credible
reports of wrongdoing by armed forces — regular or
irregular — to be investigated by the relevant
authorities, and we note that Israel is carrying out
investigations and we look forward to their full
disclosure when concluded.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): The Netherlands has
just voted no on resolution 64/10, adopted just now. As
we stated in our explanation of vote in Geneva three
weeks ago, we welcomed the work of the Goldstone
mission, but we have difficulty in welcoming the report
and endorsing all of its recommendations without
further restrictions. The Netherlands therefore voted
against the resolution at the Human Rights Council in
Geneva. We cannot now support a resolution — the
one before us — which endorses a resolution we voted
against only a few weeks ago.
The Netherlands supports the elements in the
resolution that call for independent investigations by
the parties. We are convinced that concerned parties
should pursue their own in-depth investigations into
accusations of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, and some of these
investigations have already been initiated by Israel,
including into the strategic considerations of parties
during the conflict and into the humanitarian aspects of
access to Gaza as addressed by the Goldstone report.
Where relevant, the concerned parties must bring to
justice those suspected of violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law.
While we are supportive of these elements, other
parts of the resolution before us are a source of concern
for the Netherlands. The Human Rights Council
commissioned the Goldstone report, and, in our view,
the Human Rights Council should remain the primary
organ to deal with the report, not the General
Assembly, and certainly not the Security Council, as
the resolution before us implies.
Also, the resolution gives the parties three
months’ time to investigate possible violations of
human rights and humanitarian law. We are puzzled as
to why the Secretary-General has to report on the
implementation of this resolution in the same three
months. In any case, we do not think the SecretaryGeneral should be given a central role in the
implementation of this resolution.

18

Lastly, and in a general sense, it is our overall
feeling that the resolution will not be conducive to the
aim of relaunching the Middle East peace process.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil voted in favour of
resolution 64/10. We reiterate our sincere concern for
the violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law reported to have occurred in Gaza and
southern Israel last December and January. The
Goldstone report represents a serious and important
account of those violations as it addresses crimes
allegedly committed by both sides. These violations
should be fully investigated so as to ensure
accountability and justice, prevent impunity from
leading to more violence and encourage the parties to
find a solution to their differences through peaceful
means.
At this stage, we believe that the report should be
primarily implemented by the concerned parties with
the full support of the international community. Israel
and the Palestinians must fully commit to the
establishment of transparent and serious investigations
according to international standards. The parties should
be given adequate time to conduct appropriate
independent investigations. The seriousness and
credibility of such investigations and their conclusions,
or absence thereof, should guide the consideration of
possible involvement of other United Nations bodies
according to their respective functions and powers.
Brazil is a friend of peace and a firm supporter of
the establishment of an independent, geographically
united, democratic and economically viable Palestinian
State living side by side with Israel in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders. We
are confident that today’s decision will help us to
achieve this goal.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia abstained in the vote on resolution 64/10. At
this meeting, my country would like to reiterate its
support for achieving a negotiated and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine and thus values all
efforts aimed at achieving an agreement between the
parties and reaching peace between Israel and
Palestine. We reiterate the importance of direct
dialogue as the best choice for continuing to move
closer to peace and for ensuring positive results for the
peoples of Israel and Palestine. My country will
continue to provide its support to all initiatives aimed
attaining a result that is satisfactory to the parties —

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

guided by Colombia’s commitment to multilateralism
and the peaceful resolution of disputes. At the same
time, Colombia regrets the acts of violence produced
by attacks that could affect the civilian population,
regardless of their origin. My delegation reiterates its
commitment to achieving full defence of human rights,
and we invite all countries to move forward
constructively in strengthening their institutional
capacities to ensure implementation of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand takes
this opportunity to explain its abstention in the vote on
resolution 64/10. That position must be seen in the
wider context of the Middle East peace process and our
long-standing support for international justice. Our
position is based on a number of principles.
New Zealand seeks
a just,
enduring,
comprehensive peace settlement based on the two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security, and we call on all parties to resume
negotiations to that end. New Zealand has consistently
called for investigations into alleged violations of
human rights and humanitarian law arising from the
conflict. There should be no impunity. Perpetrators of
any such violations must be brought to justice.
We would have preferred that this issue be
considered by the Human Rights Council in Geneva in
March next year, as originally agreed, as this could
have created a better climate for the required
investigations. We object to the continued bias against
Israel in the handling of this important question in the
Human Rights Council.
While we appreciate its position, we regret that
Israel did not present its version of events to the FactFinding Mission, in particular after the Mission’s
original biased mandate was changed by agreement
between the President of the Human Rights Council
and Justice Goldstone. All that having been said, the
report is here, and we must deal with it.
We strongly support Israel’s right to defend itself
and its people from attack of any kind and from
whatever quarter, in a way that avoids harm to civilians
and is consistent with international law. Equally, we
strongly support the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination, consistent with international law.
We call for an end to Israel’s settlement building,
which we regard as a serious impediment to the peace
process. We are deeply concerned at the severe

09-59485

humanitarian crisis in Gaza, including the impact of
border movement restrictions, and repeat our calls for
these restrictions to be eased. We welcome the fact that
nearly 80 truckloads of goods entered Gaza from Israel
through the Kerem Shalom crossing, and we call for
such openings to continue. We condemn Hamas’s
indiscriminate rocket attacks against Israeli citizens
and the use of civilian-populated urban sites as rocketlaunch sites.
Any jurist who accepted the Fact-Finding
Mission’s brief would have fully understood the legal
and political path ahead. It is to the credit of Justice
Goldstone and his colleagues that they did not flinch
from that task. We consider that serious allegations are
raised by the Goldstone report, and we call for all
parties to begin credible independent domestic
investigations into those allegations, conducted in line
with internationally accepted standards. We will not
prejudge the integrity or the outcome of those
investigations. We agree that this was a fact-finding
mission and not a judicial inquiry. The allegations in
the Goldstone report have not yet been subjected to the
independent investigation recommended in that report,
and we should not pass judgment as though they had:
they must be properly and independently investigated.
Although we call on Israel and the Palestinians to
investigate the alleged violations, we cannot support a
resolution that, in its first operative paragraph,
endorses a Human Rights Council report on a special
session that includes a biased, one-sided resolution.
Against that background, an abstention was, for us, the
appropriate course.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 64/10, adopted
under the agenda item on the report of the Human
Rights Council, on the follow-up to the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict. However, I should like to state the following.
With regard to this resolution, my delegation believes
that there is imbalance to putting the occupying Power
that has committed so many abhorrent crimes against
the people in Gaza with that of the Palestinian side on
the same and equal footing. Moreover, the report itself
reflected only partial and minimal dimensions of the
war crimes committed by the Israeli regime in Gaza.
In response to the baseless allegation made by the
representative of the regime in the occupied territory,
my delegation should like to point out that the

19

A/64/PV.39

illegitimate regime of the occupied Palestinian
territories tries to distort the facts and intends, through
the dissemination of disinformation and issues that are
irrelevant to the subject under consideration in this
body, to evade the very important dilemma facing that
regime — that is a lack of legitimacy emanating from
more than 60 years of occupation and brutality in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): India has a
deep association with and continuing commitment to
Palestine. We voted in favour of resolution 64/10. We
believe that the recommendation of the report of the
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza conflict that both
sides should undertake investigations that are
independent, credible and in conformity with
international standards must be implemented forthwith.
Our vote should, however, not be construed as
endorsing referrals to the International Criminal Court
and the Security Council.
Mr. Hernández-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica’s actions in the international
arena are guided by the conviction that peace between
nations can only be achieved through respect for
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We believe that the international
community must respond to all instances in which
those norms are broken. Accountability and the fight
against impunity are fundamental pillars needed to
strengthen international humanitarian law and human
rights. In forums and thematic discussions on
accountability and the fight against impunity, Costa
Rica has made its position clear, namely, that there are
crimes whose nature evokes the international
community’s duty to intervene and impose sanctions
under the standards of internationally recognized
justice. We have stated this more than once, as
members of the International Criminal Court and also
in debates on the responsibility to protect and on
universal jurisdiction.
It is the responsibility of all of us to strengthen
those institutions that promote accountability and make
the fight against impunity possible, and to refrain from
using or manipulating those institutions to political
ends. Reactionary and unjustified recourse to those
instruments and institutions can only weaken them.
We believe that the parties must initiate internal
investigative proceedings in order to establish who was
responsible for the violations of human rights and of

20

international humanitarian law. Those investigations
should be conducted within a reasonable time frame
and should lead to concrete results. Judge Richard
Goldstone has a background that is worthy of respect
and that Costa Rica holds in high regard. The report of
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict that he headed (A/HRC/12/48) is an admirable
attempt to establish the facts in an objective way.
However, that effort was made under particularly
difficult circumstances, given the lack of cooperation
on the part of one of the sides involved. That could
explain some of the limitations that have been noted in
the report. Our delegation considers that there is no
continuity between the recommendations in the report
and the operative paragraphs of resolution 64/10.
Costa Rica would have liked to have seen in the
resolution a follow-up mechanism whereby the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the SecretaryGeneral, with the cooperation of the parties, could
submit reports to the Human Rights Council and the
General Assembly. The outcome of what has been
initiated by the resolution’s sponsors will most likely
be yet another of the never-ending proceedings
whereby the General Assembly votes year after year on
a proposal about the Middle East that has no effect on
the ground. For that reason we ask: Will that strengthen
accountability as a tool to implement the rule of law
internationally? Is that the way to fight the impunity
with which all the many acts violating international
standards were committed in Gaza during the hostile
actions last December and January?
Finally, will what the sponsors of the resolution
have initiated work to enforce international standards,
promote accountability and fight impunity? We
honestly do not think that it will. What all this amounts
to is an attempt to put to frivolous use instruments and
institutions that deserve a weightier respect. The loss
of consistency, undermining the principle of
accountability and weakening the fight against
impunity are not causes that Costa Rica can endorse.
Recognizing the merits of the Fact-Finding Mission’s
report, even with the limitations that we are all aware
of, Costa Rica is opposed to its banalization and could
not add its vote to a decision that reflects the many
errors committed along the way that has led us to
where we are. That is the reason for our abstention.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland voted in favour of resolution 64/10 for
three main reasons. First, we consider the nature of the

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

conclusions contained in the report of the Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48) require
monitoring by the international community. The
resolution is an important step in that direction.
Secondly, combating impunity is crucial because
what is at stake is a precondition for sustainable peace
and preventing future violations of international law.
Thirdly, the resolution calls in a balanced way for both
parties to carry out independent inquiries in line with
international standards. Thus it gives a clear signal that
this responsibility rests first and foremost with them.
Finally, Switzerland has taken due note of the request
that necessary measures should be taken to convene a
conference of High Contracting Parties of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 and Switzerland is
available to the High Contracting Parties.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): My delegation
supports the main thrust of the resolution just adopted.
In particular, we endorse the call for independent and
credible investigations carried out in accordance with
international standards by both parties.
As we expressed in our statement during the
debate, we were disappointed by the manner in which
the Human Rights Council had dealt with the report of
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict (A/HRC/12/48). Our abstention, which we
have cast with much regret, is therefore due solely to
the manner in which the text refers to the report of the
Human Rights Council (A/64/53/Add.1).
We hope that this resolution will make a genuine
contribution to ensuring accountability and to
addressing violations of international humanitarian law
documented in the Goldstone report. We look forward
to the future consideration of this important topic by
this Assembly.
Mr. Thalassinós (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
The resolution we have just adopted urges the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
conduct credible, independent investigations, in line
with international standards, on the alleged violations
within a time frame of three months. The Republic of
Panama has always respected the principles of the
United Nations Charter and we support all multilateral
efforts aimed at achieving a lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Panama joins the international call for renewing a
peace process that builds on previous accords and

09-59485

international law and that respects the right of both
peoples to live in peace, justice and security as
sovereign, independent States. However, Panama has
some serious concerns about the objectivity of the
language used in the text of the resolution, because in
fact it prejudges the outcome of the investigations that
have to be carried out both by the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian authority, and refers the outcome of
those investigations to the Security Council.
The international community knows Panama’s
long history of respect for human rights. However,
while it is important for perpetrators of violations to be
held accountable and face justice, that cannot be done
on the basis of a resolution that prejudges the results of
investigations. The investigative process should be
just, objective and credible. That is why the Republic
of Panama voted against the resolution.
Mr. Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay rejects and condemns all violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
without exception and we hope that in all situations
where the international community considers such
violations they are given equal treatment and that the
fight continues against impunity and the perpetrators of
such violations.
Uruguay has an unshakeable commitment to
international humanitarian law and accords a high
priority to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Protection of civilians is a legal obligation under
international humanitarian law, but it is also an ethical
imperative that reflects the long evolution of
humankind towards civilizing standards that place
respect for life, integrity and human dignity at the
centre of their values.
Uruguay values the work of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, headed by
Judge Richard Goldstone, and we endorse its report
(A/HRC/12/48). It is a serious document that sought to
investigate the grave events that occurred during
Operation Cast Lead, regardless of who the
perpetrators might be. In that spirit, we deem the report
to require a careful study and follow-up of all the
elements that it contains. In particular, we think that its
recommendations should be the subject of a levelheaded and thorough examination bearing in mind the
complexity of its proposals as well as their possible
ramifications, which may include profound consequences
that are difficult to predict.

21

A/64/PV.39

Uruguay considers it essential that the sides
involved conduct their respective investigations on the
facts that are described and avoid impunity, especially
with respect to the most serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. We appeal to
the General Assembly not to politicize a topic as
serious as this one, and especially not to affect
negotiations currently under way, to remain focused on
achieving a lasting solution to the Middle East conflict
and to have a balanced, equitable approach that calls
on all parties involved to live up to their commitments
and obligations.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Benin
voted in favour of the resolution to demonstrate its
systematic rejection of human rights violations,
regardless of their origin. Benin’s vote proceeds from
its consistent foreign policy and is directed against no
particular country.
No one, under any circumstances, must exempt
themselves from the obligation to meticulously respect
human rights and ensure the protection of civilians.
The principles of humanity are inviolable and must
remain so under all circumstances.
Benin believes that the authority of the Geneva
Conventions, trampled underfoot in Gaza, must prevail
in all conflict situations. The military operations
carried out in December 2008 and January 2009 led to
intolerable
abuses
that
gravely
undermined
international norms and the principles of humanity.
Such actions are attributable to radicalism, which we
cannot support.
It is important that in-depth investigations be
conducted outside the framework of any political party
in order to identify and punish those responsible for
proven human rights violations. That would make it
possible to avoid laying the groundwork for impunity
and to prevent a renewed and indefinite spiral of
violence. Both parties must conduct such investigations
with full transparency. That said, Benin does not
approve of any use of force to settle international
disputes, without prejudice to people’s right to use all
means recognized in international law to exercise their
right to self-determination.
Benin advocates dialogue and negotiation to seek
the path of peace and calls upon States that are able to
influence the situation in the Middle East to do their
utmost to achieve a swift settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which has lasted too long. We urge

22

a relaunching of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
in order to achieve, as soon as possible, the solution of
two sovereign States living in peace with each other
and their neighbours within secure and internationally
recognized borders. We appeal urgently to the parties
to the conflict to resume negotiations in good faith
with a view to achieving peace as soon as possible.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): My delegation wishes to
make clear our position on the resolution that we have
adopted here today. Ireland supported the resolution
because of our support for the Fact-Finding Mission
led by Judge Goldstone and for its report
(A/HRC/12/48).
That document is a serious and very important
contribution to our understanding of what took place in
Gaza and southern Israel. It forms part of the pursuit of
appropriate accountability for actions which occurred
and is supportive of the efforts to ensure that such
tragedies are not repeated.
In voting for the resolution, Ireland wishes to
make clear that this does not mean that we necessarily
support each and every recommendation contained in
the Goldstone report. Ireland shares the concern of a
number of delegations that it was not helpful or
appropriate for the General Assembly to be requested
at this time to endorse the report and its
recommendations in their entirety. The report is a
complex
and
detailed
document,
and
its
recommendations cover extremely wide-ranging
actions in many national and international forums, with
wide and far-reaching political and legal implications.
Like many other delegations, we will need time to
consider those implications carefully before agreeing
on the best way forward on these crucial issues.
We do fully support the recommendations which
call, in the first instance, on the parties to the conflict
in Gaza to respond seriously and comprehensively to
the findings of the report by launching appropriate
investigations into all the allegations of possible
breaches of international law that are independent and
in conformity with international standards.
For that reason, we decided to vote in favour of
the resolution just adopted.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
I now call on the observer of Palestine.

09-59485

A/64/PV.39

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish to express the
gratitude of Palestine, Mr. President, for your
outstanding efforts in facilitating this meeting to
consider the report of the Human Rights Council
(A/64/53/Add.1) and to discuss and consider the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). Palestine would also
like to express its gratitude to all our Arab brothers
who submitted the draft resolution, along with those
who sponsored it. We are grateful to all of them for
their united stand in submitting the resolution that has
been adopted.
We would also like to express our thanks to all
those countries that voted in favour of the resolution. I
must add that we interpret all the abstentions in the
voting as supportive of the essence of the resolution,
and we take note of some of the problems that those
who abstained had on the procedural side.
In addition, I do not wish to demean myself by
responding to the comments and questions by the
representative of Israel, because the Palestinian side
cooperated fully with the members of the Goldstone
team in their investigation. The Israeli side did not; it
obstructed the efforts of the Goldstone Mission.
Therefore, our actions speak louder than our words, in
terms of not being afraid of international law, but
rather of honouring, respecting and cooperating with it.
Those who claim that theirs is a democratic country are
afraid to subject themselves to investigation by such a
mission.
Be that as it may, let me just say that tonight is a
very important night in the history of the General
Assembly. It is also a very important night in the
history of the fight against impunity and in seeking
accountability. We are not done with this exercise.
Tonight, congratulations go to all Members of the
Assembly, because they have allowed the process set
out in the Goldstone report to begin. We are preparing
ourselves for the High Contracting Parties to the
Geneva Convention to be convened in Switzerland. In
that connection, we express particular gratitude to the
delegation of Switzerland for that country’s courage
and its defence of international law, international
humanitarian law and the issue of accountability.
Therefore, we will be ready for the unfolding of
that segment of the recommendations contained in the
Goldstone report. We will also be ready to come back

09-59485

to the General Assembly in three months’ time to
consider the report of the Secretary-General. We will
do so with a view to further action in all the relevant
organs of the United Nations, including the Security
Council. This journey of fighting impunity and seeking
accountability is a long one. We are proud that the
General Assembly has been so responsible as to
instruct the Secretary-General to forward the Goldstone
report (A/HCR/12/48) to the Security Council, so that
it will be an official document before the Council. We
will continue to knock on the door of the Security
Council to ask it to shoulder its responsibilities.
While we are investigating all the allegations
contained in the Goldstone report, we will work very
closely with the High Commissioner for Human Rights
to find modalities and ways of dealing with the issue of
reparations and the establishment of a compensation
fund. We will come back to that issue once we have
obtained all the expertise and suggestions available
from the Office of the High Commissioner.
We will continue to work with the Red Cross, and
with appropriate bodies of the United Nations, to see
how we can address the issue of dealing with the
weapons and ammunition that were used during the
Gaza conflict, another recommendation contained in
the Goldstone report. Once we have that expert
information, we will come back to the issue. We have
therefore started the journey today. It is a process, and
we will continue that process until we can ensure that
the Israeli criminals who committed war crimes against
Palestinian civilians are brought to justice and receive
the punishment they deserve.
As for us, on the Palestinian side, we will
continue to uphold international law. We are not afraid
of international law, which is on our side. We will
never accept that there is any kind of symmetry
between the occupiers and the victims — the
Palestinian people under occupation. International law
is on our side and represents the solution we have to
impose on Israel sooner or later.
I would like to thank everyone in this Hall and to
say goodnight and that tomorrow will be another day.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 64.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

23
