United Nations

S/PV.9265

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9265th meeting
Tuesday, 21 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier/Ms. Gatt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Barnor
Mr. Yamanaka
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2023/108)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05408 (E)
*2305408*

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2023/108)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
and His Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations, in
his capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/108, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rugwabiza.
Ms. Rugwabiza: I am honoured to join the Security
Council today to present the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the Central African Republic
(S/2023/108) and to update the Council on recent
developments and the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA).
The peace and political process, under the leadership of the Government and effective coordination by
the Prime Minister, has continued to advance to the
implementation of the time frame adopted by the Gov2/24

21/02/2023

ernment on 29 August 2022, which, as the Council will
recall, seeks to mutualize the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and the Luanda road map. While we always wish
for the quick realization of peace, we are also pleased
to see gradual progress as a result of the Government’s
increased ownership, such as in preparations for local
elections, the reform of the security sector, the extension of State authority and the adoption of an operational framework for border management. Those steps
are welcome, as the Central African population faces
myriad challenges, compounded by a worsening socioeconomic situation.
Addressing violence is at the heart of the Central
African Republic’s peace process. The path to
sustainable peace is through inclusive and constructive
dialogue, as the military option alone cannot decisively
or durably resolve the conflict. Political engagement
with the leaders of armed groups remains essential and
is starting to yield modest results. In December 2022
we saw the dissolution of four armed groups that are
signatories to the Political Agreement and represented
in the Government, namely, the Rassemblement
patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique, the
Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains pour la
justice, the Union des forces républicaines and the
Union des forces républicaines fondamentales.
This demonstrates that political engagement
coupled with real incentives and alternatives for
armed groups can create positive momentum towards
inclusive and constructive dialogue. The efforts of
the national authorities to explore options for the
integration of ex-combatants into the security forces,
including the special mixed security units, as well as
for the long-term socioeconomic reintegration of excombatants, is welcomed and requires the support of
international partners.
Commendable steps have been taken, and others
are on the horizon. We look forward to the Government
convening the next strategic review of the peace and
political process following the first, held in June. That
will be an opportunity to take stock of the progress
made and the challenges to overcome. To that end, the
Government’s strategy of engagement with leaders of
armed groups who remain outside of the peace process
remains central to continued progress.
At the same time, there are still opportunities for
further advancing the implementation of the peace
and political process and sustaining its gains. That
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

will require more commitment and engagement from
the Central African Republic’s partners, including
in the subregion. A significant opportunity is the
upcoming local elections, which will be the first in the
Central African Republic since 1988. Those elections
could strengthen local governance and advance the
decentralization of services in a country where exclusion
and centre-periphery discrepancies are among the root
causes of recurrent conflicts.
I cannot overstate the importance of local elections,
which are a key component of the political peace
agreement. They provide an opportunity to expand
political space to include traditionally marginalized
groups, such as women and youth, while also giving
former combatants and leaders of armed groups who
laid down their arms and remained in the peace process
an opportunity to have a voice. In addition, the elections
provide an opportunity for the Government to engage
the political opposition in a genuine dialogue.
The Central African authorities have taken
steps to create an enabling environment for the local
elections, including by developing its legal framework
and updating the electoral code to encourage the
participation of women. Through the adoption of a new
law, more than 200 constituencies were established.
Last Tuesday, the Prime Minister, the President of the
National Electoral Authority and I signed the integrated
security plan for local elections. Those elections need
to be inclusive in order to be credible. All citizens,
including those living in remote areas and the hundreds
of thousands of internally displaced persons, must be
provided the opportunity to register to vote.
Regrettably, the organization of the local elections
faces many challenges, including an acute financial
shortfall. I call on partners of the Central African
Republic to support the elections for all the potential
gains they are likely to bring for the Central African
Republic and its people. There are other challenges.
The elections will also be conducted in a challenging
security environment, and we must recognize that
armed groups could become spoilers. Another
challenge will be to make sure that the elected officials
have the means and the wherewithal to assume their
duties and exercise them normally. After the elections,
newly elected officials will need considerable support,
especially in places where local administration has been
non-existent for decades and where infrastructure has
been destroyed or dilapidated during multiple cycles of
conflict. Finally, regardless of the disagreement among

S/PV.9265

key stakeholders, it is essential to maintain an open
political dialogue and an inclusive political process in
a manner that does not inflame tensions or violence.
I welcome the statement by the Prime Minister and
Head of Government affirming that local elections
will not be combined with any eventual referendum on
the Constitution.
The Central African Republic experienced a
period of relative stability and calm during the rainy
season. However, I must report that since December,
with the onset of the dry season, armed groups have
increased their activities and attacks. Unfortunately,
such a resurgence in violence is the normal pattern
of conflict in the country; it is much easier to move
across the country during this period, which facilitates
hit and run tactics. This time, however, we have
witnessed new developments in the modus operandi of
armed groups, namely, the use of explosive devices and
drones, negatively impacting the population, national
security forces, humanitarian actors and United
Nations peacekeepers. For example, on 6 February
an explosive device detonated near Nzakoun village,
killing two Central African Republic soldiers and
a civilian. On 10 February, another one wounded 6
civilians near Manga. The use of explosive devices
is primarily concentrated in the area of the western
Central African Republic.
There have also been other security developments
of concern, including increasing attacks against the
positions of the national defence forces. Most recently,
a week ago, armed groups attacked a detachment of
the national armed forces deployed in Sikikédé, in
Vakaga prefecture, killing 16 soldiers and kidnapping
20 others. We offer our most sincere condolences to the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
national army, and we condemn such attacks.
Those new threats have had an impact on the
already complex security environment, which requires
MINUSCA to maintain flexibility and mobility to
effectively respond to the evolving threats against
civilians. As I reported during my most recent briefing
(see S/PV.9156), we are in the process of closing 13 of
our temporary operating bases so as to maximize the
effectiveness and mobility of our force, while mitigating
the threat to the civilian population and the risk of
misconduct. That requires that MINUSCA implement
effective mitigation measures, which, in turn, requires
greater mobility and information in order to respond
appropriately. It also means that the MINUSCA force

23-054083/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

and police must have adequate preparation and be able
to use all available assets for deployments, particularly
in high-risk areas. The acute lack of infrastructure
across the country, including roads and bridges, is a
major challenge, as are other factors, such as the lack
of sufficient military helicopters and the sporadic
restrictions on MINUSCA’s movements, which have
constrained our ability to do that effectively and
consistently. Access constraints not only impede
an effective security response, but also prevent
Central Africans from normalizing their lives. While
rationalizing our Mission layout, in particular our force
layout, I also continue to prioritize the enhancement
of MINUSCA’s early-warning system, which is a key
component of our overall security posture and approach.
I am pleased to report that, since my most recent
briefing to the Council, the Central African authorities
have lifted the ban on MINUSCA night flights since
December 2022. I appreciate the good working
atmosphere and cooperation that enabled a satisfactory
resolution of that matter, which posed serious risks for
United Nations personnel. However, I regret to inform
the members of the Council that, earlier this month, the
Ministry of Defence issued a circular banning all drone
flights in the Central African Republic except for those
of the national defence and security forces. Since then,
the Government and I, as well as the leadership of the
Forces armées centrafricaines and MINUSCA forces,
have been engaging intensively and constructively with a
view to resolving the new restriction, which compromises
our ability to operate, including to protect civilians.
A few moments before the start of this Council
meeting, I received from the Ministry of Defence a
derogation to the ban on MINUSCA with conditions
and modalities, which I am yet to review. I strongly
believe that, with continued goodwill and constructive
engagement, a solution to that significant operational
restriction will be found. Every day that an orbiter is
grounded, valuable information cannot be collected,
long-range patrols will not receive overhead air cover,
armed elements cannot be located or monitored, at
least not regarding their movements, and the condition
of roads and infrastructure, such as bridges, cannot
be identified and fixed. That clearly increases the
risk to the lives of civilians, humanitarian actors
and peacekeepers.
The resurgence of tensions at the Central African
Republic’s borders has highlighted the regional
dimension of the country’s security crisis, especially
along the transhumance routes and the resource-rich
4/24

21/02/2023

areas in the north-west, the north-east and the
centre-south that are conflict hotspots. Those areas
are large, volatile and porous. To stem the tide of
rebel activity in such areas will need concerted action
by the Central African Republic and neighbouring
countries through increased subregional mobilization
and cooperation. Regional organizations and the
United Nations can play a positive role in that regard. In
coordination with the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, I will use the avenues available to
me to work towards the mobilization of regional efforts
on those critical border issues.
I regret to report that the human rights and
justice situations in the country have not witnessed
any significant improvement since my most recent
briefing. I am particularly concerned about the increase
in conflict-related sexual violence committed by
all parties.
In that context, we must collectively continue to
support the authorities of the Central African Republic
in strengthening their police, justice and penitentiary
systems so that justice is rendered for the victims of
serious crimes in a timely, fair and independent manner.
I welcome the renewal of the mandate of the Special
Criminal Court following consultations between His
Excellency President Touadera and myself. Valuable
support was provided to the Special Criminal Court
by MINUSCA. I call on Member States and partners
to contribute to the Court’s budget, which has now
reached a level of maturity that allows it to handle more
cases and render justice to the victims of the conflict.
As Central Africans are acutely affected by the
socioeconomic crisis, the humanitarian crisis in the
Central African Republic continues to worsen. The
World Food Programme projects that the percentage
of the Central African population suffering from
acute food insecurity will increase from 44 per cent
in 2022, which was already one of the highest in the
world, to 49 per cent in 2023. That has the greatest
impact on the most vulnerable. A majority of the
Central African population depends on humanitarian
assistance. On 9 February, the Prime Minister and the
Deputy Representative of the Secretary-General who
was also serving as Humanitarian Coordinator and
Resident Coordinator launched the joint humanitarian
response plan for 2023, to the tune of $465 million
to be mobilized for life-saving interventions. While
I am mindful of the global economic pressures and
multiple humanitarian needs in many corners of our
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

world, the Central African people need international
solidarity and support. I encourage all Member States
to extend solidarity to the most vulnerable segment
of the population by responding generously to that
humanitarian appeal.
At the same time, the downward trend in the
humanitarian situation will not and cannot be reversed
until development takes root. This is far from the
reality, and the socioeconomic situation is concerning.
The budgetary reductions for 2023 compared to 2022
are indicative of a deep economic contraction, which
increases pressure on the population. The vulnerability
and socioeconomic pressures on the population risk
insecurity, which could undermine the modest gains
made on the political and security fronts.
Let me state the obvious: development requires
stability, and stability requires development. I call on
development partners to support the Central African
population, which is one of the most vulnerable and
poorest in the world, through targeted and prioritized
social and development projects.
MINUSCA has supported and will continue to
support Central Africa to create the political and
security environment conducive to the peace and
political process to advance the restoration of State
authority over the country’s entire territory. But
MINUSCA cannot do it alone. Central Africa cannot
do it alone. I call on bilateral and multilateral partners
to help to consolidate the security gains achieved so
far, use the once-in-a-lifetime opportunity presented
by local elections to help Central Africa to build a
foundation for local and citizen-centred governance,
accelerate the progress in security sector reform
towards professional defence and security forces,
which, I repeat, remains the only lasting solution for
Central Africa to build her capabilities to protect her
population and territorial integrity.

S/PV.9265

configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
on the progress in and prospects for peacebuilding
in that country. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his very comprehensive report (S/2023/108)
highlighting the issues and challenges facing the
Central African Republic at a critical moment in its
journey towards lasting peace and stability, as well as
the recommendations it proposes.
The resurgent activities of armed groups in various
areas of the Central African Republic, and the pressures
on the country’s public finances, are worsening the
security and socioeconomic situation and taking a heavy
toll on the civilian population. However, despite the
many challenges that remain, we witnessed encouraging
positive developments during the reporting period that
should be capitalized on to sustain and strengthen the
country’s commitment to recovery.
The first of those developments is that the Central
African authorities have demonstrated the political
will that is needed for the revitalization and national
ownership of the peace process, especially through
their implementation of the commitments to ensuring
complementarity and maintaining synergy at the
political level within the framework of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, as well as the Luanda joint road map
for peace in the Central African Republic agreed on at
the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region.

Mr. Hilale (spoke in French): Let me begin,
Madam President, by congratulating you and Malta
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February.

We urge them to continue those efforts, including by
approving and implementing the strategy for engaging
with the armed groups. In that context, we welcome the
official disbanding on 6 December 2022 of four armedgroup signatories to the Political Agreement, which we
consider a step forward in stabilizing the political and
security climate, expanding the democratic space and
keeping the Central African Republic on the path to a
lasting peace. Peacebuilding can be effective only if it is
accompanied by efforts to demobilize armed groups and
hold accountable those responsible for serious crimes
and human rights violations. We welcome the focus
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) on ensuring a protective environment for
the population, particularly by supporting the expansion
of State authority beyond the provincial capitals.

I appreciate the opportunity to address the Security
Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission in
my capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic

Secondly, efforts are being undertaken in the
region alongside the Central African authorities to
mobilize support for advancing the peace process.

The President: I thank Ms. Rugwabiza for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hilale.

23-054085/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

As the Secretary-General emphasized in his report,
the situation in the Central African Republic has a
significant impact on the region as a whole. In that
regard, we commend the regional and subregional
organizations, as well as Heads of State in the region
and of neighbouring countries, for their commitment
to ensuring greater cohesiveness in regional action,
and we call on all those stakeholders to continue their
efforts to defuse tensions in the subregion and address
cross-border threats to peace and the political process. I
also want to emphasize the importance of the continued
constructive engagement of all the Central African
Republic’s partners, including international financial
institutions, regional development banks and bilateral
partners. The lack of technical and financial capacities
remains one of the main challenges in the Central
African Republic. We reiterate our call to all partners,
whether from the region, the continent or elsewhere, to
pay particular attention to the Central African Republic
and provide it with the necessary support, given that its
urgent needs are threatening the gains made in terms
of peacebuilding and development. The Peacebuilding
Fund, of which the current portfolio in the Central
African Republic includes nine projects valued at
a total of $18 million, is an example of the value of
investing in peacebuilding and durable solutions, which
acts as a catalyst and can have a clear and direct impact
on populations.
This context underscores the importance of
peacebuilding efforts as a tool for addressing the root
causes of instability. In 2022 that led the configuration
to focus on strengthening the national ownership of
the peacebuilding priorities, the first of which is the
holding of local elections, which are scheduled for July
and October 2023. The country is preparing to vote in
those elections, which represent a unique opportunity
for promoting local governance with elected officials
directly accountable to citizens, thereby helping to
advance the decentralization process in the Central
African Republic and address one of the root causes of
its political and security crises.
We encourage the Government to continue its efforts
to ensure that those elections can take place on time and
in a free, inclusive and secure atmosphere with the full,
equal, meaningful and safe participation of women,
including by adopting effective confidence-building
measures and prioritizing dialogue with all political and
civil-society actors. We are reassured by MINUSCA’s
support for those elections and its commitment to
6/24

21/02/2023

making every effort to ensure that they are peaceful,
free, non-violent and open to all, including women and
young people. However, the significant lack of funding
for local elections is very worrisome. The budget
deficit, which is the main reason why the elections
have already been postponed three times, could affect
the holding of the elections and create a real risk for
peace and stability. We therefore urge Member States
and the Central African Republic’s partners to act as
quickly as possible to mobilize the necessary funds
to fill the gap in the budget, which amounts to nearly
$7 million, through contributions to the United Nations
Development Programme basket fund, which manages
the programme to support the electoral process.
The second peacebuilding priority is strengthening
of the rule of law and transitional justice. Access to
justice and combating impunity, which are a sine qua non
for the stabilization of the Central African Republic and
the success of any national reconciliation project, will
contribute to the prevention of conflict in the short term
and sustainable peace in the long term. We welcome
the operationalization of the Special Criminal Court
and the Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation
Commission, thanks to the concerted efforts of the
Central African authorities and their international
partners, including MINUSCA. They are essential
mechanisms for addressing human rights violations,
combating impunity and ensuring accountability for
perpetrators and justice and reparations for victims.
The configuration is proud to have contributed to
that endeavour through its innovative practice of using
its forum to advocate for resources to fill the budgetary
gaps of the Special Criminal Court and the Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation Commission.
As we have repeatedly said, there can be no peace
without reconciliation and no reconciliation without
credible mechanisms to combat impunity. In that
context, the work of the Court and the Commission is
of paramount importance, and we urge all partners to
offer greater financial, technical and logistical support
for those mechanisms.
Thirdly, the current bleak global economic outlook
and food and energy crises, coupled with supply-chain
constraints, have had a negative impact on the national
budget and on revenue generation for the national
peacebuilding plan in the Central African Republic.
Investments in the Central African Republic’s
socioeconomic recovery and development remain
critical to implementing of the Political Agreement
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

and consolidating the peacebuilding dividends that
are intrinsically linked to sustainable peace. In that
regard, I welcome the continued dialogue between the
Government and the international financial institutions,
including with the facilitation of MINUSCA.
The configuration will continue to focus on
the cohesion and coordination of the actions I have
mentioned, in addition to advocating for greater
attention and support on the part of the international
community to the Central African Republic. I cannot
stress enough that the country is at a critical moment in
its history and will need our continued support to ensure
a return to a lasting peace and long-term stability.
The President: I thank Mr. Hilale for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative for her briefing and for her
work as Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I would also like to thank the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission for his briefing. Finally,
I welcome the presence among us of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains very fragile. France condemns the increasing
number of attacks committed in recent weeks by armed
groups against civilians, the Central African armed
forces and MINUSCA. These attacks remind us of the
need for the peace process to produce concrete results.
France supports the efforts of the Central
African authorities to implement, with the support
of MINUSCA and the countries of the region, the
Political Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic and the Luanda road map.
It welcomes the recent disarmament of four armed
groups and hopes that this will create momentum for
negotiations with other armed groups. The existence
of real socioeconomic opportunities and protection for
demobilized combatants are essential to the success
of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation process.
The support of the countries in the region, the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region is crucial for the peace process in

S/PV.9265

the Central African Republic to move forward. France
welcomes the recent meeting in Luanda between
President Touadera, the President of the Chadian
Transition and the President of Angola.
Progress has been made in the fight against
impunity and in transitional justice. That must continue.
France welcomes the extension of the mandate of the
Special Criminal Court, which has delivered its first
verdict, and the launch of the work of the Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation Commission. However,
we remain very concerned about the increasing number
of human rights violations, as mentioned in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/108). We condemn
in the strongest terms the abuses committed against
civilians by armed groups, but also by the Central
African armed forces and Wagner mercenaries, who
are responsible for most of the violations documented
in the report.
Peace in the Central African Republic can only
move forward in a peaceful, open and democratic
political climate. Violations of the rule of law and of
the independence of judicial institutions have increased
in recent months. Restrictions on civic space, constant
threats against the opposition and civil society, and the
proliferation of hate speech are of great concern. A
truly inclusive dialogue, in which all voices, including
those of youth and women are heard, is needed. The
success of local elections depends on that.
In that context, MINUSCA’s action is more
necessary than ever to assist the Central African
Republic on the path to peace and reconciliation. France
welcomes the dialogue between the Mission and the
Central African authorities, which has made it possible
to lift the ban on night flights. We call on the Central
African Republic to lift the ban on the use of drones,
which is essential for the safety of peacekeepers.
Finally, I would like to reiterate France’s full
support for the Special Representative in her work and
our gratitude for the professionalism and dedication of
the MINUSCA personnel.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the
African members of the Security Council, namely,
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon (A3). We thank
Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Ambassador Omar Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their informative

23-054087/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

21/02/2023

briefings on the latest developments in the country and
on the activities of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I also welcome the participation
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic at today’s meeting.

guaranteeing transparency in the funds allocated to
the electoral process support project, which is directly
managed by UNDP itself. The holding of local elections
is a crucial step that will contribute to the restoration
of State authority, which is essential for the Central
African Republic’s stabilization.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/108)
on the situation in Central African Republic and
its consequences for peace and stability gives us the
opportunity to reiterate the support of the A3 for
the restoration of peace and security in the Central
African Republic despite the security and humanitarian
challenges the country is facing and in view of the
remarkable resilience the country has shown, which
deserves to be recognized and upheld.

It would be a pity if the hard-won gains made thus
far owing to considerable efforts were to be wiped
out at this stage. The crisis in the Central African
Republic has an impact on international peace and
security — which is the responsibility of the Security
Council — and it is crucial that the international
community mobilize alongside the Central African
authorities so that those local elections, demanded by
the people, are held. We also welcome the continued
support of the International Organization of la
Francophonie in strengthening democracy and the rule
of law in the Central African Republic, particularly
through support for institutions such as the National
Electoral Authority, the Constitutional Court and the
national human rights commission.

We will examine these three pillars in the light of
the Secretary-General’s report.
On the political level, the A3 takes note of the debates
around the composition of the Constitutional Court and
consider the regular referrals to this important organ by
civil society and opposition actors to reflect its scope
and leadership. We encourage the Central African
authorities to continue dialogue with all political actors
to maintain a space for discussion, which is necessary
for definitively silencing the weapons in the Central
African Republic.
The Government’s efforts to organize the first local
elections in more than 20 years are noteworthy. These
elections, which could be held if the security situation
permits in the country’s 176 communes, are awaited
by the Central African people, who aspire to lasting
peace and free, transparent and credible elections. We
welcome the opening of local branches of the National
Electoral Authority in 20 prefectures of the country
and the finalization of the electoral mapping despite
the multiplication of security incidents resulting from
sporadic attacks by armed groups.
The A3 recalls that the overall budget for the
organization of local elections is estimated at around
$11 million and that the Central African State has
made a financial commitment of $4.56 million. Given
that difficult economic context, the Central African
Republic is in greater need than ever of the international
community’s financial support, which is crucial for the
effective holding of local elections within the agreed
time frame. The Central African Republic has recently
signed a local elections financing agreement with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
8/24

We encourage the Central African authorities to
continue their efforts in the fight against disinformation
and misinformation, in particular through the actions
of the country’s communications authority. We also call
on the Government of the Central African Republic to
continue working towards ensuring social cohesion and
tolerance, which are prerequisites for durable peace in
the country. There should be no room for hate speech
or incitement to violence within the Central African
Republic, and the perpetrators of such acts should be
swiftly brought to justice by the State authorities.
At the regional level, Ghana, Mozambique and
Gabon welcome the holding of a tripartite summit
between the Central African Republic, Angola and Chad
on 8 February in Luanda, devoted, in particular, to the
prevailing political and security situation in the Central
African Republic. That mini-summit constitutes a
considerable step forward in strengthening bilateral
relations between the Central African Republic and
Chad, which is crucial for the consolidation of security
along the borders separating those two countries.
The A3 takes note of the announcement in December
2022 of the comprehensive dissolution of four armed
groups signatories to the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. We
are encouraged by the holding of the second meeting
of the strategic review for the further implementation
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

of the Political Agreement through the joint road map
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), and we ask all signatories to support
the holding of local elections and thereby prioritize
political solutions to resolve the crisis in the country.
The A3 welcomes the role played by the African
Union, the ICGLR and the Economic Community of
Central African States in the Central African Republic,
as well as the visit of the Council of Elders of the African
Union in November 2022 to Bangui — tangible proof
of the African Union’s determination to continue to
promote mediation and prevent conflicts in the country.
We invite subregional organizations to step up their
involvement in strengthening inter-State cooperation in
order to secure common borders.
On the security front, we are deeply concerned
by the continuous cycle of violence to which armed
groups are subjecting the civilian population and by
the asymmetrical attacks against MINUSCA and
the Forces armées centrafricaines as they fight, on a
daily basis, to preserve the territorial integrity of the
country. Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon strongly
condemn all such repeated attacks against the civilian
population, MINUSCA personnel and the Forces
armées centrafricaines, including the increasing use
of explosive devices by armed groups, which impede
the free movement of persons and goods. We express
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims
and call on the Central African authorities to take all
appropriate measures to bring to justice those guilty of
those heinous crimes.
The A3 underscores that a lasting peace is possible
only if the Central African authorities have the capacity
to take control of their territory; to effectively complete
the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme; and to ensure
the successful reintegration of demobilized armed
groups into society. We invite international partners to
mobilize to provide financial support to the country in
its quest for peace and development in order to address
the root causes of the conflict.
There is no military solution to the crisis in the
Central African Republic. There are only political
solutions. However, there will be no solution at all
without responding to the root causes of instability. The
Central African Republic, already weakened by internal
crises, must also deal with multiple crises, such as the
coronavirus disease and rising oil and food prices, that

S/PV.9265

weigh heavily on its future. Overcoming those cycles of
violence and crises requires economic development and
the restoration of basic services, which must receive the
financial support of the international community.
In addition, we note with satisfaction the lifting of
the ban on night flights for the benefit of MINUSCA.
Dialogue and the strengthening of cooperation between
the Central African authorities and MINUSCA must
continue in order to jointly define the appropriate
procedures for the protection of Central African
airspace against possible attacks.
We welcome the unity of the Security Council in
adopting resolution 2648 (2022) on the lifting of the
arms embargo. We believe that such a significant step
forward will enable the country to continue its actions
to protect its populations and to defend its territory and
its natural resources.
The Forces armées centrafricaines must be
able to assume their sovereign missions throughout
the country’s territory. Faced with new security
challenges that are evident in the continuous increase
in asymmetric threats, the A3 remains convinced that
the strengthening of the Forces armées centrafricaines’
operational capabilities must be commensurate with the
threats emerging on the ground. To that end, training
and capacity-building activities for the defence and
security forces must be intensified, particularly in the
areas of mine clearance, logistics and human rights.
We reiterate that allowing MINUSCA to remain in
the Central African Republic will be considered an
admission of failure for the international community.
The Central African forces must ultimately be able to
secure their territory in a sustainable manner.
There is no security without justice. We commend
the efforts of MINUSCA to promote capacity-building
for magistrates in particular. However, we are curious
about the continuous increase in human rights violations
due to the methodology used to identify them, which
unfortunately does not reflect the efforts of the Central
African authorities, supported by MINUSCA, in that
area. We reiterate that the Central African Republic
is facing multidimensional challenges that require
an increased mobilization of resources, particularly
with regard to infrastructure construction, capacitybuilding, the purchase of equipment and the training of
personnel, which are key steps towards the restoration
of State authority. The Central African Republic
cannot meet those challenges without the support

23-054089/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

of its development partners. Taking a quantitative
approach in the field of human rights, without duly
considering the qualitative and substantial efforts of
the Government, is far removed from the reality in and
priorities of the country. That approach must therefore
be more balanced and constructive.
The humanitarian crisis in the Central African
Republic continues to worsen, amid an upsurge
in violence against civilians by armed groups and
insecurity in areas outside urban centres. We strongly
condemn the attacks by armed groups against
humanitarian personnel, which significantly hamper
their work on the ground. As a result, millions of
people are seeing their vulnerability growing and
their livelihoods eroding. The A3 welcomes the
commitment of humanitarians despite the security
risks. We encourage donors to remain mobilized for the
financing of the humanitarian response plan to meet
the assistance needs of 3.4 million Central Africans,
including 1.6 million children.
In conclusion, Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon
reaffirm their commitment to respecting the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Central African
Republic. We reiterate our support for Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and her team for their constant efforts on
the ground.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza and Ambassador Hilale, in his capacity
as the Chairperson of the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings. I would also like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic to this meeting.
Albania is grateful to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for its
tireless efforts to support the national authorities
in fostering peace in the country. The relationship
between the Central African Republic and MINUSCA
should be based on mutual respect. While we note
the progress that has been made in building trust
and increasing communication, we believe that
implementing the status-of-forces agreement is
essential. We welcome the Government’s decision to
lift the ban on MINUSCA’s night flights for medical
and casualty evacuations. However, we continue to be
10/24

21/02/2023

concerned about the ongoing violations of the statusof-forces agreement and restrictions on the freedom of
movement and operational capacities of the Mission,
including the suspension of unmanned aerial system
flights, which undermine operational effectiveness,
as the Special Representative mentioned. Albania also
remains deeply concerned about the security situation
and the troubling trend of human rights violations
by armed groups and especially the Wagner Group.
The conflict-related sexual violence, grave violations
against children, undermining of humanitarian access
and attacks on humanitarian personnel must stop.
That brings me to my next point. It is vital to
reinvigorate the efforts to implement the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic through the joint road map for peace
in the Central African Republic of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We commend
the recent dissolution of four armed groups as a positive
step in that direction and call on the Government to
accelerate its efforts to bring the remaining armed
groups to the negotiating table as a critical element
in the success and consolidation of the disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
repatriation
programmes. We urge the Government to deepen its
engagement with Chad and the Sudan to address the
persistent insecurity in their border areas, and all the
armed groups to renounce violence and recommit to the
peace process. Peace and security cannot be achieved
without accountability and justice. In that regard, Albania
welcomes the renewal until 2028 of the mandate of the
Special Criminal Court. We believe that equal access
to justice for all citizens is crucial to ending impunity.
We are also following the political developments
that could create new risks for the country if not handled
properly. While we are encouraged by the electoral
preparations and the new electoral calendar, we call
on the Government and all stakeholders to commit
to creating an environment conducive to a wider
democratic space, with more meaningful participation
of women and young people, that can ultimately
enable free and fair elections later this year. We also
welcome the integrated electoral security plan signed
this month between the Government and MINUSCA to
facilitate the security measures necessary for holding
local elections.
In conclusion, we are concerned about the debate on
constitutional reform and changes in the Constitutional
Court and welcome the efforts of MINUSCA to engage
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

with the Government, opposition leaders and other
stakeholders to encourage dialogue to address those
issues. We have noted the Government’s intention
to keep local elections separate from a potential
constitutional referendum and echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an open and meaningful dialogue to
meet the Central African population’s aspirations for
durable peace.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Valentine Rugwabiza, and the Chairperson
of the Central African Republic country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Omar Hilale, for their briefings and
especially for their valuable work. And I welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central
Africans abroad of the Central African Republic.
Switzerland was pleased to read in the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2023/108) that the
security situation in the Central African Republic has
seen a slight improvement. After decades of conflict,
any sign of peace is encouraging. At the same time,
the violence continues to weigh heavily on the Central
African people. Civilians must be protected. It is their
right, and it is the duty of all the parties to guarantee
that protection. I would like to emphasize three points.
First, Switzerland supports the implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and its road map. The
recent dissolution of four armed groups is a welcome
step. We encourage the Government to maintain
a genuine dialogue with the armed groups and
neighbouring countries with a view to consolidating
the security gains made so far. For peace to establish
itself, combatants must lay down their arms and return
to civilian life in a sustainable manner, and civil
society, especially women, must be at the forefront
of the Political Agreement follow-up. We encourage
MINUSCA to continue its efforts in that regard,
including by providing its good offices. We would like
to remind the Central African Government that its full
support for the Mission remains essential to success.
Secondly, the improvement in the security situation
in some areas has been offset by the intensification of
violence in the west and north of the country. The dry
season has arrived. Armed groups are moving around
more and ramping up their activities, including the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. Climate change

S/PV.9265

is contributing to the modification of transhumance
corridors and fuelling conflicts between farmers and
herders. As is often the case, the civilian population
is paying the highest price. Armed groups continue to
violate the physical and moral integrity of civilians and
to recruit and use children. Switzerland condemns the
human rights violations and abuses and the violations
of international humanitarian law. We call on all the
parties, including Government forces, the Wagner
Group and armed groups, to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights.
Thirdly, Switzerland is encouraged by the
Government’s efforts in the fight against impunity,
which is an essential foundation for peace and the rule
of law. We welcome the work of the Special Criminal
Court, which recently handed down its first verdict
on crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
operationalization of the Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation Commission is also a sign of progress
in dealing with the past. However, Switzerland is
concerned about the spread of hate speech and the
numerous arbitrary arrests and detentions by the defence
and security forces. We encourage the Central African
Government to protect the civic space and ensure
inclusive democratic processes, including by working
with the opposition. Respect for the independence of
democratic institutions is fundamental to building trust
between the people and the Government.
Last year Switzerland strengthened its engagement
in the Central African Republic by opening an office
in Bangui, enabling us to work more closely with the
communities and the authorities in the Central African
Republic. That is vital, because sustainable peace and
development are built on the ground and by the people.
That principle will continue to guide Switzerland
during its term on the Security Council. Together with
all Council members, we will continue our efforts to
ensure lasting peace for all Central African people.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): My delegation
would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Valentine Rugwabiza for
her briefing.
I welcome Minister Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon
to today’s meeting and look forward to listening to
her statement.
We welcome the opportunity to deal with the
situation in the Central African Republic, while
counting on the perspective of the Peacebuilding

23-0540811/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

Commission (PBC). My delegation not only lends full
support to further cooperation between the Council and
the PBC, but also intends to work, in its capacity as liaison
between the two bodies, to strengthen such interaction
and make it happen more often. In that context, we thank
Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of the Central African
Republic country-specific configuration of the PBC, for
his comprehensive and informative intervention.
Regular interaction and dialogue, when based on
constructive engagement, will eventually bear fruit,
as we can see from the lifting of restrictions on the
night flights of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
authorities of the Central African Republic for reaching
a solution to that critical issue. It is a major factor in
helping MINUSCA to fulfil its mandate and provide
better protection to its peacekeepers and civil personnel
alike, in what otherwise remains a challenging security
and humanitarian environment.
With particular regard to the ongoing security and
humanitarian challenges on the ground, there are two
points that my delegation would like to highlight. The first
is our deep concern related to incidents with explosive
ordnance, including improvised devices, because of the
risk they represent to the safety of peacekeepers and
civilians. We must ensure that MINUSCA is equipped
to tackle that threat. The second point is our belief that
renewed emphasis on strategic communication would be
timely and could contribute to improving the situation.
It is encouraging to hear that MINUSCA has
been able to assist the Central African authorities in
improving the presence and capacity of local officials
throughout several prefectures across the country. At
the same time, we believe that ensuring independence
and balance among State institutions, at all levels, is as
important as developing their capacities. In addition,
Brazil echoes the calls of the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration of the PBC to ensure that
every step in the peace process is inclusive.
Another point we wish to underscore is the key
role played by the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes in the implementation
of the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and
encourage the Central African authorities to persevere
in their work in that field.
12/24

21/02/2023

We hope that the collaboration between the
Government and MINUSCA to put in place violence
reduction programmes in local communities will
continue to have a positive impact on global DDR
efforts. Furthermore, it is necessary to advance with
the national recovery plan and provide a socioeconomic
foundation to the peace process.
My delegation believes that it is equally important
to strengthen the rule of law, especially in the light of
the various reports on human rights and international
humanitarian law violations committed against
civilians, as well as the security violations of the Political
Agreement by certain armed groups. We understand
that the authorities of the Central African Republic
and the international community have the same degree
of ambition in achieving that goal. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate our support for, first, the efforts
of local authorities to deliver justice, in particular the
work of the Special Criminal Court since April 2022,
and, secondly, the action taken by MINUSCA to
assist in the operationalization of the Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation Commission.
We reiterate our full support for the renewed
engagement of the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region in favour of the implementation
of the September 2021 road map. We also welcome the
initiative of special representatives and special envoys
in Central Africa to work on common strategic visions
on a number of critical regional issues. Their crossborder nature makes concerted action essential.
I would like to conclude by underlining that Brazil
understands the enormity of the challenges faced on
the ground by the authorities of the Central African
Republic and in addressing this phase of its political life
and wishes the Central African Republic every success.
Mr. Yamanaka (Japan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza
and the Chair of the Central African Republic
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Hilale, for their insightful
briefings and contributions. I would also like to thank
the Foreign Minister of the Central African Republic,
Ms. Baipo Temon, for her presence at today’s meeting.
Japan commends the tireless effort of the personnel
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and would also like to pay tribute to all of
those who have made sacrifices.
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

Achieving lasting peace and stability in the
Central African Republic is long overdue. Prolonged
conflicts and hostilities have too long prevented the
people of the Central African Republic and the greater
region from achieving their full potential. The 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic remains the key instrument
for achieving that goal, and its full implementation
continues to be the highest priority. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize three important points related
to MINUSCA’s mandate.
First, reconciliation through inclusive and
constructive dialogue among all stakeholders, including
armed groups, should be at the core of any efforts of
the Government of the Central African Republic to
strengthen and achieve peace and stability in its State.
We welcome the Government’s commitment to the
dissolution of four armed groups that are signatories to
the Political Agreement.
Demonstrating
the
successful
cases
of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
the benefits of reconciliation is essential in facilitating
future engagement with the majority of armed groups
that have not yet laid down their weapons. Reported
political confrontations over constitutional reform
should not derail the Government’s reconciliation
efforts. Incitement of violence by all sides must cease.
Secondly, regional arrangements need to play
a more active role in addressing the fragility of the
region. We welcome the strategic review meeting held
in Bangui last June. It brought about vital momentum
for progress made under the Luanda road map and the
continued implementation of the Political Agreement.
We further encourage the leadership and engagement
of Angola, as Chair of the International Conference of
the Great Lakes Region, as well as of the Economic
Community of Central African States and African
Union as guarantors. The agreed quarterly monitoring
process should be utilized as envisaged to boost
regional cooperation. Cross-border flows of armed
combatants, arms and conflict minerals need to be
urgently addressed. The Central African Republic and
neighbouring countries should be united to strengthen
border controls through regional arrangements.
Finally, good governance is the key to ensuring
sustained peace and stability in the country. Upcoming
local elections must be able to provide a solid foundation
for the much-awaited extension of State authority

S/PV.9265

in rural areas. The conduct of credible, peaceful and
inclusive elections will serve as a springboard to garner
people’s confidence in the State’s authority. Ensuring
the security of voters is of primary importance for
its success.
In that regard, we welcome the recent security
plan for the elections, signed by the Government of the
Central African Republic and MINUSCA. Furthermore,
institution-building in the justice sector at the national
and local levels is essential to promoting the rule of law
in the Central African Republic. The current progress
in the fight against impunity, including through the
Special Criminal Court, is a significant development
for long-term reconciliation.
Since the Central African Republic’s return to
democracy, Japan has extended its assistance to support
the country in its efforts to build a stable democratic
nation, as well as to address its humanitarian
challenges. We are deeply concerned about the human
rights violations committed by armed groups and State
actors, including other security personnel mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/108) as
allegedly responsible. We hope that MINUSCA will
continue to engage the Government with regard to such
situations and to report back to the Security Council.
Japan will continue to explore how we can best help
the Central African Republic address its multifaceted
challenges in order to enable us to grow together.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza and Ambassador Hilale for their briefings
and welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Central African Republic, Ms. Baipo Temon, to
this meeting
The Central African Republic has recently
achieved major results in advancing the peace process,
strengthening State governance and furthering the
country’s development and reconstruction. China
commends that progress. This is a critical period
in the Central African Republic’s transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and the international
community should step up its support to help the
country achieve lasting peace and security.
First, with regard to the full implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, the ceremony held
by the Government of the Central African Republic
to mark the dissolution of four armed groups late last

23-0540813/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

year marked an important step in the peace process.
China calls on other armed groups to join the political
dialogue and disarmament process without delay. The
holding of the local elections planned for this year will
be momentous in terms of consolidating the peace, and
the Government of the Central African Republic has
worked hard on their organization. As the preparations
for holding the elections are still underfunded, the
international community should provide support to
ensure their smooth conduct.
Issues such as constitutional reform are internal
affairs of the Central African Republic. The international
community should respect the country’s sovereignty
and ownership and support it by enabling it to follow
a development path that suits its particular conditions.
Peace in the Central African Republic is closely linked
to regional peace and stability. Recently the Government
of the Central African Republic, regional organizations
and other countries of the region have worked together to
implement the road map of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region through the establishment
of a monitoring mechanism and strengthened border
controls. The relevant subregional organizations should
continue to play an important role by encouraging the
countries of the region to coordinate their efforts to
maintain regional stability and calm through increased
unity and cooperation.
Secondly, the threat posed by armed groups must be
curbed. The recent reporting period saw armed insurgent
groups engage in frequent attacks on security forces and
civilians and in illegal taxation, kidnapping, extortion
and other activities that threaten security and stability
and disrupt the social order. Chinese supports the efforts
of the Government of the Central African Republic to
safeguard national security in accordance with the law
and calls on the parties concerned to end their violence.
The international community should focus on assisting
the Central African Republic in its efforts to implement its
national defence policy, build a professional, efficient and
strong security sector and address new security threats,
including the use of improvised explosive devices. The
expansion of State authority is crucial to maintaining
sovereign security and should be a higher priority for
the international community and for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). Given the
continued impact of the Security Council’s sanctions on
the country’s security capacity, those measures should
be lifted altogether.
14/24

21/02/2023

Thirdly, we support a greater role for MINUSCA.
Under the leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Rugwabiza, MINUSCA has
strengthened its communication and coordination with
the Government of the Central African Republic and
worked diligently to address security threats, protect
civilians and support disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. We have also seen progress
made on resolving the issue of MINUSCA’s night flights
and continued improvements in the implementation of
the status-of-forces agreement. It is an undeniable fact
that greater cooperation and mutual trust with host
countries is a prerequisite to successful peacekeeping
operations. China supports MINUSCA in stepping up
its efforts to address the threat posed by armed groups
and to advance the peace process and the holding of
local elections.
Fourthly, it is the shared responsibility of the
United Nations and the international community to
support the development and reconstruction of the
Central African Republic. The country is currently
facing a grave humanitarian situation, with acute food
insecurity and a dire energy shortage. Half the population
is in need of humanitarian assistance. The international
community should increase its humanitarian assistance,
focusing on poverty reduction and food security and
accelerating the building of infrastructure. The main
donors should resume their unconditional aid as soon as
possible. China stands ready to continue its efforts with
the international community to provide further support
for achieving peace, stability and economic and social
development in the Central African Republic.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza
and Ambassador Hilale for their detailed briefings. We
welcome the Peacebuilding Commission’s input today
at today’s Security Council’s discussion highlighting
the broader work of supporting peacebuilding in the
Central African Republic. I would like to make three
points in response to what we have heard today.
First, the United Kingdom agrees with others today
that the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic is the only viable
option for ending the conflict and crisis in the country.
That needs renewed commitment from all the parties
involved to revitalizing the peace process. Building on
the steps forward that were made in December 2022, we
call on the authorities of the Central African Republic,
with the support of the region and the United Nations
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV.9265

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), to ensure
tangible political progress and meaningful engagement
with all political actors in the country.

Republic. I also welcome the presence here today of the
Foreign Minister of the Central African Republic and
the Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Secondly, the increase in the number of human
rights violations and abuses over the past year remains
deeply concerning. The Forces armées centrafricaines
and the Wagner Group, through their joint operations,
are now responsible for the majority of such violations.
Put simply, the Government of the Central African
Republic must do a better job of protecting its civilian
population, in particular the Fulani and Muslim
communities. We continue to urge the Government to
conduct full and timely investigations into allegations
of human rights violations and abuses and ensure that
all perpetrators are held accountable.

I would like to address three core themes
today — MINUSCA’s positive contributions to peace
and security in the Central African Republic, the
importance of respecting the Mission’s status-of-forces
agreement and the need for a political solution to ending
the country’s conflict.

Thirdly, the United Kingdom would like to
commend MINUSCA’s efforts. As a key player in
supporting the peace process, MINUSCA must be
able to implement its mandate without interference.
In that regard, the United Kingdom welcomes the
recent removal of restrictions on MINUSCA’s freedom
of movement, including reinstating night flights for
medical and casualty evacuations. But the continued
violations of the status-of-forces agreement are
undermining MINUSCA’s safety and effectiveness. I
therefore join others in expressing concern about the
removal of MINUSCA’s airport surveillance camera
and about the Government’s recent ban on unmanned
aerial systems, both of which undermine MINUSCA’s
surveillance capability, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General highlighted earlier. We call on the
authorities of the Central African Republic to maintain
full freedom of movement by allowing MINUSCA
unhindered and immediate access throughout the
country’s territory.
The United Kingdom will continue to work with
international partners to support the Government of the
Central African Republic in implementing the peace
agreement in order to end the violence, build stability
and protect human rights.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza for her leadership and informative briefing,
which illustrates the critical role that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) plays in
supporting peace and security in the Central African

First, I want to convey my appreciation to the staff
and peacekeepers of MINUSCA and its leadership
and troop- and police-contributing countries for their
commitment to peace in the Central African Republic.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/108)
describes, MINUSCA’s proactive and robust posture
protects civilians, limits the movements of armed
groups and supports the restoration of social services
and the return of humanitarian actors and development
partners. We commend the Mission’s work and join
the Government of the Central African Republic in
encouraging MINUSCA to further deter armed-group
attacks on civilians by proactively addressing sources
of instability. That is particularly timely given the
uptick in armed-group attacks since the onset of the
dry season.
The United States is proud to be a firm supporter
of MINUSCA and a partner to many of its troop- and
police-contributing countries. Through our Global
Peace Operations Initiative, we provided training
and support to the Peruvian engineering unit that
rehabilitated a road linking Bossangoa and Bossembélé.
We have also provided support to Zambia as it prepares
to deploy its infantry battalion, a unit that has been
recognized for its performance, particularly in helping
protect civilians and expelling armed groups from
Ouanda-Djallé last summer. To enable MINUSCA to
effectively fulfil its mandate and ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel, it is critical that it
be permitted full freedom of movement. We welcomed
the agreement late in 2022 between the Government
of the Central African Republic and MINUSCA
reauthorizing unrestricted United Nations night flights.
However, the new restrictions on unmanned aerial
vehicles directly hinder MINUSCA’s ability to fulfil its
mandate. Lifting one restriction and replacing it with
another is not progress.

23-0540815/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

That leads me to my second point, which is the need
for the Central African armed forces to demonstrate
greater respect for the Mission’s status-of-forces
agreement. We were disheartened to see an increase in
violations of the agreement over the reporting period,
despite the Mission’s efforts to cooperate with the Forces
armées centrafricaines. Obstructing Mission patrols
and detaining convoys impedes MINUSCA’s ability to
protect civilians from armed groups, identify and clear
explosive ordnance and support the stabilization of the
Central African Republic.
We share the Government of the Central African
Republic’s concern about the reported increases in
armed-group activity, including cross-border violence.
The heinous attack in late January on the Beloko
customs facility represents a stark escalation by armed
groups, and we encourage all actors in the region to
play a constructive role in helping to stabilize the
country. Sustainably addressing that challenge requires
coordination between border-patrol forces, positive
engagement by regional actors and a recommitment to
the peace process.
That leads me to my final point, which is that
there can be no military-only settlement of the crisis
in the Central African Republic. The only durable
solution is through political dialogue, in addition to the
full implementation of the 2019 Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and the regionally brokered 2021 road map,
along with the reassertion of State authority and
justice for victims. The full, equal, and meaningful
participation and leadership of women, the diverse
and effective engagement of young people and the
participation of members of ethnic and religious
minorities in political dialogue are critical to making
the peace process in the Central African Republic more
effective, inclusive and sustainable.
Unfortunately, some predatory entities in the
Central African Republic are seeking to destabilize the
country in order to further exploit its wealth for their
own gain. The Wagner Group perpetuates numerous
human rights abuses as part of its campaign to control
the Central African Republic’s sovereign natural
resources. We are disappointed that the Secretariat
continues to self-censor by using euphemisms to
refer to the Group when it is clear that its forces are
responsible for many of those abuses. The Wagner
Group came to the Central African Republic promising
to reduce armed-group violence, but on the contrary,
16/24

21/02/2023

its actions are fuelling further insecurity and conflict.
Without accountability for human rights abuses, the
Central African Republic will not be able to achieve
the peace that is necessary to unlock the country’s vast
potential. We once again call on all actors to lay down
their weapons and choose the path of dialogue. The
Central African people deserve peace.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
first like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Rugwabiza for her comprehensive briefing. I
also thank Ambassador Hilale for briefing us and for
Morocco’s notable contribution as Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), which is another good example
of the value added by the PBC’s engagement with the
Security Council. I also welcome the participation of
Foreign Minister Baipo Temon in today’s meeting.
Through the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the Council has committed to
achieving peace and stability in the Central African
Republic. The United Arab Emirates reiterates its full
support to the Special Representative and the Mission,
and we underscore that a constructive relationship
between MINUSCA and the Government is essential
to the country’s success. MINUSCA’s effectiveness
will be amplified by the recent decision regarding the
operation of night flights, which we welcome. We hope
that this constructive engagement continues and that it
can be expanded to address other key issues to enable the
full implementation of MINUSCA’s mandate. I would
like to raise three points that underline the importance
of dialogue and pragmatism for the road ahead.
First, despite a complex array of challenges, it is
important to take a moment to acknowledge the progress
that the Government and the people of the Central
African Republic continue to make. Some important
developments include the plans for holding elections in
2023; Government ownership of the implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and the Luanda road
map; and efforts aimed at institution-building and
the improved provision of basic services. All of those
represent improvements that must be safeguarded. To
help preserve those gains, the Council, Member States,
regional actors and the United Nations should continue
to support the Central African Republic. Sustained
assistance will be critical, whether through capacitybuilding or technical and financial support.
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

Secondly, given the persistence of insecurity in the
Central African Republic, protecting civilians must
remain at the heart of the United Nations, regional and
international responses. Special attention must be paid
to protecting women and girls from the rampant sexual
violence that many reports continue to highlight. For
women to be truly empowered, they must be full, equal
and meaningful participants in the country’s political
processes. Any attempts to harm them or prevent
their participation must be stopped. The United Arab
Emirates is clear-eyed about the challenges confronting
MINUSCA as it executes that core element of its
mandate. Chief among them is the expansion of the
activities of armed groups and the grave risk they pose
to civilians. Bangui and its neighbours have to work
together alongside multinational and regional actors
in order to counter the expansion of those groups and
sever their regional networks.
The complexity of the situation in the Central
African Republic must not overshadow our belief that
building peace through inclusive dialogue is achievable.
In the face of the ongoing escalation in intercommunal
and interreligious tensions, intercultural and interfaith
dialogue remain key to preserving the country’s social
fabric. That is why MINUSCA and the Government
of the Central African Republic should redouble their
efforts to counter the spread of the misinformation
and disinformation that fuel hate speech. The recent
dissolution of four armed groups is an encouraging
development. It is important for MINUSCA and the
Government to continue focusing on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, with an emphasis on
community-level violence-reduction programmes.
Thirdly, I would like to draw attention to the
links between climate change and conflict. We have
seen in the past that the arrival of the dry season is
often accompanied by increased activity among armed
groups. With greater mobility, they are able to pillage
resources and expand their footprint further. There is a
clear and urgent need to tackle climate change and its
ramifications in the Central African Republic, including
its ongoing impact on food insecurity. In the Central
African Republic, some 3.4 million people — more than
half of the population — are in a critically acute state
of food insecurity. Climate change is forcing farmers to
contend with less reliable rainy seasons and ever more
extreme weather patterns. That has resulted not only
in rising food insecurity but also in increased tensions
between farmers and herders, creating more fragility

S/PV.9265

and further destabilization. As co-Chair of the Informal
Expert Group of Members of the Security Council
on Climate and Security and incoming president of
the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, we intend to convene major discussions to
address this issue. We need to better understand the
intersection of climate and fragility and identify and
deploy the tools at our disposal to address that nexus.
In conclusion, we must continue to support the work
of the United Nations in the Central African Republic
while building on the leadership of the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Region. We must all work together to support the Central
African Republic on its path to peace and stability.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Rugwabiza, for her briefing and
Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his important briefing. I welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central
Africans Abroad of the Central African Republic to
this meeting.
The Central African Republic is navigating
towards peace in an adverse international situation
marked by international supply chain disruption,
the economic situation and rising inflation. That is
compounded by insecurity and violence, which have
not allowed human displacement to stop. According to
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/108), 56 per cent
of the population of the Central African Republic will
need humanitarian assistance. International support
therefore must not decline.
We agree that the political challenges and the
conditions of insecurity in the Central African Republic
are complex, and we welcome the progress made thanks
to the efforts of the Central African Government, with
the support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
In that regard, we welcome the Government’s
decision to lift the ban on night flights for MINUSCA
and urge that the same be done for the deployment of
drones, which are necessary for the Mission’s work. We
urge that all possible support be provided to MINUSCA,
in line with the status-of-forces agreement.

23-0540817/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

Regarding the challenges facing the Central African
Republic, many of which are reflected in the report, I
would like to focus on four aspects.
First, territorial control is central, both for the
strengthening of the rule of law and for institutionality
and decentralization, which is why the progress
achieved in the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and recent advances with respect
to the disbanding of four armed groups have been
fundamental. We recall the importance of the inclusion
of women in political spheres as managers in the peace,
demobilization and reintegration processes.
Secondly, the volatile security situation of the
civilian population is of concern owing to the growing
number of incidents involving explosive devices. The
work of MINUSCA in training Blue Helmets and
humanitarian personnel is timely. Organized crime
has its tentacles in the trafficking of natural resources,
which is why the implementation of the national strategy
and the action plan of the National Commission to
Combat the Proliferation of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, supported by MINUSCA, are indispensable.
Thirdly, Ecuador supports democratic processes and
welcomes the upcoming municipal and regional elections
for the five-year period 2023–2028, scheduled for July.
We believe that coordination between the Government
and MINUSCA in the process of local elections, the
reconfiguration of the administrative districts and the
mobilization of funds are necessary in order to achieve
the electoral time table. Peace cannot be maintained
by force. We therefore urge that dialogue prevail over
disinformation and hate speech, as well as incitement to
violence and threats. Ecuador categorically rejects this
type of violence, which includes incitement to sexual
violence against the opposition, especially against
women, and we recognize the work of MINUSCA in
denouncing it.
Fourthly, as the delegation of Gabon stated, there is
no peace without justice. That is why we encourage the
work of the Special Criminal Court that punishes war
crimes and crimes against humanity, as well as the Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation Commission.
The State has the primary responsibility to protect
the population. We therefore urge that the human
rights of the people of the Central African Republic
be respected and guaranteed and that all cases of
human rights abuses and violations be investigated and
prosecuted and their perpetrators brought to justice.
18/24

21/02/2023

Ecuador welcomes the signing of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(2023–2027) between the United Nations and the
Government. We call for increasing support from the
United Nations system and global and regional financial
institutions in order to provide cooperation and access
to finance to the Central African Republic.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm Ecuador’s
commitment to MINUSCA by contributing permanently
with officers, mostly women, to this Mission, as one
of the contributions we make to the Organization in
the search for sustainable and lasting solutions for
peace processes.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, for her briefing. We are grateful to the
Permanent Representative of Morocco, Mr. Omar
Hilale, for the statement he delivered in his capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We welcome the
participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic, Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, in
today’s meeting.
We follow very closely the security developments
in the Central African Republic. Overall, the country
is under the control of Government forces, and the
capacities of many illegal armed groups have been
significantly reduced.
At the same time, we note the increased activity
of the remaining fighters in a number of border areas
in recent months. The intensification of activities by
illegal armed groups, including the most intransigent
amongst them, the Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique
and the Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation groups,
gives rise to serious concern. Another worrisome
trend is the emergence of new armed formations, such
as Coalition Siriri, which operates in the border area
with the Sudan, in coordination with the Unité pour
la paix en Centrafrique and the Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation groups.
In that regard, we call for more decisive steps on
the part of the Security Council towards a complete
lifting of the arms embargo against the Central African
Republic. We believe that measure is necessary in order
to strengthen the defence capacity of the country and to
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

help it to combat the illegal armed groups who refuse to
participate in national reconciliation and make it more
difficult to prepare the new elections in the country.
The African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the African members
of the Security Council speak unequivocally in favour
of lifting sanctions. The people of the Central African
Republic also remain very vocal in that regard. It is clear
that lasting stabilization and progress on the political
process are not possible unless the Central African
Republic receives effective support in the capacitybuilding of its national military and law enforcement.
We believe that the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed in Bangui on 6 February 2019, remains the basis
for achieving stability and security. We welcome the
practical steps taken by Bangui in order to continue
the political process, with a view to normalizing
the situation in the country. We call on all parties to
implement the unilateral ceasefire announced by the
Head of State on 15 October 2021.
We need to ensure that the illegal armed groups
that did not sign the Luanda road map also participate
in the process. According to the road map, the parties
undertook to stop fighting, begin disarmament and
demobilize former combatants. Rebel leaders must
abandon violent fighting methods and engage in
meaningful dialogue with Bangui, as there is no
alternative to a political and diplomatic settlement in
the Central African Republic.
We believe that the decisions taken in the context
of the implementation mechanism of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic — the Khartoum agreement — and the
Luanda road map will promote peace efforts in Bangui.
We continue to assist the Central African Republic
in strengthening its defence capabilities. More than
one shipment of military goods was delivered to the
country with the knowledge of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic. Russian
instructors sent there in response to a request by the
legitimate authorities are successfully operating in the
Central African Republic. The campaign to discredit
them and the attempts in general to place the blame for
human rights violations on the Central African Republic
armed forces and bilateral partners are custom-made
and are not supported by verified facts.

S/PV.9265

We welcome the efforts of the Central African
Republic authorities to ensure a State presence,
strengthen administrative structures, continue security
sector reform, develop the judicial system and prepare
for the first local elections since 1988. In that context,
we once again draw attention to the politicized
decisions taken by some external donors to freeze direct
budgetary support to the Central African Republic.
That situation directly threatens to exacerbate the
situation in the country, in particular in humanitarian
terms, and jeopardizes the achievements of recent years
with regard to national reconciliation.
We believe that it is important to continue effective
support to the authorities on the part of MINUSCA,
headed by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Rugwabiza. We thank the military
personnel of the troop-contributing countries, who
risk their lives on a daily basis in carrying out their
duty. We welcome the signing of a comprehensive plan
for election security with MINUSCA’s assistance. In
general, we would like to reiterate that MINUSCA
should particularly devote its resources to assisting
the authorities in establishing State control, countering
armed groups and protecting civilians.
We are very concerned that terrorist attacks in
the Central African Republic are targeting Russian
nationals. We strongly condemn the attack on
Mr. Syty, Director-General of Russian House, a company
operating in the Central African Republic, which took
place in Bangui on 16 December 2022. We trust that the
perpetrators of that crime will be identified and duly
held accountable. Additional coordinated steps by the
authorities of neighbouring States are needed to curb
the illegal cross-border movement of militants.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that only the
comprehensive normalization of the security situation
will enable Bangui to focus on a constructive domestic
agenda in the interests of the citizens and the State. The
Security Council must do its utmost to facilitate that
process, including by lifting the remaining sanctions
restrictions against the legitimate Government.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I thank Special Representative Rugwabiza and
Ambassador Omar Hilale, Chair of the Central
African Republic country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings. I
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign

23-0540819/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

Affairs of the Central African Republic in this meeting.
I also extend my condolences to the families of the six
United Nations personnel who died recently while they
were serving in the country.
Our message today is one that looks forward to
the achievement of peace and stability in the Central
African Republic through a genuine investment in
trust. We understand the need of the Government to
extend State authority, especially when it comes to
addressing the threat of armed groups, which take
advantage of the security vacuums to gain footholds in
exhausted communities.
However, we are deeply concerned about the findings
of the report of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) on human rights. We condemn
all violations perpetrated by armed groups, the Forces
armées centrafricaines and other security personnel,
namely, the Wagner Group.
In addressing the threats caused by non-State
actors, we stress the importance of a resilient justice
system. We welcome the first verdict of the Special
Criminal Court, delivered on 31 October 2022, which
found the defendants guilty of crimes against humanity
and war crimes. We also welcome the extension of the
Court’s mandate until 2028.
Malta is deeply committed to combating all forms
of violence, including sexual and gender-based violence
and grave violations committed against children. We
welcome the decision by the Government to create a
strategic committee to prevent and respond to genderbased violence linked to conflict. Furthermore, we urge
the development of a strategy to prevent and eliminate
the six grave violations against children, as recognized
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict.
Further trust will be safeguarded if a renewed
commitment is dedicated to the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. The critical work of the Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation Commission and progress
on the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme remain central. We welcome the
dissolution of four armed groups among the signatories
and encourage the Government to consolidate such
gains. Only through a ceasefire and continued dialogue
20/24

21/02/2023

between the Government and armed groups can a
path towards peace be forged, in partnership with
international and regional partners.
We also look forward to the holding of local elections
later this year for the first time since 1988. Having
inclusive, free and fair elections and creating a civic
space that represents all stakeholders are crucial to all
democratic societies. The full, equal, meaningful and
safe participation of women, young people, internally
displaced persons and refugees remains of the utmost
importance. At the same time, we are concerned about
reports regarding the challenges that the authorities
are experiencing in the holding of local elections, as
well as the recently adopted referendum law and the
dismissal of members from the Constitutional Court.
We acknowledge the Government’s public commitment
that the current budgetary plans will be adapted in
order to facilitate the local elections.
Malta remains supportive of MINUSCA’s work.
We are pleased about the recent decision concerning
the night-flight ban, which is no longer an impediment
to MINUSCA’s efforts to ensure the medical evacuation
of injured peacekeepers. While we take note of the
violations of the status-of-forces agreement, it is
important for MINUSCA to continue to operate without
restrictions. On that note, Malta welcomes MINUSCA’s
efforts to raise awareness of its mandate, which is
fundamental to fighting misinformation.
We must also work to address the humanitarian
situation, as 3.4 million people face limited or no
access to basic services, such as water and sanitation.
Inflation also continues apace, as most basic products
have at least doubled in price since the war in Ukraine
began, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian needs of
millions of people already facing acute food insecurity
and climate change.
In conclusion, we emphasize the importance
of engendering trust in MINUSCA’s dealings with
the people of the Central African Republic. We are
convinced that investing in good governance will
facilitate increasing dialogue and justice over violence
and impunity. Malta will continue to express its deepest
commitment to supporting the Central African Republic
in its path towards long-lasting peace and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV.9265

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.

support for the upcoming local elections, to be held in
July 2023, the timetable of which has been set out by
the National Electoral Authority.

Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): Allow me to extend my warm
greetings to the Security Council, and my thanks
for the greetings that were addressed to me. I would
also like to thank all the participants here today,
and I convey to them the thanks of His Excellency
Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, President of the
Central African Republic and Head of State, the Central
African Government, led by Mr. Félix Moloua, Prime
Minister and Head of Government, and the Central
African people for the interest shown in our country,
the Central African Republic, through the support of
the international community, represented by the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council.

Turning to the subject that has brought us together
today, namely, the situation in the Central African
Republic, on which the Secretary-General has issued
a report organized around 11 points, I would like, first
of all, to express the gratitude of the people and the
Government of the Central African Republic for the
international community, acting through MINUSCA,
and thank it for its multifaceted support in a context
that is as complex as it is complicated. In addition, I
would support Ambassador Hilale’s briefing and urge
the international community to remain involved in
the Central African Republic in order to strengthen
security cooperation and achieve success in the form of
an effective return to peace.

Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
the new States that have joined the Security Council
as non-permanent members. I would like to especially
congratulate you, Madam President, on your country’s
presidency for the month of February.

While we welcome the achievements resulting
from our collective efforts, it should be noted that
improvements still need to be made through coordinated
and mutually respectful work so that anomalies and
inconsistencies cease to be a hindrance to the political
process for peace and that they stop fuelling insecurity
and precariousness in the Central African Republic.

It is with renewed pleasure that I appear before
the Security Council to speak on behalf of the Central
African Republic, my dear and beautiful country, in
order to share with Council members the situation
in my country as well as my Government’s remarks
and commentary on the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/108), which has just been presented
to us in summary form by Special Representative
Valentine Rugwabiza, Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). I would like
to take this opportunity to thank and congratulate her for
her clear and concise briefing and for the work she has
done with the Central African authorities, and also to
provide her with encouragement as she meets the heavy
burden of leading MINUSCA to achieving results.
I could not end my thanks without acknowledging
Ambassador Hilale’s commitment to the Central
African Republic Chair of the country configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to express
to him the gratitude of the people and the Government
of the Central African Republic for the work he has
carried out to mobilize the partners and the friendly
countries of the United Nations to remain in solidarity
with my country. This gratitude also extends to every
member of his team. I add my voice to his in calling for

I would now like to share with the Council
the situation in the Central African Republic and
my Government’s comments on the report of the
Secretary-General. Council members should know that
the Central African Republic, my country, is a country
with an estimated population of 5 million inhabitants,
which means that there are 5 million women and men
whose rights and dignity continue to be disregarded
and scorned, in this twenty-first century, by lawless
and faithless enemies of peace. In the madness of
their desire to serve dark causes, these enemies of
peace wage a proxy war against the Central African
people and the institutions of the Republic, obtaining
remuneration through the illicit exploitation of natural
resources that they galvanize to strengthen themselves
with weaponry. In this way, they remain useful actors
in all efforts aimed at destabilization with a view to
gaining power by force or through any other means.
We are in the twenty-first century, and those who
have had the opportunity to visit the Central African
Republic could describe the paradox of the country to
the Council. The Central African Republic is a sparsely
populated State, vast in surface area and possessing
innumerable natural resources and a generous land. But

23-0540821/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

the country is subject to the tyranny of men, forcing an
entire people to live in a situation of unacceptable and,
above all, incomprehensible insecurity.
Indeed, with abuses and violent extremism
perpetrated by armed groups, the population cannot
have access to their land for cultivation to meet their
personal consumption needs. The Central African
authorities are cut off from any possibility of exploiting
the resources of its subsoil that could allow it to support
efficient economic and social development programmes.
Furthermore, a campaign of demonization in the
Central African Republic, driven by the geopolitical
and geostrategic interests of Powers that are motivated
by economic and positioning objectives, relies on all
means to marginalize a country and a population that
have already been badly damaged. In addition, a negative
campaign aimed at taking the Central African population
hostage has been actively undertaken to prevent any
financial support for the Central African authorities,
strangling the country and fomenting a social crisis.
This means that the youth of the Central African
Republic — a youth that aspires only to peace, which
every human being should be able to enjoy in the land
of their forebears — can look forward only to a very
sad future. It also means that the future holds only
one option: violence in response to violence, as that is
the only way to survive. Indeed, while the SecretaryGeneral’s report makes a good number of points, it does
not go to the heart of the matter, in particular what the
Central African people aspire to.
It would be appropriate to sit down one day and
discuss the results expected from the implementation
of the peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic, because, first of all, we are accountable to the
population for them. Let us not forget that MINUSCA’s
mandate is to protect civilians. Secondly, we should
do this because it is not enough to take stock of the
security and political situation in the Central African
Republic without evaluating the actions and expected
results of what we are doing. Indeed, we will have to
face the fact that we must work together for peace and
stop merely talking about peace. To do this, we must
focus on the realities experienced by Central Africans,
and not on facts deliberately extrapolated in the name
of humanity, or even in the name of compassion for a
people living in misery or facing the illicit exploitation
of natural resources of which the Central African State
is deprived.
22/24

21/02/2023

Members of the Security Council should know
that we are well aware of the realities of this world
and the paradox between the wealth that the Central
African Republic possesses and the misery in which
its population lives. It is also a sad consequence of
the reality of this world despite collective efforts — a
world in chaos, a world of chaos — simply because the
solutions advocated are out of phase with the realities
of States.
We will continue to meet in this Chamber to discuss
as many reports and draft resolutions as we want. But
would it not make more sense, after 13 multilateral
peace operations and nine years of peacekeeping
operations through MINUSCA, to focus urgently on
the fact that we need to truly establish this oft-invoked
peace before we can finally be able to maintain it.
We can debate the different points of the report
submitted by the Secretary-General, and we can also
continue to count the dead, the displaced and the
refugees. But would it not be better to focus on finding a
concrete solution for what is causing the Central African
problem? Or, instead, we can focus on non-issues,
such as restrictions on night flights, which was a topic
constantly brought up during the debate on the renewal
of MINUSCA’s mandate, so that we would forget that
the original mandate is far from being achieved.
We know the cause of the Central African problem,
and the Council knows it too. All we need to do now is to
want to address it. Let us remember that Central African
Republic’s appeal to the international community was
made because of aggression that ensued from the
Séléka rebellion in 2013, which in a few days massacred
thousands of innocent people and displaced thousands
more. What is the situation today, nine years later?
On the political level, efforts continue in a political
process for peace and reconciliation shared with the
Luanda road map, which came as a complement to
bring the recalcitrant armed groups that had resumed
their rebellion back to the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, in the presence of United Nations forces
consisting of approximately 13,000 people. We should
appreciate the authorities’ unceasing efforts to preserve
the foundations of democracy, build the rule of law and
restore State authority throughout the country. That
is a long and wearisome process, but the approaching
deadline for local elections should enable us to speed up
our decentralization policy and through that our local
23-05408

21/02/2023

The situation in the Central African Republic

development. I would like to echo Ambassador Hilale’s
request that the international community mobilize
funding for the holding of local elections to enable us
to finalize a democratic process that we all desire and
have initiated together.
The state of the world today suggests that sanctions
that are imposed solely to punish are completely
ineffective, especially when they are disproportionate,
unjust and cruel, forcing a people to their knees simply
because they have made a legitimate cry for help to
survive. As I said, we should understand that the political
process for a young State like the Central African
Republic is long and wearisome. Above all, it has been
made difficult and painful by incessant interference
with the sole objective of distracting us from our
primary goal and the real issue, which is giving the
people back their sovereignty and their ability to express
themselves on the subject that most concerns them,
their development and social welfare. Let us not forget
that no one can claim to care about the Central African
Republic more than the Central Africans themselves.
With regard to security, the resurgence of attacks
by armed groups and the use of explosive devices and
drones has created an alarming situation. The latest
incidents include the 14 February attack on Sikikédé,
in the Vakaga region, in which lives were lost and
officers of the Forces armées centrafricaines were
taken hostage, and the assassinations on 18 February
in Paoua, as well as attacks on United Nations forces
and humanitarian personnel. All of that should compel
us to review MINUSCA’s mandate so that it can deploy
more efficiently in a way that compels it to effectively
protect civilians while attacks by negative forces are
actually happening rather than in their aftermath. We
should also review the mandate so that the mistakes
made in the run-up to the previous electoral deadlines
are not repeated, especially the plan to secure the
elections that failed to produce the expected results
and sparked a new aggression by armed groups. In the
light of the resurgence in armed-group attacks and the
threats, disinformation and incitement to hatred that
are being disseminated on social networks with the
aim of angering and frightening the people, we must
sit down and consider the supposed effectiveness of
the increase in United Nations troops, which has been
presented as a response to the failure of that security
plan for the 2020–2021 electoral timetable, during
which a new rebellion emerged that has forced us to
once again appeal to the international community and
subregional organizations.

S/PV.9265

The Secretary-General’s report discusses the
situation of MINUSCA in the Central African Republic
and the restrictions on its freedom of movement
in particular. It is important to point out that the
appeals made by the Central African authorities for
coordinated efforts, particularly in the context of the
growing numbers of troops and their identity, have still
not unanswered. Is the Council aware that despite our
constant requests, we have seen no sign of collaboration
or coordination, in total violation of the sovereignty of
the Central African Republic? In my view, it is important
that in all the relevant resolutions of the Council, it is
stressed that it is first and foremost the responsibility of
the Central African authorities to ensure the protection
of their population and territory. How can we respond
if we do not even have the right to know who has been
invited to set foot on Central African soil? Is that not
an insidious way to flout a sovereign right? Would any
country here accept such practices?
The terms of the status-of-forces agreement with
the Central African Government regarding MINUSCA’s
operations are clear. The Government has tolerated a
number of exemptions — even some that are barely
acceptable — but it is important to remember that the
Central African Republic has requested support in
its quest for security, not a trusteeship or any kind of
substitution for the Central African authorities. The
restrictions we have announced should be understood
in the light of the abuses committed and considering
the vulnerability of the Central African Republic. They
highlight the contradictions in a mandate where there
is securitization without an adequate level of control.
As an example, that minimal level of control led to the
arrest of a couple, parents to a six-month-old baby, who
came to the Central African Republic ostensibly on a
religious mission and were found on the outskirts of the
Central African capital using drones. They were arrested
and expelled from Central African territory. That is one
case among many demonstrating the minimum level of
control we need to talk about securitization.
On the economic front, the persistent problems — exacerbated by the coronavirus disease health
crisis and the Ukraine-Russia crisis — have not spared
the Central African economy, which was already in
dire straits thanks to its situation as an underdeveloped
country. The Central African Republic is not immune
to the consequences of soaring prices for basic necessities and petroleum products, which are fuelling social
tensions. That worrisome economic and financial back-

23-0540823/24

S/PV.9265

The situation in the Central African Republic

drop is aggravating an already alarming humanitarian
situation resulting from constant attacks by armed groups
and the illicit exploitation of natural resources. The peacekeeping operation and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations, with their tax exemptions, are also hampering the Central African economy.
How can we possibly improve the humanitarian situation without addressing the issue of the armed groups that
are its root cause? They are obstructing the people’s access
to their own backyard and preventing the Central African
authorities from implementing economic programmes
based on the country’s rich potential in natural resources.
How can we reduce the humanitarian problems when
80 per cent of donations pledged are used solely to ensure
the operations of non-governmental organizations and
other associations? How can we resolve those issues when
poverty is supported by the exploitation of Central African personnel, even on their own territory?
We can end this alarming humanitarian situation, but
first we need the will to do it. We have to reduce the armed
groups’ lethal capacity. I will not dwell on the issue of
human rights violations in view of the double standards
that are apparent in the handling of certain cases — specifically, where work was done without the knowledge of
the local Central African authorities, in cases where the
claims have been unverifiable and in decisions motivated by known inconsistencies, such as the withdrawal
of Gabonese troops in 2021 on the basis of slanderous
denunciations or even misinformation. The fight against
impunity functions at two entirely different speeds, with a
list of sanctions ignored, thereby allowing the executioners of the Central African people to continue their abuses.
We cannot ask for the possible and the impossible
at the same time. Building a State based on the rule of
law and simultaneously functioning as a stable State are
not humanly possible. Our ability to be effective depends
on structured, coordinated and orderly work. If we try to
chase several hares at the same time, we will not catch any
of them — which is to say that we will not achieve any
results, because there is no security solution or alternative
other than to work together to fight the enemies of peace
in the Central African Republic, the forces of evil that are
the armed groups.
Stabilizing the Central African Republic is more
imperative today than ever before. Together we must
think about how to stabilize the Central African Republic and bring back peace. There is no question that in the
face of heavily armed groups equipped with sophisticated
weapons, in a region of Central Africa where no State

24/24

21/02/2023

manufactures or sells weapons, the Mission’s mandate
must be revised under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. We need a robust and effective operation
that can put an end to the suffering of a people exhausted
by decades of aggression against their territory, crimes
against their citizens, destabilization of their institutions
and illicit exploitation of their mineral resources.
The Central African context demands that we not
ignore the failures and mistakes that have complicated
the political and security situation in the Central African
Republic if we are to put in place an operation whose goal
is to impose peace and stability in order to overcome the
country’s issues of precarity, and consequently of human
rights violations, disinformation and incitement to hatred,
by offering people sane and genuine alternatives, not
empty promises. Let us work together to create dreams,
not sell them. To do that, let us work in solidarity, without
considering strong versus weak or who is dominant versus
who can be dominated. Let us not forget that we are all
human beings. Let us work to reduce discrimination and
to lift unjust, perverse and ineffective sanctions. Let us
stop legitimizing armed groups with sanctions that have
the opposite effects to those intended, and above all, let us
not turn victims into oppressors and torturers into victims.
In conclusion, I encourage Council members to put
themselves in the place of the people of the Central African Republic and to treat their cause as their own — their
quest for a life of dignity — by supporting the lifting of
the unjust sanctions on their Government such as those in
resolution 2127 (2013), on the embargo on Central African Republic, which gave legitimacy to the armed groups
to the detriment of the legitimate authorities and makes
no sense in the wake of the lifting of the restrictions on
access to arms for the regular forces, the lifting of the
remaining sanctions under the Kimberley Process and the
implementation of sanctions on the free movement and the
freezing of assets of persons under sanctions for crimes
against humanity.
The people of the Central African Republic ask the
members of the Council not to be mistaken about who their
enemies are. The country, the people and the Government
of the Central African Republic are not their enemies, and
they are not the enemy. The Central African people simply
want mutually beneficial partnerships based on the principles of equality and non-discrimination.
May peace take shape in this world of constant struggle. May peace take shape in the Central African Republic.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

23-05408
