United Nations

s/P!?.3745

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-second Year

3745 th Meeting
Wednesday, 5 March 1997, 3.50 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wlosowicz

.............,...............,.....

Members:

Chile ..........................................
China ..........................................
CostaRica .......................................
Egypt ..........................................
France.. ........................................
Guinea-Bissau ....................................
Japan ..........................................
Kenya ..........................................
Portugal ........................................
Republic of Korea .................................
Russian Federation .................................
Sweden .........................................
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ........
UnitedStatesofAmerica
............................

(Poland)
Mr. Somavfa
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Berrocal Soto
Mr. Elaraby
Mr. Ladsous
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Owada
Mr. Mahugu
Mr. Soares
Mr. Park
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Osvald
Sir John Weston
Mr. Richardson

Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab territories

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations
of speeches
delivered in the other languages, The final text will be printed in the OsJicid Records offhe Sccrrrif.y
Courtcil.
Corrections
should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week # rhe rfole of puhlicnhbn,
to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting
Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, to
participate in the current debate of the Security
Council with regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the current debate in accordance
with the rules of procedure and previous practice in this
regard.
There being on objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 3 March 1997 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which reads
as follows:

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the’ invitation of the President, Mr. Peleg (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan),
Mr. Baali (Algeria), Mr. Petrella
{Argentina}, Mr. Buallai (Bahrain), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Amorim (Brazil), Mr. Karsgaard
{Canada),
Mr. Garcia (Colombia), Mr. Nuiiez
Mosquera (Cuba), Mr. Wisnurnurti (Indonesia), Mr.
Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abu-Nimah
(Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan {Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak
(Lebanon), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr. Berteling (Netherlands), Mr. Bi(rn
Lian (Norway), Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Al Khalifa (Qatar), Mr. AZ-Ahmed
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Wehbe {Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Celem
(Turkey), Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) and
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 3 March 1997 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/1997/194 and reads as follows:

2

“In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, I have the honour to request that
I be invited to participate in the debate on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council,”
On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Ibra Deguene Ka.
There being no objection, it is so decided,
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 5 March 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer

Security Council
Fifty-second year
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council’s discussion of the
item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab
territories’.”
This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1997/196. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 to Mr, Engin A. Ansay.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I wish you every successin your work. Allow me
also to extend my thanks to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for his excellent
work, in particular with regard to the item under
consideration today. I would also like to take the
opportunity to express our deep appreciation to all the
members of the Security Council, and in particular to the
Ambassador of Egypt, for the valuable meeting that we
held this morning with President Yasser Arafat.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations, at the request of Egypt under rule 2 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1997/149 and
S/1997/157, letters dated 21 and 25 February 1997,
respectively, from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1997/165, letter dated 27 February 1997
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1997/172, letter dated 28 February 1997 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
President of the Security Council; S/1997/175, letter dated
3 March 1997 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1997/177, letter dated 3 March 1997
from the Charge d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General; S/1997/181, letter dated 28 February
1997 from the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the text of the declaration by the Presidency on
behalf of the European Union on the decision of the Israeli
Government to approve construction plans for Har
Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim; and S/1997/182, identical letters
dated 3 March 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral and to the President of the Security Council.

The Government of Israel, the occupying Power,
decided on 26 February 1997 to build a new colonial
settlement in the area of Jabal Abu Ghniem in the
occupied Palestinian territories, This area is situated
within the territory which Israel annexed and considers
part of the extended municipal boundaries of the city of
Jerusalem. This decision is illegal and in blatant violation
of international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions. It provides for the building of 6,500
housing units on land that was confiscated in 1991 and
1992. This decision, which will bring approximately
25,000 new Israeli settlers into the area, will isolate areas
of Arab Jerusalem from the southern part of the West
Bank in pursuit of a long standing Israeli plan to build
settlements around those Arab neighbourhoods and to
completely isolate them from the rest of the West Bank,
thus creating new facts on the ground. The Israeli
Government took this decision despite the efforts of the
Palestinian side to prevent it and in disregard .of the
advice of a number of its friends, as well as in flagrant
defiance of this Council, which sought to avert the taking
of such a decision and avoid its great inherent dangers.

The President: The first speaker is the representative
of Palestine. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

This Israeli measure follows a series of others
regarding Jerusalem that constitute a clear policy aimed
at the Judaization of the city of Jerusalem and at changing
its legal status and its demographic composition. These
measures have included the destruction of a building
belonging to an Arab association in the Old City in an
attempt to confiscate the land beneath it. We raised this
matter in our letter to the President of the Security
Council of 27 August 1996, contained in document
S/1996/699. On 23 September 1996 the Israeli authorities
also opened the entrance to the tunnel in the vicinity of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, creating further changes in the
nature of the city. In this instance, Israel refused, as
usual, to abide by the Council’s resolution 1073 (1996),
which, in its first operative paragraph, called for

Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) (interpretation from
Arabic):, Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your

“the immediate cessation and reversal of all acts
which have resulted in the aggravation of the

3

Security Council
Fifty-second year
situation, and which have negative implications for the
Middle East peace process.” (res. 1073 (1996), pm-a.
1)

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
recognized Israeli sovereignty over West Jerusalem. We
call upon the international community to defend and
uphold its decision and to compel Israel to cease ignoring
these decisions and violating international law.

This resolution has yet to be implemented.
The Israeli Government also declared, during the
second week of December 1996, its intention to implement
a plan for the building of a colonial settlement composed of
more than 132 housing units for Jewish settlers in the heart
of East Jerusalem. If implemented, this plan would place
the new colonial settlement inside the original and
recognized frontiers of East Jerusalem in the populated
Arab quarter of Ras al-Amud, which would also overlook
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
The Israeli authorities are also continuing to deprive
the Palestinian inhabitants of Jerusalem of their natural and
inherited right to live in their city as did their ancestors.
Israel treats them like foreigners and has pursued all kinds
of illegal manoeuvers and measures to deprive them of their
right of residence. This includes, for example, its attempts
to enforce this measure on all who are living temporarily
outside Jerusalem or who have acquired a second
citizenship.
Furthermore, Israel has long enforced the isolation of
East Jerusalem from the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories and kept the Palestinian people out of the city,
despite the fact that it is their economic, cultural and
religious centre. This constitutes yet another Israeli attempt
to impose a de facto situation with regard to Jerusalem. It
is a blatant violation of the rights of the Palestinian people
and defies the will of the international community.
All of these actions represent flagrant violations of
several Security Council resolutions on the question of
Jerusalem, which is of central importance to the Palestinian
people, the Arab world and Islamic Ummah. Jerusalem was
the first @blah and is the third Holy Sanctuary; it is of
great importance to the followers of the three heavenly
religions and to the whole international community. The
Security
Council’s
relevant resolutions, including
resolutions 252 (1968), 271 (1969), 298 (1971), 478 (1980)
and 672 (1990), clearly affirm that any action or measure
taken by Israel to alter the legal status and the demographic
composition of the city is null and void and has no legal
validity. These resolutions also call upon Israel to cease all
such actions and measures. The international community
has categorically rejected Israel’s positions on Jerusalem
and has always affirmed that East Jerusalem is part of the
territories occupied since 1967. Furthermore, it has never

4

The Israeli violations in Jerusalem come in the
context of the resumption by this Israeli Government of
its colonial settlement campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Government has taken a
number of decisions and actions resulting in actual
construction in many places. In several letters addressed
to the Council, we have drawn attention to this matter and
to the extremely dangerous situation it produces. Once
again, this general Israeli policy, which has been
confirmed by the guidelines of the present Israeli
Government, clearly and grossly violates the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which this Council has
repeatedly validated in many of its resolutions - 24, to
be exact - reaffhming its applicability to all territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem. The policy also
violates several Security Council resolutions dealing
specifically with settlements, including resolutions 446
(1979), 452 (1979) and 465 (1980). We once again
reaffirm the illegality of the colonial settlements and
reject any attempt by the Israeli Government to make a
distinction between old and new settlements. We also
reject all the ramifications of the new construction,
including Israel’s confiscation of additional land, the
establishment of bypass roads, the theft of water and the
confiscation of our natural resources.
The historical shift that followed the signing of the
Declaration of Principles in 1993 and of the Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 1995
between the Government of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization has resulted in positive changes
in the Middle East region. The benefits of peace began to
appear on the horizon for the peoples of the Middle East
in particular, and for the whole world in general.
Unfortunately, this Israeli Government began to pursue
policies that ran counter to the spirit and the logic of the
peace process and began to take decisions and actions that
were in gross violation of the agreements reached. Such
policies, measures and actions are aimed at continuing to
alter the situation and the status of the city of Jerusalem
and to continue the colonial-settlement campaign in the
occupied territories. It was agreed in the Declaration of
Principles that the issue of Jerusalem and the settlements,
infer aliu, would be negotiated in the final stage. This
naturally implies that all parties should create no new
facts on the ground that would pre-empt the negotiations
and render them useless. If the peace process is to

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting
5 March 1997

continue and succeed, these Israeli policies and actions
cannot continue; such policies and actions would guarantee
the destruction of the peace process.

The President: I thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations for his kind words
addressed to me.

The Government of Israel must understand that it is
impossible to return to, its the practices and behaviour of
occupation without creating dangerous repercussions. It
must also understand that it is impossible to continue
occupying and confiscating land and to pursue the peace
process at the same time, and that it is impossible to
occupy and claim sole ownership of the city of Jerusalem
if it is to establish and maintain peaceful and natural
relations with its neighbours and the world. The city of
Jerusalem does not accept Israel’s exclusive ownership, and
there will be no peace in the region without the attainment
of Palestinian and Arab rights in the Holy City.

The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.

The General Assembly ended the deliberations of its
fifty-first session with a clear position regarding all issues
related to the question of Palestine and the situation in the
Middle East, including Jerusalem and the question of
settlements. The General Assembly adopted 19 resolutions
on Palestine by an ‘overwhelming majority, which is a
genuine reflection of the position of the international
community. We believe that the Security Council must take
this into consideration.
Israel, the occupying Power, must cease construction
on the colonial settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim and
promptly cease all settlement activities and confiscation of
land, as well as any actions that would change the facts on
the ground, especially in occupied East Jerusalem. Further,
we believe that the Security Council must take the
necessary action by adopting a clear resolution in order to
guarantee respect for its relevant resolutions and for
international law and to save the peace process. Such goals
fall within the Council’s responsibility to preserve
international peace and security, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter. Since the start of
the peace process, in accordance with its duties and
responsibilities, the Security Council has intervened on
several occasions to save this process and provide clear
support to its sponsors. We appreciate the Council’s
position and hope that it will be able to play this role once
again. We look forward to the establishment of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East region.
When that comes about, we will all be able to stop coming
to this Council to discuss this issue and to request that
actions be taken.

Mr. Peleg (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I would also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, for the very able manner
in which he conducted the affairs of the Council.
Jerusalem has been the capital of the State of Israel
since its rebirth in 1948 and the seat of Jewish
Government since King David established it as the centre
of Jewish national life some 3,000 years ago. Jerusalem’s
centrality to Judaism transcends geographical boundaries.
Three times a day, Jews at prayer around the world turn
to face Jerusalem. For 3,000 years, the thoughts, hopes
and prayers of the entire Jewish people have been focused
on Jerusalem. Indeed, the Bible mentions the name
Jerusalem 657 times.
Jerusalem is a city comprising many different
religious groups and has been a source of inspiration for
Christians and Muslims around the world.
I am a native of Jerusalem. I am of the generation
that remembers the divided Jerusalem that existed prior to
1967. I remember the walls, and I remember the barbed
wire that divided my home city. Since 1967, I am proud
to say, Jerusalem has been reunited; it is an open city
where freedom of worship is extended to all faiths.
1
Jerusalem today is Israel’s largest city, home to
578,000 residents. Of these, 411,900, or 71.2 per cent, are
Jewish and 166,900, or 28.2 per cent, are non-Jewish.
Since 1984, Jerusalem’s population has grown 30 per
cent, and estimates show that by the year 2Otl0,
Jerusalem’s population will be greater than 650,000.
Jerusalem is a vibrant, vital city where old sits
astride new and the modem and traditional worlds
converge. Jerusalem, like any other modern city, has
specific needs, such as development and modemization,
and municipal services must be extended to all its
citizens.
On 26 February this year, the Government of Israel
unanimously approved construction in Har Homa and in

5

Security Council
Fifty-second year
10 predominantly
Arab neighbourhoods throughout
Jerusalem. The new neighbourhood of Har Homa will
eventually consist of 6,500 housing units, 2,500 of which
will be built during the first stage of construction. The
neighbourhood will be located in an unpopulated area in
southern Jerusalem, within the city’s municipal boundaries.
Seventy-five per cent of the land necessary for the Har
Homa project is owned by individual Jews.
This project is an essential part of a comprehensive
municipal plan to construct 20,000 new housing units for
the city’s Jewish residents and 8,500 for the city’s Arab
residents - a ratio comparable to that of the Jewish and
Arab populations in the city. Concurrent with the
construction of Har Homa, infrastructure work designed to
construct 3,000 housing units in 10 predominantly Arab
neighbourhoods in the city will begin. This construction
will take place in Beit Safafa, Arav a-Swakharra, Jebel
M&bar,
Silwan, Ras al-Amud, Abu Tor, A-Tor, Asaviya,
Aswaui and A-She&h.
The purpose of this comprehensive project is to
alleviate the shortage of housing for both Jewish and Arab
residents of Jerusalem. Allow me to quote the Prime
Minister of Israel, Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu, who said,
“We are as committed to the Arab residents of
Jerusalem as we are to providing for the Jewish
residents. They, too, need housing and we will build,
adapting the building plans to the needs of both
populations.”
Regrettably, some speakers fail to differentiate
between the issue of Jerusalem and its neighbourhoods and
the issue of settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Both of these issues are to be negotiated
separately - I repeat, separately - within the context of
the permanent status negotiations.
The coming years will be crucial ones for the ArabIsraeli peace process. During this time, it is upon the
international community to exhibit restraint, understanding
and trust in the determination of Israel and its neighbours
to advance the peace process. Moreover, the international
community must avoid damaging the sensitive negotiations
by predetermining and prejudging their outcome.
I regret that once again the Security Council sees fit
to discuss issues of contention between Israel and the
Palestinians. The very appeal by the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to the Security Council is inconsistent
with its explicit agreement to settle all issues under dispute

6

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
through negotiations. This commitment is outlined by
PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat in his letter to the late
Prime Minister of Israel, Yitzhak Rabin, dated 9
September 1993. The Chairman wrote that
“the PLO commits itself to the Middle East peace
process and to a peaceful resolution of the conflict
between the two sides and declares that all
outstanding issues relating to the permanent status
will be resolved through negotiations.”
This commitment
is reiterated in both the
Declaration of Principles of 13 September 1993 and the
Interim Agreement of 28 September 1995, which refer
issues under dispute to the appropriate mechanisms of
coordination, cooperation and conciliation between the
parties without the involvement of outside parties.
Israel and the Palestinians are currently making
progress in the process of negotiation and reconciliation.
The peace process, based on the principle of reciprocity,
has thus far succeeded in establishing a new modus
vivendi between our two peoples. The most recent
expression of this peace process was the Hebron protocol
and the establishment of timetables for the resumption of
negotiation of the permanent status and the ftirther
redeployment of Israel’s defence forces in the West Bank.
In the agreement between the two sides, Israel and
the Palestinians agreed that the Palestinian autonomy
authorities have no powers or responsibility in Jerusalem.
Accordingly, their offices and institutions are to be
located only in those areas in which the Palestinian
autonomy enjoys territorial authority - namely, outside
Jerusalem. It was explicitly agreed that the authority of
the Palestinian autonomy would extend over the West
Bank and Gaza, to the exclusion of those issues to bediscussed in the permanent status negotiations, including
Jerusalem.
In agreeing that the issue of Jerusalem is to be part
of the permanent status negotiations, the parties
recognized Jerusalem as a separate issue which does not
constitute a part of the agreed arrangement for
redeployment and transfer of authorities in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. Life in Jerusalem, and all this entails,
continues, with the status of the city remaining unchanged
so long as no decision to the contrary is taken in the
permanent status negotiations.
Therefore, the approval of building plans within
Jerusalem, or the implementation of any construction

Security Council
Fifty-second year
work, does not constitute a change in the status of
Jerusalem; neither does it create a situation which can
adversely affect or influence the permanent status
negotiations. In any event, the existing agreements do not
accord the Palestinians any standing with regard to any
actions taken in Jerusalem, and Israel is under no obligation
to coordinate such actions with them or to consult with
them.
Jerusalem is currently in the midst of an
unprecedented surge of planning and development,
addressing the needs of all the city’s residents. The
Government of Israel is committed to the continued
development and growth of Jerusalem for the benefit of all
of its residents.
It is written in the Book of Zechariab,
“Thus saith the Lord: I am returned unto Zion and
will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem ... There shall yet
old men and old women dwell in the streets of
Jerusalem ... And the streets of the city shall be full of
boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.” (The
Holy Bible, Zechariah 8:3-5)

Let us turn this prophecy into a reality.
The President: I thank the representative of Israel for
his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretationfrom Arabic): At
the outset, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
I am confident that you will conduct the work of the
Council with great wisdom and professionalism. I would
also like to extend to the Permanent Representative of
Kenya our thanks for what he achieved last month.

3745th meeting
S March 1997
delegation of Egypt would like to recall the Security
Council meeting held on 12 May 1995, during which it
discussed Israel’s confiscation of Arab lands in East
Jerusalem, lands adjacent to those on which the Israeli
Government has decided to build housing units in Jabal
Abu Ghneim.
While the previous ,Israeli Government responded
positively to the will of the international community after
its expression of concern for the peace process, and did
not take the steps it had intended to take concerning the
confiscation of these lands, unfortunately, to the contrary,
the present Israeli Government did not hesitate to decide
to confiscate lands without any regard for the
repercussions of such a decision on the peace process.
The international community, as represented in the
organs of the United Nations; has more than once stood
up very decisively to the illegitimate Israeli measures
aimed at annexing East Jerusalem, whether by changing
the legal status of the city, by changing its demographic
composition or even by changing its geographical nature.
These attempts by Israel should not obscure the following
facts.
The first fact is that the city of East Jerusalem, like
all other lands and towns in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, is part and parcel of these lands. These lands were
acquired by Israel by force in the war of 1967. Such an
occupation does not acquire any legality with the passage
of time. According to international law, lands that have
been occupied by force have to be vacated. The
international community should not recognize such an
occupation, but should rather apply the principles and
doctrines for which the foundations were laid long ago.

The Security Council is seized today of a very
important question related to the future of the peace process
in the Middle East. Israeli settlement activity constitutes
one of the most complicated questions in the Arab-Israeli
conflict. It becomes more sensitive and complicated when
it relates to the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif - Jerusalem which has a unique political status and represents the
spiritual patrimony of three religions and is closdy linked
to deep religious feelings in the Islamic world.

The second fact is that those Arab lands, including
East Jerusalem, are governed by the Hague Rules of 1907
and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. This has
been confirmed by the General Assembly in all its
relevant resolutions, the last of which related to the
applicability of the Geneva Convention to occupied Arab
lands and was adopted during the last session of the
General Assembly. This makes it necessary for Israel,
being the occupying Power, not to undertake any change
in these lands.

The decision adopted by the Israeli Government on 26
February to build housing units in Jabal Abu Ghneim in
East Jerusalem should be discussed within the context of
past Security Council positions and resolutions. The

The third fact is that the Security Council has
adopted many resolutions calling upon Israel to respect its
obligations as the occupying Power. The representative
of Palestine referred to them: resolutions 252 (1968), 271

7

Security Council
Fifty-second year
(1969), 476 (1980), and 672 (1990). The most important of
this set of resolutions is resolution 478 (1980), which states
that
“all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, which
have altered or purport to alter the character and status
of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and in particular the
recent ‘basic law’ on Jerusalem, are null and void”.
(resolution 478 (1980), para. 3).

Respect for Security Council resolutions on the
question of Jerusalem represents one of the basic
requirements for the success of the peace process in the
Middle East. There is no doubt that any disregard for the
position of the international community on this sensitive
question would deal an abortive blow to the peace process
and bring it to a sad end. As the Council knows, many
parties, including large sectors of the Israeli population,
have made great efforts for it to succeed. Nor is there any
doubt that if the Council is silent about this, certain
questions will be raised concerning its resolutions.
The fourth fact is the bilateral agreements signed by
Israel and the Palestinian National Authority and the
implementation protocols make it binding on both parts not
to take any measures that deal an abortive blow or prejudge
the results of the negotiations on the questions of final
status, which as we know include Jerusalem, refugees,
settlements, borders and security arrangements. There is a
clear, uncontroversial ‘text contained in chapter five of the
Interim Agreement signed by both the Palestinian and
Israeli parties in Washington in September 1995:
(spoke in English)

“Neither side shall initiate or take any step that will
change the status of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
pending the outcome of the permanent status
negotiations.” (Interim Agreement on the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip, article XXX& para. 7)
(spoke in Arabic)

This text represents a restriction accepted by Israel, and
Israel must abide by this restriction that prevents Israel
from undertaking any change - I repeat, any change - in
the occupied Arab territories, including East Jerusalem.
Pacta

obligations:

8

sunt servandam -

respect for contractual
this is the basis of the current world order.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
Respect for that principle means, as set out in article 26
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, that
“every treaty in force is binding upon the parties to
it and must be performed by them in good faith”.
(United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 1155)

All parties, including the Security Council, must take that
legal principle into consideration when addressing this
very important question. Any violation of that principle
anywhere in the world, and in relation to any conflict,
reduces the credibility of the party that violates it, and
creates loopholes that undermine the international order.
The Security Council, under its Charter obligations,
must therefore stand against any attempt to avoid
international obligations, particularly when such an
attempt has a direct effect on the maintenance of
international peace.
Israel must cease its policy of building settlements.
Apart from its being a violation of international law, this
policy can only strengthen extremism and confrontation
and weaken those who support moderation and dialogue.
Countries concerned with the success of the peace
process - in particular the United States of America,
whose great efforts as a sponsor of the peace process are
recognized by all - must shoulder their responsibility to
point out to the Government of Israel the extremely
negative effects of its policies. Israel should not
implement this policy, in order to show that it is serious
about the peace process and about not allowing that
process to fail.
Egypt hopes that the Security Council will be able
today to adopt whatever decision is necessary to protect
peace in the Middle East, which is directly threatened by
these Israeli measures. This relates to the Council’s
position on Israeli policy in the occupied Arab territories
in general’ and in East Jerusalem in particular.
The President: I thank the representative of Egypt
for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The Security Council is meeting, as it has done several
times over the past 12 months, to discuss a situation that
endangers the Middle East peace process, and to reaffirm
its wish for that process to continue on the basis of the
agreements entered into by the parties.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The implementation of the Oslo agreement made it
possible to establish a lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. Only a short time ago, that goal might have
seemed unreachable. Thanks to the determination and will
of a few individuals, dialogue and negotiation have
overtaken violence and confrontation, One of those
statesman, a Prime Minister of Israel, Yitzhak Rabin, paid
for his commitment to peace with his life. Unfortunately,
there have been other victims on both sides in the violence
of recent months. This shows that the path to peace is a
tortuous one, a chaotic one; it shows too how essential it is
that no action or decision jeopardize this process, a process
which virtually all the States of the world support,
In our’ view, the Israeli Government decision to
authorize the establishment of a new settlement at Jabal
Abu Gneim is not a step in the right direction. As we,
along with our European Union partners, have said, we
deeply deplore that decision, which runs counter ro
international law and to guarantees that have been given,
While the signing of the Hebron agreement gave us hope
that the peace process would regain its momentum, this
decision creates new tensions on the ground and could
undermine the trust which must exist between the parties
and which is indispensable. In any negotiating process, it is
not good for an agreement - which constitutes progress to be followed by a retrograde measure.
The question of Jerusalem, a holy city that is sacred
to three major religious, is clearly a particularly sensitive
one. In the context of the peace process, the parties agreed
to negotiate its status. Negotiations cannot accommodate
unilateral decisions; they cannot accommodate decisions
that prejudge the outcome of the discussions; nor can they
accommodate decisions that alter the status quo.
Until the parties come to an agreement, East Jerusalem
remains subject to the principles set out in resolution
242 (19671, including the principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force. Moreover, we recall
that the Fourth Geneva Convention is applicable here, as
well as with respect to the other occupied territories.
We therefore urge all parties to the peace process to
do nothing that could complicate or slow down the process.
In the present case, we earnestly hope that the Israeli
authorities will understand that it is in the interest of all to
abandon the planned construction and to focus entirely on
the success of the forthcoming phases: the initial
redeployment of Israeli forces and specific negotiations
between the parties on the many issues that remain to be
resolved.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom):
The
international community has had to address itself to the
situation in the occupied Arab territories on three
occasions in recent months: the demolition of the Burj al
Laqlaq centre in August 1996, the opening of the Western
Wall tunnel in September, and now the announcement of
the plan to undertake the construction of new housing
units in the Har Homa/Jabel Abu Ghneim area of East
Jerusalem. Of course, we have also witnessed many
encouraging developments over the same period, notably
the signature of the Hebron agreement. Nevertheless, it is
worrying that we have been forced to revisit this subject
so often since last summer, and in response to what
appear to be increasingly serious incidents.
The issue of settlements has become central to the
whole Middle East peace process. For this reason, my
delegation feels it is important to reaffirm our positions of
principle on settlements, positions which are endorsed by
almost the entire international community. Two facts
stand out: first, as the British Foreign Secretary, Malcolm
Rifkind, made clear during a visit to Hebron on 3
November last year, all Israeli settlements in occupied
territory are illegal under Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. This includes settlements in East Jerusalem.
Secondly, settlement activities damage the peace process.
Not only do they violate the spirit of the Oslo accords
and the Hebron agreement, they establish facts on the
ground which prejudge the final status negotiations. In
particular, we cannot condone actions which unashamedly
change the status of Jerusalem ahead of those
negotiations.
The United Kingdom, along with the vast majority
of the international community, warmly welcomed the
recent agreement reached between the two parties over
withdrawal from Hebron. We hoped and believed that it
represented a new impetus for peace. Now the Har Homa
decision risks destroying the positive atmosphere created
by the Hebron agreement. Whatever Israel’s position on
Jerusalem, it is not in Israel’s interests to set back the
Palestinian track in this way.
We are struck by the wide degree of consensus
across the whole international community following the
Israeli decision to approve constructions at Har Homa.
The shared sense of dismay ought send a clear message
to the Israeli Government to rethink where its current
course is heading.
We have urged the Palestinian Authority to do what
it can to contain reactions among its people. The strength

9

Security Council
Fifty-second year
of Palestinian feeling on this issue is understandable, but
these feelings must be expressed peacefully and
responsibly. We commend them for the restraint they have
shown. Reciprocity, to which the Israeli Government
attaches such great importance, should argue for equal
restraint on their part in taking any action which will
inflame the situation. Further provocative actions at this
time, such as the closure of Palestinian institutions in the
absence of clear evidence that they are Palestinian
Authority institutions, cannot be sensible.
Israel must bear any consequences of a decision to
proceed with the construction of new settlements in East
Jerusalem. It is not reasonable to ask the Council to ignore
this dangerous turn of events, claiming that action by the
Council would only make matters worse. On the contrary,
it is the responsibility of the Council to make clear to the
Israeli Government that it must exercise caution and good
sense so that the situation can be restored to a more even
footing.
It is not too late for the Israeli Government to
suspend, or even rescind, its decision in principle to go
ahead with Har Homa. There is no reason for the actual
construction to start now. The previous Israeli
administration postponed similar plans to build in that area,
realising the danger such plans, if implemented, represented
for all communities. If the Israeli Government shows signs
that it is willing to change its hard-line stance, we would be
willing to consider a delay to Council reaction. But if the
Israelis are determined to proceed, I believe this Council
will, and should, be compelled to respond.
We believe that the Israeli Government should honour
its word not to build new settlements, including settlements
in East Jerusalem. But this in itself is not sufficient. The
Israeli Government must also halt the practice of enlarging
settlement boundaries and confiscating Palestinian land.
Building bypass roads to settlements can, on its own, alter
the status of the occupied territories and thereby pre-empt
the final-status negotiations. These roads have the effect of
isolating Palestinian towns from one another. Road-building
should take full account of the sensitivity of territorial
issues in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the
possible effects on final-status talks.
The British Government has urged the Israeli
Government not to proceed with its plans for a new
settlement in East Jerusalem. This would only detract from
the positive atmosphere created by the Hebron agreement
and undermine the successful negotiation of final-status
issues. The United Kingdom remains committed to the

10

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
final-status negotiations as the means to a peaceful
settlement. These talks are already hedged around with
difficulties. Neither side should seek to complicate them
further.
Mr. Soares (Portugal): The successful conclusion of
the Hebron agreement had led us to believe that Israel
and the Palestinians would at this moment be focusing on
the timely implementation of all agreements already
concluded and would by now be starting talks on the final
status of the occupied territories.
Instead we are now facing an element of
destabilization that risks jeopardizing the atmosphere
which should prevail to enable the parties to tackle the
crucial issues that remain to be addressed. I am referring,
naturally, to the decision by the Israeli Government to
build a new settlement in the southern part of East
Jerusalem, in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area.
This decision increases the frustration felt by all
those who support the peace process. Unfortunately, it
also encourages, perversely, the forces that are, directly or
indirectly, opposing peace.
The Israeli Government’s decision constitutes a
violation of numerous resolutions of the Security Council
and General Assembly, and also of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The Portuguese Government regrets the
decision and wishes the Israeli Government had not taken
it.
We believe that this measure is inconsistent with the
terms of reference upon which the peace process is based,
in particular Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We cannot accept any decisions that aim at
creating facts on the ground, prejudging the outcome of
the final-status negotiations. Such measures can only
undermine the indispensable trust and confidence that the
parties must build in order to achieve a just,
comprehensive and longstanding political settlement and
to establish a new relationship based on cooperation, from
which all countries of the region will benefit,
Moreover, the construction or the expansion of
settlements, particularly in East Jerusalem - perhaps the
most sensitive and emotional issue of the entire peace
process - would create additional obstacles to the
accomplishment of the ultimate goals of peace and
cooperation envisaged by the parties. It will also further
complicate the task of those engaged in mediating or
assisting the parties in the peace process.

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting
5 March 1997

The presidency of the European Union will also
address the Council on this subject. I should like to stress
that Portugal fully subscribes to its statement.

ease tensions, thereby creating a favourable atmosphere
for the further advancement of the Middle East peace
process,

Portugal firmly believes that there is no alternative to
the Middle East peace process. Therefore, we call upon the
Israeli authorities to refrain from any concrete action on
Jabal Abu Ghneim that would have a negative impact on
that process.

The Chinese Government has consistently supported
the Middle East peace process and stood for a political
settlement of the Middle East question on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of
land for peace. We believe that achieving peace in the
Middle East represents the common aspiration of the
peoples of all the countries in the region, conforms with
their fundamental interests and would contribute to peace
and stability throughout the world.

The Council must be clear and firm. Our purpose is to
preserve and encourage the peace process. Therefore, we
must urge parties to live up to their commitments and to
comply with their obligations under international law and
with the agreements they have reached. No one will
understand or accept it if the momentum towards peace is
lost as a result of disruptive actions by any of the parties.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The recent decision of the Israeli Government to
build Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem has received
considerable attention from the international community.
The Council’s holding of a formal meeting today
demonstrates the seriousness of this question as well as the
deep concern of the international community.
The Chinese delegation expresses its grave concern at
this move by the Israeli Government. We are of the view
that it is bound to place serious obstacles in the way of the
Palestine-Israel peace process and to be detrimental to the
Middle East peace process as a whole. We urge Israel to
call off its plan to build Jewish settlements in East
Jerusalem.
The Palestinian question is at the core of the situation
in the Middle East. An early, just, reasonable and lasting
solution to this question and the restoration of the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people are the keys to
peace, stability and development in the Middle East.
The question of Jerusalem should be settled by the
parties concerned through negotiations on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Any unilateral move
contrary to this approach should be avoided, since it will
only further complicate the question instead of contributing
to its proper settlement or to the Middle East peace process.
Peace has not come about easily in the Middle East
and should therefore be deeply cherished by the parties
concerned. We hope that the parties will avoid making any
move that might aggravate conflicts and undermine the
peace process. We encourage all positive efforts that help

Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): Moscow has learned with concern of the
decision of the Government of Israel to proceed with the
construction of a new residential settlement in East
Jerusalem.
We share the negative response of the Palestinians,
Arab and Islamic States, and the entire international
community to this ill- considered and untimely step taken
by Israel. Given the seriousness of the situation, Russia
supported the request of a group of Arab countries for an
urgent consideration of this issue at a formal meeting of
the Security Council. This meeting assumes special
significance since Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and President of the Palestinian National
Authority, is currently in New York.
Israel’s decision clouds the negotiating environment
in the Middle East in general, especially on the threshold
of the start ‘in mid-March of the final-status talks.
Unfortunately, all this is occurring after the agreements
on Hebron opened a road to progress on the PalestinianIsraeli track based on the fulfilment of commitments
undertaken by both sides.
The steps taken by Israel run counter to the
Palestinian-Israeli agreements reached, since they are,
factually speaking, designed to predetermine solutions to
issues that require discussion during the final-status talks,
the agenda for which includes the status of Jerusalem and
the future of settlements. Such unilateral actions, designed
to change the demographic composition of East Jerusalem
in favour of the Israeli population, perpetuate the policy
of fdit accompli with respect to the Holy City and
actually obviate a negotiated search for compromise on
the problem of Jerusalem. All of this is at variance with

13

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting
S March 1997

the direction of the peace process begun at the Madrid
Conference.

foundations for peace are laid down in Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978).

Believers, especially Muslims, are extremely sensitive
to any change in the status quo of East Jerusalem. Such
changes contradict relevant Security Council resolutions and
raise additional barriers to peace in the Middle East.

The direction and timetable of the Israeli and
Palestinian peace process was agreed to in the Declaration
of Principles of 1993 and the Interim Agreement of 1995.
The Hebron Protocol of 17 January 1997, concerning
Israeli redeployment in and from Hebron and aspects on
the further implementation of the Interim Agreement,
constitutes an important step towards strengthening
confidence between the parties.

The efforts of the Russian co-sponsor are currently
focused on energetically promoting a Palestinian-Israeli
dialogue and on the resumption in a constructive spirit of
the final-status talks. According to the Madrid formula, and
in compliance with the letter of the Palestinian-Israeli
accords, these talks must be based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Accordingly, the
principles set forth in these resolutions, including the
inadmissibility of acquiring foreign territories by force, are
applicable not only to the current situation but also to any
future solution of the East Jerusalem problem. Moreover,
the Palestinians’
right to self-determination
and
statehood - and we stress this in particular - can be
realized only on a basis of mutual acceptability and within
the framework of the peace process.
The issue of Israeli settlements in the Palestinian
territories will be stressed during the forthcoming contacts
with the Israeli leaders in Moscow. We hope that the Israeli
Government will find it possible to ponder all the
consequences of its decision and to reconsider it.
As a co-sponsor of the peace process, Russia is
convinced that the situation requires resolute action so as to
avoid a relapse into tension in Palestinian-Israeli i+elations,
as occurred last September. This, in our view, is the major
motive behind today’s Security Council meeting. A speedy
resolution of the situation in East Jerusalem would ensure
progress in the peace process and meet the interests of the
Palestinians and Israelis alike, as well as the desires of the
international community as a whole. We are sure that the
Security Council will again declare itself in favour of this.
Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Sweden fully associates itself
with the statement that will be made later in the debate by
the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.
Sweden is committed to the peace process, both
politically and economically. We support the right of the
Palestinians to self-deterniination, including their right to a
State of their own. This right can be fully realized only
through negotiations and only through a political process
can lasting security in the Middle East be achieved. The

12

The parties should continue to base their efforts on
what has been achieved so far and refrain from measures
that can threaten the peace process. In particular this
applies to measures that could prejudge the outcome of
the final status negotiations, including steps that would
change the status of the occupied territories. Accordingly,
the Government of Israel should reverse its settlement
policy.
Sweden has long been deeply concerned about
Israeli Government decisions and plans concerning
settlements on occupied territory. The most recent
decision concerns Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har Homa located
on the occupied West Bank in the Jerusalem area. My
Government considers that the construction of such
settlements is a grave obstacle to peace, incompatible with
the Declaration of Principles and in contravention of
international law, notably the Fourth Geneva Convention.
The framework laid down in the Declaration of
Principles between the Government of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) should be the
blueprint for an irreversible process. The peace efforts of
the Government of Israel and the Palestinians must be
brought to fruition. All parties have a formidable
responsibility to see to it that this endeavour becomes
reality.
Peace and stability in the region are an urgent
necessity not only to the parties and the region but to the
whole international community. We urge the Israeli
Government to reconsider its decision on the settlements
in Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har Homa and to reverse its
settlement policy. This will serve the peace process, the
Israeli and the Palestinian peoples, and international
security.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): As we all know, just
over a year ago the international community was full of
optimism regarding the progress towards peace in the

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Middle East, inspired by the success of the peaceful and
democratic elections in Palestine held on 20 January 1996.
Although Israeli-Palestinian relations went more or less
downhill for the rest of 1996, 1997 began on a positive
note with the momentous agreement to redeploy Israeli
forces from Hebron. My delegation believes that this
agreement holds particular significance, for it demonstrates
once again that, even if differences at first appear
insurmountable, those man-made differences can be
overcome through dialogue between the parties directly
concerned.
Now, however, a new man-made difficulty has arisen
in East Jerusalem which, if not handled with adequate
caution and prudence, could pose serious problems for the
entire peace process. My delegation considers the recent
Israeli decision to construct housing units in the southern
part of East Jerusalem as a step which runs contrary not
only to the relevant international conventions and Council
resolutions, but also to the acceleration of the peace
process, especially in light of the well-known political
sensitivities associated with the city.
At this juncture, we believe that it is crucially
important to prevent any weakening of the bonds of trust
and cooperation that have been built between the Israelis
and the Palestinians, especially following the Hebron
agreement, lest the fraying of those ties jeopardize the
entire peace process. This is all the more important as the
final-status negotiations - one of the most critical and
complex stages of the peace process - are scheduled to
start soon. Clearly, neither the Israelis nor the Palestinians
would benefit were the implementation
of Israel’s
construction plans to derail the entire peace process, as
already clearly evidenced through the events of last
September in Jerusalem.
Furthermore, we wish to emphasize the importance of
both sides’ adopting a prudent and level-headed approach
in the current circumstances. What has happened thus far is
indeed cause for serious concern, but in no way justifies a
violent response, which would only encourage extremism
on both sides, In this connection, a photograph in last
Friday’s New York Times, which showed a Palestinian
demonstrator holding an olive branch at the East Jerusalem
housing site, conveys an important symbolic message that
violence should not be a tool for solving problems.
Fully recognizing the far-reaching implications that the
Middle East carries for world peace and prosperity, the
Republic of Korea has consistently supported the peace
process in the region and closely followed its

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
implementation, Along with other members of the
international community, we too believe that the Israelis
and the Palestinians alike have a vital stake not only in
continuing but in accelerating the peace process. It is
therefore our sincere hope that a more fully fledged spirit
of compromise and. cooperation will prevail in their
relations. As my delegation emphasized before the
General Assembly during its debate on the situation in the
Middle East last fall, we believe that difficulties in the
Israeli-Palestinian relationship have often been caused by
the impact of domestic politics at the international level.
Solutions to these problems, therefore, can also be found
domestically.
By the same token, we firmly believe that, despite
setbacks, the truly impressive progress made in the peace
process so far proves that Israelis and Palestinians are
capable of mustering the courage, wisdom, and patience
they need to overcome the current difficulties.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the hope of my
delegation that the present tensions in East Jerusalem can
be promptly defused through open-ended dialogue
between the two sides, so that the Middle East peace
process can once again move forward on the course laid
out by the agreements freely entered into on the basis of
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
For many, the Middle East conflict has been an integral
part of the cultural baggage of today’s society. Over time,
we have come to associate this region with hatred and
violence and to believe that little can be done to avoid
this.
Nonetheless, events have proven those who think
this way to be wrong and that, with political will and a
sense of history, one could move towards initial solutions
that would pave the way to a new era. This has been the
inspiration of leaders of great moral stature, committed to
their peoples and guided by bold politics.
Over the past few years, the world has watched as
vital steps have been taken towards the establishment of
lasting peace and security for all in the Middle East
region, The Madrid Conference and the Oslo accords,
which were unthinkable just a few years ago, have shown
us that nothing is impossible. Rarely have international
agreements given rise to such hope and relief in the
international community. Once again, the Government of
Chile pays tribute to all those who made the start of this
peace process possible, and in particular Yitzhak Rabin

13

Security Council
Fifty-second year
and Yassar Arafat, who were honoured with the Nobel
Peace Prize for their contributions.
This has not been an easy process, however. Many
obstacles have emerged along the way and many more will
certainly surface. But that is not what is of concern to us;
it is not the most difficult aspect of the issue. History
shows that complex processes have always been rife with
great difficulties. Nonetheless, from the barbaric acts of
terrorism of last April, the closing of the borders and the
bombardment of Lebanon, to the latest elections in Israel
and the subsequent events with which we are all familiar,
it would appear that the spirit of Oslo is gradually losing
ground. This, in our opinion, is the most serious difficulty.
In September, the Security Council met on an
emergency basis to address the consequences of the
opening of the mosque tunnel, which left more than 70
dead and hundreds wounded. At that time, Chile called for
openness and a halt to the use of the tunnel. At the same
time, compliance with the agreements was becoming more
difficult, as was the continuation of the peace process,
particularly regarding Hebron. Fortunately, in the end and
at great cost, an understanding wasreached that should now
be fully implemented. As a result of the latest decisions
taken by the Israeli Government regarding East Jerusalem,
the Security Council is once again forced to take up the
question of the occupied territories at today’s meeting.
Jerusalem, as other speakers have said, is a holy city
for several cultures and religions. It is not just any city.
This is a place that sparks great sensitivities and deep
emotions. A delicate and precarious balance exists that must
be not only maintained but strengthened until definitive
agreements are implemented. This is the policy which the
international community has considered most fair and
correct. In this context, Israel’s annexation of East
Jerusalem has never been recognized by the international
community as a whole.
My country, as an integral part of this international
community,
recognizes the status established under
resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council as the only
valid status for the occupied territories, including Jerusalem.
This position has been reiterated over the years and recently
in this very room, by several Foreign Ministers, including
that of my own country, during the debate which took place
last September. We consider East Jerusalem to be an
occupied territory; consequently, we deeply deplore the
approval by the Government of Israel of a plan to build
6,500 housing units in the Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har Homa
sector, in the south of East Jerusalem, We believe that this

14

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
decision is not only in breach of international law, as
reflected by this Council’s resolutions, but that it also
seriously endangers the precarious stability of the region.
Indeed, the decision to proceed with these
settlements touches the most sensitive nerve of the
Palestinian people. These are disputed lands and this
decision creates the justified perception of a policy of fait
accompli aimed at maintaining total control over
Jerusalem. Furthermore, this settlement virtually cuts off
communications
between Bethlehem
and other
surrounding Palestinian settlements.
The last thing Chile wants is for the Security
Council to have to meet regularly on Middle East issues.
What we want are negotiations and direct agreements
between the parties that would make it unnecessary to
hold such meetings, time and time again in the future.
For this reason, we appeal for calm and for the
parties to refrain from any act of violence that might
make matters even worse. Naturally, we also make a
special appeal to Israel to reconsider its decision. We
believe that the parties should do everything possible to
advance dialogue in a framework of respect for
agreements reached and for the special sensitivities in
connection with Jerusalem.
The peace process, which has already come a long
way, should not be halted. It is necessary to reverse the
measure that has given rise to this latest dispute, and
Chile is prepared to support a Security Council draft
resolution in that connection.
Above all, it is necessary to restore the high-minded
spirit and the conviction that only dialogue and
negotiation, not unilateral actions, provide long-term
security for all. We must continue forward with the
process of implementing the peace agreements and secure
compliance with the resolutions of the Council on this
matter.
In conclusion, there are already too many standing
in the shadows and trying to block peace for other,
central actors to lose the spirit that made the first
agreement possible and thus weaken the spirit of Oslo.
Now is a time when political courage will once again
show the quality of leaders. Now is a time to dare to
write history, not to allow oneself to be carried away by
extreme positions of groups that, though they are
influential, are a minority. Chile trusts that good
judgement and common sense will prevail.

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting
5 March 1997

Mr. Owada (Japan): The Government of Japan has
been watching with great concern and anxiety the recent
developments in the Middle East involving the decision
made by the Government of Israel on the construction of
housing at Har Homa in East Jerusalem. It is particularly
unfortunate that this decision should have come in the wake
of an agreement that had been reached between Israel and
the Palestine Authority on Hebron, after the peace process
had been halted for several months in a turbulent situation
which involved the tragic assassination of Prime Minister
Rabin of Israel. It was Japan’s view that the agreement
symbolized a step forward towards advancing the
Palestinian track of the Middle East peace process.

“The immediate task on which action is
required is for the parties directly involved to
immediately engage in efforts to bridge the chasm of
mistrust that separates them by refraining from any
action which could do harm to the prospects of the
peace process. It is thus essential that they devote
themselves to practical confidence-building
measures .,. At the same time, on a more
fundamental level, it is imperative that the parties
directly involved intensify their efforts, in good faith
and with steadfast determination, to pursue the peace
process in order to restore peace throughout the
region.” (UPV.3698, Resumption I, p. 27)

The decision of the Government of Israel on the
construction of housing at Har Homa, or, in Arabic, Jabal
Abu Ghneim, coming as it did at such a juncture, must be
viewed against the background of these recent
developments. For this reason, the Government of Japan
feels bound to state that this decision on the part of the
Government of Israel is regrettable. In the view of my
Government, this action would seem to run the risk of
jeopardizing the basic situation concerning the occupied
territory and prejudging the outcome of the final status
negotiations. Furthermore, we cannot close our eyes to the
fact that the Government of Israel took its decision just at
a time when the Middle East peace process, particularly the
Palestinian track, is at a crucial stage.

That is exactly how the Government of Japan sees the
current situation at this time. There would be little cause
for optimism about progress in those negotiations unless
the parties concerned addressed the outstanding issues
with serious determination and in good faith.

Taking into account all these factors, the Prime
Minister of Japan, Mr. Ryutaro Hashimoto emphasized just
one week ago, on 27 February, when Foreign Minister
Levy of Israel visited Japan, that Japan regretted the
decision of the Government of Israel to construct housing
in East Jerusalem, as it constituted a negative factor for the
peace process. The Government of Japan has since been
urging the parties involved to make the utmost efforts not
to allow the present situation to develop into a major
obstacle to the peace process and to do their utmost to push
that process further forward.
I wish to recall that on the occasion of the Security
Council meeting on the situation in the occupied Arab
territories on 27 September 1996, I stated the position of
the Government of Japan as follows:
“Improvements to the present situation should be
carried out through a double-track approach. One task
is immediate and the other a more. fundamental
approach to the basic issues at the root of the
problem.

It is out of the same concern for restoring peace in
the region that Japan has been actively involvingitself in
the peace process in the Middle East, in particular
through active participation in the multilateral talks that
began with the Madrid Conference in October 1991.
Japan’s policy is based on its conviction that the Middle
East peace process is an extremely complex and delicate
process which for its success requires careful nurturing
through concrete measures of cooperation by the
international comrnun+y to buttress the efforts to be made
by the parties directly involved. Thus, my country, as a
member of the steering group, as well as gavelholder of
the working group on environment, has been instrumental
in providing a favourable environment that will assist the
direct talks among the parties concerned. Also as part of
those efforts, Japan has been implementing various
projects worth approximately $250 million to promote
Palestinian self-rule in its initial phase after the Oslo
accord. With a view to creating a new spirit of mutual
confidence and of joint cooperation among the counhies
in the region, Japan has been calling on the countries
concerned to convene a plenary meeting of the
environment working group, as well as a meeting of the
steering group for the multilateral talks at the earliest
possible time so that the Palestinian track may proceed
smoothly following the Hebron agreement.
Japan feels very strongly that it is most important,
particularly at this very difficult time, for the parties
directly involved to exercise self-restraint, strictly refrain
from any action that would pose an obstacle to the peace
process and do their utmost to bring the peace process

15

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting
5 March 1997

back on track as quickly as possible. Japan is committed to
assisting them in that endeavour to the best of its ability.

support for the peace process in that region, wishes to
make the following statement.

There is a very real danger that the Israeli decision
could lead to a crisis of confidence in which the erosion of
the process of peace might result. If that should take place,
the resulting mistrust and rancour among the parties could
destroy the very structure for peace in the Middle East, a
structure so assiduously built up over the years since Camp
David, Madrid and Oslo.

Costa Rica, true to the traditional principles of its
foreign policy, has always expressed its firm and
determined support for the peace process and, in the
context of its deep feelings of friendship for and solidarity
with all the peoples of that region, reiterates that peace,
stability and reconciliation in the Middle East should be
based on faithful compliance with the Oslo accords.

My delegation sincerely hopes that the parties
concerned will not lose sight at this juncture of the critical
importance of overcoming small differences for the sake of
promoting the cause of lasting peace and stability in the
region. In any great undertaking there is always a danger
that we may fail to see the forest for the trees. It is my
earnest hope that all parties concerned will focus their
endeavours on the forest and make their best efforts to offer
the people in the region a solid ground for hope for a more
peaceful and secure future.

Those principles will determine the positions taken
by our country in the Security Council, as the
Government of Costa Rica is convinced that the Oslo
accords are the path to peace and that the international
community has an obligation to contribute constructively
to the effective conclusion of this process in a spirit of
solidarity with Israel and the Palestinian National
Authority.

Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Over the last three years we
have been encouraged by the progress made in the peace
process in the Middle East. Kenya has been an advocate of
peace in that part of the world and has supported the
dialogue that has been evident between the parties.
We are concerned about any threats to the ongoing
negotiations. We believe that these negotiations have
proved to be fruitful so far, and we therefore call upon the
parties concerned to refrain from any activities that may
have the potential to undermine the peace process.
It is in that regard that we urge the parties in the
Middle East to exercise restraint at this stage and to
continue to negotiate on all the outstanding issues, including
the permanent status of Jerusalem.
On our part, we are determined to continue to support
the parties in their search for a durable, comprehensive, just
and permanent peace. The people of the region - both
Palestinians and Israelis - and the world at large want
peace.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (inrerpretution from
In the light of the recent events in the Middle
East, in particular the difftcult situation resulting from the
Israeli decision to build a housing project in Har Homa a traditionally Arab area in East Jerusalem - which is the
reason for the Security Council’s formal meeting today, the
Government of Costa Rica, in the context of its steadfast
Spanish):

16

Costa Rica therefore considers it of great importance
that all parties to the peace process should act in
accordance with the agreements made in Oslo, and that
the implementation of the agreements should continue
normally while the concrete and positive actions
necessary to achieve such a goal are carried out. This will
to achieve peace, which was expressed at Oslo and
reaffirmed by the signing of the Hebron protocol, should
be maintained at all costs, in order to overcome negative
situations that impede the proper implementation of
agreements.
Costa Rica believes that in the present circumstances
it is of the utmost importance for the parties to begin as
soon as possible the final stage of the negotiations aimed
at achieving all the necessary agreements for the
definition and establishment of a permanent status. This
should include the matters pending with regard to
settlements, refugees and the permanent status of
Jerusalem.
In this connection, our country wishes to take this
opportunity to reiterate its stance of full and unconditional
support and respect for all the consensual agreements that
may be undertaken during this final stage by Israel and
the Palestinian National Authority with regard to the
matters pending, including the status of Jerusalem and the
other matters addressed in the Oslo accord. Costa Rica
has supported the recognition of all the rights of the
Palestinian people since the General Assembly of the
United Nations adopted resolution 181 (II) on 29
November 1947, in particular its right to establish its own

Security Council
Fifty-second year
State. Costa Rica reaffirms this position and its willingness
to develop full relations of friendship and cooperation with
Palestine.
Costa Rica, also a friend of the State df Israel, pursues
an open and constructive policy regarding the situation in
the Middle East and has always supported Israel in its just
demands for secure borders. Our country also believes that,
unfortunately, in the current circumstances some positions
taken by certain radical Israeli political factions impede the
full realization of the Israeli people’s legitimate desire for
peace and the fulfilment of the Oslo accords. It is therefore
essential to maintain the spirit of Oslo.
My country trusts that the important mediatitig role
that the Government of the United States has undertaken
and continues to cany out, along with the importance of the
direct contacts between President William Clinton, Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the President of
the Palestinian National Authority, Yasser Arafat, will make
it possible to overcotie these difficulties and create the
necessary conditions to begin this last and essential stage of
the negotiations.
At the same time, my country believes that it is
essential to point out the important role that President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt and His Majesty King Hussein of Jordan
have played in the peace efforts. Both leaders have
dedicated their best efforts and national endeavours to
create the proper conditions to achieve peace and a
comprehensive solution to the conflicts in the Middle East.
In this context, and in full agreement with the
international community, my country firmly believes that a
firm and lasting peace in the Middle East should be based
on a wide and comprehensive vision that should necessarily
encompass all areas of disagreement. It must also include,
without exception, all the Governments in the region that
have some influence in the settlement of those con?icts.
Otherwise, peace in that sensitive part of the world will
always be precarious.
In this spirit, Costa Rica reaffirms its support for the
need to maintain and respect the territorial integrity and the
internationally recognized borders of Lebanon. It also
underlines that a comprehensive solution to the conflict in
the Middle East also requires a just and balanced solution
to the problem of the Syrian territories currently occupied
by Israel. Our country hopes that the developnient of
constructive negotiations in that direction will come to
complement and unify the current process of negotiations
between Israel and Palestine.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
Finally, my country, in its capacity as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council, believes this
to be an appropriate occasion to reaffirm its traditional
and historical policy in favour of peace and international
security through dialogue and negotiations that guarantee
the timely implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly of the United
Nations and the full observance of international law.
Mr. Cabral ‘(Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
ask you to convey our thanks to your predecessor, our
colleague and friend Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, for
the competence and talent with which he presided over
the work of the Council in February.
Every one of us bears an indelible memory of the
image of that handshake, in Washington in September
1993, between the President of the Palestinian Authority,
Mr. Yasser Arafat, and thk then Prime Minister of Israel,
Mr. Yitzhak Rabin, who w& assassinated in so cowardly
a manner in October 1995.
That day the whole world bore witness to an event
whose historical significance transcended the geographical
confines of the Middle East and the destiny of the peoples
involved. We felt then that we were experiencing an
extraordinary moment, and were virtual eye-witnesses to
a major turning point in the tortured history of ArabIsraeli relations. We thought that a new page had been
turned, bearing in bold capitals the inscription “Peace,
Reconciliation and Coexistence” - words that had been
absent for so long from daily human discourse in that part
of the world, because they had been drowned out by the
deafening thunder of guns and the indiscriminate blast of
bombs.
Our hopes knew no bounds. We were surprised to
find ourselves dreaming of friendship and harmony
between the Arab and the Israeli peoples. We believed in
the complete withdrawal of the occupation forces and in
an end to the hostilities that for so long had brought such
bloodshed to that part of the world and with it had
plunged so many families, on both sides, into mourning.
We thought that the reasons for killing one another and
for pursuing the war could not stand up to common sense
and would surely yield to reason. We had hoped to see,
on a horizon darkened by such great bitterness and
despair, a new dawn whose glow would enlighten the
hearts and minds of all in a region that had seen such
grief.

17

Security Council
Fifty-second year
To be sure, we knew that peace was not easily built,
and that great difficulties could be involved in such an
undertaking. But so many obstacles had been overcome and
so much progress had been achieved since the October
1991 Madrid Conference that we felt safe in our belief that
peace was now possible and lay within our grasp.
As in any process of this kind, goodwill and
determination are needed to overcome the uncertainties
inherent in the complexity of conflict. Without complete
understanding of what is really at stake, of the common
destiny that unites the peoples of the Middle East, lasting
peace cannot be established in a region where decades of
exclusion and hatred have left wounds that are difficult to
heal over.
Modern history teaches us that great political courage
and humanism are needed to overcome the prejudice and
fear that produce in us the fear of “the other”. It is the duty
of every statesman and every leader to resist short-sighted
pressure and to reject the ascendancy of policies that are
merely political.
The Israeli Government decision to establish new
Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem runs counter to the
spirit of peace that now prevails in the region, and
constitutes an additional obstacle to the creation of a
climate of understanding, reconciliation and religious
tolerance in that age-old holy city held so dear by the
world’s three great monotheistic religions, We must
remember the sacred nature of Jerusalem in order to
understand better the feelings of disagreement and
opposition engendered by such a decision - which
moreover is illegal, as it completely ignores the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The status of Jerusalem cannot be altered without
provoking the disapproval of the international community.
The measures decided upon by the Israeli Government have
added to the injustice of which the people of East
Jerusalem are already victims, having been evicted to make
room for newcomers. The resulting demographic change
and sociological imbalance have already exacerbated
tension and deepened the differences between the
Palestinians and the Israeli settlers.
It is up to the Israeli Government to show restraint
and to respect the rights of the Palestinians, many of whom,
having had their property confiscated, are living in
conditions that are intolerable and that violate their rights.
Under the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, Israel

18

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
must shoulder its responsibilities as the occupying Power.
Building new Jewish housing in the southern part of East
Jerusalem, in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area, where Arabs
have always lived, is senseless provocation, for it is
taking place at the very time when a new phase of
negotiations is beginning following the recent agreement
on Hebron. The Israeli Government must reverse its
decision, for the status of Jerusalem and all related
questions must be the subject of discussions in the
framework of the dynamic of peace that is already under
way.
For decades, the international community has sought
a solution to the Middle East conflict. If a settlement is to
be conclusive and lasting, it must result in full enjoyment
by the Palestinians of all their rights. The peace
process - some of whose vagaries we have already
mentioned in order to show how necessary it is that it be
consolidated - must continue on the terms agreed upon
by the Palestinian National Authority and the Israeli
Government. The pace and timetable must be maintained;
everything must be done to ensure that the rights of all
parties are taken into account, with respect for the
principles of justice and equity. The well-being of the
Jewish inhabitants of Jerusalem cannot be achieved at the
cost of the Palestinians being driven from their land. We
absolutely must correct the political and socio-economic
imbalances caused by 30 years of occupation.
In the Middle East as everywhere else, an end to
hostilities does not mean a return to peace. That requires
sincere commitment and exceptional abilities, not the least
of which is political courage. Will the Israeli leaders be
able to heed the call of the Security Council and act
accordingly?
Guinea-Bissau considers that the peace process must
continue, and must enjoy the unwavering support of the
international community.
The Palestinian National
Authority and the Israeli Government must try to
overcome all the obstacles to bring about a conclusive
peace based on respect for the inalienable rights of one
and all.
The history of the Middle East will record the heroic
sacrifices of those who have not hesitated to overcome
their own prejudices and oppose the ignorance and
intolerance of extremists of all stripes to show us the path
to follow: the path of dialogue, negotiation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, which has been so
forcefully advocated by the United Nations and so long
desired by the peoples of the region.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
We must hope that the supreme sacrifice of those who
have given their lives for the cause of peace in that part of
the world will continue to illuminate and inspire the
political leaders and the peoples of the region in their quest
for peace, justice and a better life for all.
The President: I thank the representative of GuineaBissau for the kind words he addressed to me and, through
me, to Ambassador Mahugu.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): We meet
today at a moment of great promise and great challenge in
the Middle East peace process. There can be no doubt of
the extraordinary progress made by the parties in their talks
to date.
In January, after intense negotiations, the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority reached an
agreement on Israeli withdrawal in Hebron, one of the most
contentious and divisive issues discussed by the parties to
date. That accord has now been implemented and a road
map for future progress on such issues as further
redeployment, the Gaza airport, safe passage, and economic
matters has been agreed to,
In February, the Government of Israel made good on
its pledge to release dozens of Palestinian women prisoners
in a further measure to respect prior agreements and build
confidence. In the coming weeks and months, we fully
expect the parties to proceed with further steps designed to
advance the peace process, including additional Israeli
redeployments from areas of the West Bank.
What these developments underscore is that the parties
retain the will, the commitment and the ability to move
forward, despite the considerable obstacles they face. Most
significantly, these achievements have come about because
the parties remain dedicated to the single most important
principle upon which the Madrid process was based: that
there is no substitute for direct negotiations between the
parties.
Unfortunately,
the announced decision of the
Government of Israel on the proposed Har Homa settlement
construction in East Jerusalem does not accord with the
progress the parties have achieved to date. The United
States is concerned by the decision announced by the Israeli
Government. As President Clinton said on Monday, the
United States would prefer that the Har Homa decision had
not been made. We believe that this decision undermines
the trust and confidence that is so badly needed if a lasting
peace is to be achieved. We know the sensitivity of the

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
issue of Jerusalem, and it is precisely because mutual
confidence is needed to deal with the permanent status
questions that we would have preferred this decision not
to have heen taken.
The international community has a responsibility too.
We must respect the will and the commitment of the
parties to move forward together along their chosen path
of negotiations. We must offer our support and
encouragement at every turn, just as the General
Assembly has each year in its annual resolution in support
of the Middle East peace process.
All parties share the goal of finding ways to advance
peace. We must do everything possible to foster a
supportive environment for permanent status negotiations,
which will begin later this month. We must be especially
sensitive to any actual or implied interference in these
negotiations. Such interference can only provoke mistrust
and harden the positions of both sides, which will make
further progress much more difficult. The Security
Council has a special responsibility in this regard.
I believe all of us in this Chamber want the same
things. We want to see continued progress in the Middle
East peace process. We want to encourage the parties to
resolve their differences directly, among themselves,
without resort to force or the threat of violence. Our goal
is a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement to the
conflict in the Middle East. Let me reiterate our view that
it is critically important that the parties and the Council
remain focused on the need to sustain and enhance
progress towards this goal. At a time when permanent
status negotiations are scheduled to resume, we should not
take any action that would detract from this objective and
which would make the tasks of the parties that much
more difficult.
The Council should keep these long-term goals in
mind as we consider the steps before us. As members of
the international community, we seek to assist the parties
to build a peaceful, prosperous and secure future in the
Middle East.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
As I am speaking at the end of this part of today’s
meeting, and as we share many of the views and opinions
presented so far by the members of the Council and
associate ourselves with the statement to be delivered by
the delegation of the Netherlands on behalf of the

19

Security Council
Fifty-second year
European Union, I should like to limit myself to the
presentation of the fundamental elements of the Polish
position on the present situation in the occupied territories.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

First, we believe that there is no alternative to the
peace process in the Middle East. Therefore, the Polish
Government welcomes every manifestation of progress in
the peace negotiations between the Israeli and the
Palestinian sides, as in the case of the successful conclusion
of the agreement on the redeployment of Israeli soldiers
from Hebron. It is extremely important that the entire peace
process be implemented smoothly and in a way that would
help to enhance confidence among the parties. That is why
we encourage the parties strictly to abide by the agreements
already reached and to continue their efforts to advance the
peace process.
Secondly, we hold the strong view that all sides
should refrain from any action that could have negative
implications for the peace process. The recent decision by
the Israeli Government to approve the construction of the
Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har Homa settlement in East Jerusalem,
if carried out, poses a danger to the peaceful future of the
region. We join others in appealing to the Israeli
Government to reconsider its position. Existing international
obligations and commitments should be respected. This is
of paramount importance on the eve of the resumption of
the final status negotiations.
Thirdly, the Polish Government is aware of the efforts
undertaken by several States aimed at defusing the present
tension and safeguarding the achievements of the peace
process. We welcome and support these initiatives, and we
call upon the parties to cooperate.
Finally, the Polish delegation is convinced that the
Security Council should send an appropriate message to the
parties reaffirming its interest in the situation in the
occupied Arab territories and calling upon them to
overcome the predicament in which the peace process has
found itself in recent days.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I should like to inform the Council that I have just
received a letter from the representative of the Philippines
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in

20

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mabilangan
(Philippines) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Norway. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. B&n Lian (Norway): Today’s meeting of the
Security Council comes at crucial point in the Middle
East peace process. Last year saw serious difficulties in
that process that at long last now seemed to have been
overcome, The signing and swift implementation of the
Hebron protocol in January was a long- awaited, practical
reconfirmation by the parties of their commitment to the
Oslo accords. We were gratified that the parties had yet
again demonstrated their capacity to transcend
disagreements and conclude agreements. The United
States deserves particular praise for its active support
during that negotiation process.
The consequent establishment of a multilateral
observer corps in Hebron, manned by personnel from
Denmark, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and
Turkey, also served to underline the undiminished
international support for the parties in their quest for
peace. And with the resumption of talks last month on
outstanding issues in the Interim Agreement, lost
momentum was regained and confidence rebuilt in the
Middle East peace process.
Against this background, Norway is deeply
concerned by the decision taken by Israel’s Government
to establish a new settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim/Har
Homa in East Jerusalem. Such settlement activities would
not only contravene the present legal status of East
Jerusalem but would also be in conflict with the spirit of
the Oslo agreements. At this critical juncture of the peace
process, when negotiations on final status issues are to
be initiated shortly, it is more important than ever that the
parties show restraint.
My authorities therefore urge the Israeli Government
to reconsider its’ decision. And we call, upon both Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to refrain from any action
that could change the facts on the ground and thus

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3745th meeting
5 March 1997

preempt the outcome of the negotiations on the final status
of Jerusalem.

outcome of the final-status talks should not even be
considered until the successful conclusion of the talks.

Rather than making unfortunate unilateral decisions,
the parties should now promote understanding between their
peoples and advance the negotiations towards a peaceful
settlement. We see this as their moral and political
obligation. The international community thus expects the
parties to follow the challenging course set out by the
Declaration of Principles and the subsequent agreements.
While difficult problems remain, the rewards will be high
in terms of prospects for lasting peace as well as economic
prosperity and well-being for their peoples.

How long can such vacillations continue before the
process is dealt a blow from which it cannot recover? The
future not only of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, but of the entire
Middle East peace process, hangs in the balance. In this
vein, I wish to reiterate Turkey’s unwavering support for
and belief in the Middle East peace process, which we
deem the only rational path leading to a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region. To achieve
this goal, we expect the parties to contribute positively to
the process on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Celem (Turkey): The Turkish Government is
seriously concerned about the latest decision of the Israeli
Government to approve a housing construction project in
the Jabal Abu Ghneim region of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in
defiance of the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. Although it is sugar-coated with the
simultaneous approval of scattered housing construction
projects for the Arab population of Al-Quds, everyone is
aware that the Israeli Government views this project as a
method to preempt the outcome of the negotiations on the
final status, particularly on the future of the Holy City equally holy for all three monotheistic religions.
The tragic events of last September, following another
decision of the Israeli Government regarding a holy site again in Al-Quds - are still vivid in our minds. The chain
of reactions provoked by that decision to open an
archaeological tunnel passing under the Al-Aqsa Mosque
complex should have taught a lesson to all the parties
involved on what not to do at this critical point in time.
Unilateral actions that may adversely affect the peace
process must be avoided at all costs. So far, much has been
achieved in peacemaking between the Arabs and the
Israelis, leading very recently to the protocol on Al-Khalil
and finally clearing the way for the final-status talks, which
will also include the negotiations on the future of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. At a time when the commitment demonstrated by
the Israeli Government to the established parametres of the
peace process was rekindling our hopes for the future of the
Middle East, the decision to allow construction in Jabal
Abu Ghneim has once again caused deep worries about the
success of the process. Any decision that could affect the

Therefore, my Government urges the Government of
Israel to reconsider and reverse its policy of resuming
such settlement activities in Jabal Abu Ghneim and other
occupied areas.
The President:
The next speaker is the
representative of Lebanon. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretution from
Arabic): May I first congratulate you, Sir, on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for this month.
May I also pay tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for his work as President of the
Council last month.
I would like to express our deep concern at the
persistence with which Israel, as an occupying Power, is
continuing to pursue illegal policies and measures in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, as
well as in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan. In particular,
Israel persists in establishing settlements in violation of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, the Hague Rules
of 1907, the 24 resolutions of the Security Council
regarding settlements and the resolutions of the General
Assembly on this matter. Such acts also seriously
endanger the peace process in general.
After the Madrid Peace Conference in 1991 laid the
foundation of the peace process, we had hoped to see a
new dawn in our region in which a just and lasting peace
could take root. The Arabs participated sincerely in this
process, but Israel’s persistent policy of establishing
settlements, expanding and confiscating lands have dashed
those hopes. The new Israeli Government has now dealt
a virtually fatal blow to those hopes by declaring

21

Security Council
Fifty-second year
explicitly its retreat from its obligations under the peace
process.
This Government makes settlement an integral part of
its policy priorities and no longer wishes to resume the
peaceful negotiations that had been taking place despite the
obstacles. This Government has taken serious new steps to
annex East Jerusalem. For the third time in seven months,
the Security Council is compelled to focus on Israel’s
illegal measures that have been adopted in regard to
occupied East Jerusalem that seek to enshrine policies
aimed at changing the legal status of that city and its
demographic composition.
A few days ago, the Israeli authorities announced their
decision to create a new settlement with 6,500 housing
units in the southern part of East Jerusalem, particularly in
Jabal Abu Ghneim. This is in the context of a series of
similar Israeli measures, including the declaration of intent
regarding the establishment of another settlement at Ras
al-Amud, within the original municipal borders of East
Jerusalem. The Israeli authorities have also demolished the
building belonging to the Burj al-Laqhq association within
the Old Citjr, thus opening the way to the creation of new
settlements in that building’s place.
All of this is a prelude to a gradual, progressive
campaign of expelling Palestinian Arabs from Jerusalem.
We have always warned that such Israeli policies and
illegal expansionist measures in Jerusalem, are of an
extremely serious nature. Jerusalem is a city of vital
importance to the Arab, Muslim and Christian worlds, as
well as to the international community and the three
revealed religions.
Similarly, the Israeli authorities continue to keep the
tunnel under Haram al-Sharif open, despite Security
Council resolution 1073 (19%).
We would therefore reaffirm the following. First, we
are in full solidarity with the Palestinian people, who refuse
to bend to occupation, under any occupying Power
whatsoever. Secondly, the current problem has not come
unannounced; it is the natural result of the current Israeli
Government’s ideology and policies. Consequently, in order
to address this problem, it is necessary for the international
community, as represented by this Council, to adopt a clear
position. This position must make it clear to the Israeli
Government that the international community rejects its
attempts to annex occupied Arab territories, including East
Jerusalem, as well as its settlement operations and activities
in those territories.

22

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
In calling for such a position, we wish it to be in the
service of peace in the region. The indulgence hitherto
shown the Israeli leaders has led to destruction and
violence for the Arab and Israeli peoples alike. Our stance
here is in keeping with all previous Security Council
resolutions and with international law. It is also in
keeping with the most noble concepts of international law,
which still constitutes the basic pillar of today’s civilized
world.
We believe that it is the duty of this Council to
place on equal footing all the decisions that it has adopted
to date and that it will adopt regarding the Middle East
and other regions of the world. We will never forget
Council resolutions 252 (l%S), 267 (1%9), 271 (1969),
298 (1971) and 476 (1975), according to which all
Israel’s legislative and administrative measures and
activities in Jerusalem are null and void as well as illegal.
Today, we call for a resolution clearly expressing the
international community’s rejection of and opposition to
Israel’s policies and measures aimed at annexing
Jerusalem and expanding settlements. In this resolution,
we must insist on specific measures that would lead Israel
to respect international law. We also call for a clear-cut
position that reflects the international community’s
commitment to seeking peace in conformity with the
Madrid principles, particularly that of land for peace, We
are called upon here to shoulder our historic
responsibilities, because time is no longer on the side of
peace. Events in the region threaten to cause everything
to explode, both there and elsewhere.
Thirdly, the argument continually used by the
Israelis in order to justify their expansionist and
settlement measures and upon which the various Israeli
Governments have based their actions no longer holds.
These measures have led to violence and increased
tension between Arabs and Israelis. How, indeed, can one
establish peace under continued occupation? A fait
accompli peace, imposed by force, is not viable and is
destined to fail. True peace is within our reach, provided
that it is founded on bases agreed upon by all.
We established these bases and foundations in
Madrid. The most important among them are those that
call for land for peace and full implementation of the
resolutions of international law demanding Israel’s
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem and the Golan, to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
keeping with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), as well as from Lebanon to the

Security Council
Fiftv-second year

internationally recognized Lebanese borders, in keeping
with resolution 425 (1978). The half-measures adopted in
the context of the peace process do not exempt Israel from
its responsibility or from the pressure of international public
opinion and the views of the international community as a
whole. The latter should not allow Israel to move forward
with its vast occupation plans.
Last, we would call on the two States sponsoring the
peace process in the Middle East to play a key role by
convincing Israel to postpone and cancel its decision to
build settlements at Jabal Abu Ghneim, to reverse and
definitively abandon these projects, to adopt measures to
accelerate the peace process as a whole and to return to the
point at which this process stopped, basing itself on the
Madrid principles and on the principle of exchanging land
for peace in keeping with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978).
Today, it is imperative that the two sponsors of the
peace process act to ensure that peace is relaunched, in
keeping with the principles agreed upon in Madrid, with the
goal of achieving a just and lasting global peace in the
region. We would also, through this Council, call on all
those who are actively involved to work seriously and take
decisive and prompt measures to convince Israel to return
to the agreements of Madrid as a frame of reference.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Yemen. I invite him to take the seat reserved for him at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend to you, Sir, our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that you
will ably conduct the work of the Council. I would also like
to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of Kenya, for
his excellent guidance of the work of the Council in
February.
The Security Council meets today in the face of
serious developments which imperil peace and security and
threaten to return the Middle East to the vicious circle of
conflict, tension and instability. The Israeli Government’s
decision on 26 February to built a new Jewish settlement at
Jabal Abu Ghneim, south of the Arab city of Jerusalem, is
a new and acute crisis that threatens the peace process,
which has already been shaken several times since the
Likud party came to power.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
The decision of the Israeli Government is a clear
violation of the principles upon which the peace process
was based and of all international laws and resolutions,
and in particular Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
252 (1968) and 338 (1973), which reaffirm the illegality
and illegitimacy of confiscating land by force and which
decide all actions and measures taken by Israel, including
the confiscation of land and property, to be null and void.
Such actions cannot change the status of the city of
Jerusalem.
Furthermore, the Israeli actions run counter to the
letter and spirit of the peace agreements signed between
Israel and the Palestinian party.
They also pre-empt the final-status negotiations and
constitute an attempt to impose a fait accompli on AlQuds Al-Sharif, one of the most important issues of the
peace process.
When the Arab Group addressed its letter to the
President of the Security Council before Israel took the
decision to build a new settlement, it did so in the hope
that the Security Council would take pre-emptive action
to compel Israel to put a halt to the Jabal Abu Ghneim
project. The Council did not act expeditiously, however.
Now that the Israeli Government has taken that decision
and is prepared to use force in order to implement it, the
Security Council is required once again to make a clear
pronouncement reaffirming the illegality
of the
confiscation of land by force and calling upon Israel to
reverse its decision and to cease all provocative action
that could threaten the peace process and the security of
the region.
The position of the Republic of Yemen with regard
to Israel’s decision to build a new settlement is
summarized in the following statement issued by the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Sanaa:
“The Republic of Yemen follows with grave
concern the Israeli decision to build a new Jewish
settlement in occupied East Jerusalem. This
represents a further escalation by Israel that will
create tension in the region and is an expression of
Israel’s ill-intentioned design to destroy and hinder
the peace process. It also represents Israel’s
complete disregard of all the agreements it has
concluded with the Arabs to promote the peace
process.

23

Security Council
Fifty-second year
“This new Israeli provocation and escalation does
not contribute to establishing an environment of
confidence. Rather, it pushes the region once again
into an atmosphere of confrontation and instability.
“While strongly denouncing and condemning this
Israeli action, the Republic of Yemen calls upon the
Security Council and all States concerned with the
peace process in the region - foremost among which
are the United States of America and the European
countries - to bring pressure to bear on Israel to
reverse this serious and provocative decision.
“The Republic of Yemen once again reiterates its
firm position on the peace process and the importance
of establishing a just and comprehensive peace based
on the restoration of all legitimate Arab rights and the
end of the Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab
territories in Palestine, the Golan and southern
Lebanon.
“The eyes of the world, in particular in the
Middle East, are focused on the Security Council in
the hope that it will shoulder its responsibility and
advance the peace process on the basis of its own
resolutions, which form the framework of all
agreements, including those signed between Israel and
the Palestinians. We call on the Security Council to
move speedily to avert all the dangers and impel the
peace process forward.”
The President: The next speaker is the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr, Ka (Senegal) Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(interpretation from French): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
I am sure that under your enlightened guidance the
Council’s work will be very successful. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Mahugu, Permanent Representative of Kenya,
for the exemplary manner in which he presided over the
work of the Council in February 1997.
I should like to thank the members of the Council for
giving me this opportunity, as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to participate in this important debate on the

24

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
decision taken by the Israeli authorities to build housing
for Jewish settlers in the area of Jabal Abu Ghneim in the
southern part of East Jerusalem.
Our Committee vehemently deplores this decision,
which is a violation of international law, the Fourth
GeFeva Convention and many relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions on the situation in
occupied Palestine. The decision was particularly untimely
in that on 15 January the Israeli Government and the
Palestine Liberation Organization had reached agreement
on redeployment in Hebron; that agreement, which was
regarded as a major event by the international community,
had given new impetus to the peace process.
The decision of the Israeli Government runs counter
to the letter and the spirit of the Declaration of Principles
on the Interim Self-Government Arrangements, which the
Israeli Government and the Palestine Liberation
Organization signed on 13 September 1993, as well as to
agreements reached later, particularly the Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, signed
in September 1995.
Moreover, this decision, along with the closing of
four Palestinian offices in East Jerusalem, has come at a
time when the Israeli army continues to seal off
Palestinian territories and is delaying its withdrawal from
some sectors in the West Bank, thereby jeopardizing the
continuation of the peace process. As these measures
were taken just before the new stage of negotiations on
Jerusalem, they seem to take on the character of
fait accompli. In short, this decision undermines the
credibility of the entire peace process and has created
undesirable tensions in the region at this crucial stage of
the status negotiations on the final status of the
Palestinian territories.
This new attempt to Judaize Jerusalem, coming after
the attempt in May 1995 and the various confiscations of
Palestinian land to establish or expand Israeli settlements,
have all provoked the general disapproval of the
international community and confounded sensibilities.
The sponsors of the peace process, as well as the
European Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, have all
unanimously condemned this policy. The Organization of
African Unity, whose Council of Ministers was meeting
at the time, also adopted a resolution reflecting the
concerns of the international community.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, through me, would like to
associate itself with this great movement in order urgently
to call upon the Israeli Government to refrain from altering
the physical character, the demographic composition and
the institutional structure of the city of Jerusalem and the
status of the Palestinian territories and other Arab territories
occupied since 1967. It calls upon Israel above all to
implement quickly and comprehensively the agreements
already concluded between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization in order to create the necessary
conditions for a just and lasting settlement on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 465
(1980) and 478 (1980).
The Committee believes that real political will is
essential to relaunching the peace process and to preventing
the current situation from deteriorating further, thus
damaging the efforts of many persons of good will to
establish an era of peace and stability in the Middle East.

3745th meeting
5 March 1997
As has been forcefully reaffirmed by previous
speakers, if we wish to achieve reconciliation, establish a
commonality of interests and realize the desire to live
shared by the Palestinian and Israeli parties, there is no
alternative to the agreements already reached.
History has often shown us over the course of the
centuries that attempts to impose demands solely by force
can only unleash a bloodbath and are usually doomed to
failure. The sooner the Israeli leaders recognize that peace
and stability are based on compromise and that mutual
interests and the establishment of a partnership cannot be
imposed unilaterally, the better it will be for all the
peoples of the region. The policies and attitudes of the
occupier and the denial of the legitimate rights and
aspirations of the Palestinian people are incompatible with
efforts to pursue the current peace process.
In convening this meeting, the members of the
Security Council have shown that the decision taken by
the Israeli Government is a source of major concern for
the international community as a whole. The Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People therefore hopes that, at the end of this
debate, the Council will demonstrate to world public
opinion its unshakable will to annul the Israeli decision to
build housing for Jewish settlers in Jabal Abu Ghneim
and to put an end to the policy of the Judaization of the
Holy City of Jerusalem, a symbol of peaceful coexistence
of peoples and religions.
It is time for all the peoples of the region, who have
brought such transcendental messages to the world, to
learn to live together, respect one another and create the
necessary conditions for peace and trust, the benefits of
which will redound to the entire region.
The President: There are further speakers on my
list. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the
consent of the Council, I intend to suspend the meeting
now.

25
