f”,, ‘/ 1 l\i ‘I I
h? )1’ t:.. I...*ia

nd

,’ l’li’-,

MEETING: 8 NOVEMBER 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1372) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President ........................

1

Adoption of the agenda

1

......................................

Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative
of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8218) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SlPV.1372

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
Jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York
President:

AND

on Wednesday,

Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTE (Mali).

Besent:
The representatives of the following States:
‘Argentina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia,
France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 372)

1. Adoption
2.

SEVENTY-SECOND

of the agenda.

Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8218).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): Before we
3egin our work I should like, on behalf of the Security
Council and in my capacity as President for the month of
November,
to pay a tribute to my predecessor,
Mr. Tsuruoka, the representative of Japan, for the valuable
iervice he rendered to the Council as President for the
nonth of October.
!. The outstanding ability and devotion shown by
vIr. Tsuruoka in conducting our deliberations helped in
arge measure to make our task less formidable. We should
ike to express our gratitude to him for having given us so
:ompletely
not only the benefit of his talents but also his
tie, patience and courtesy.
Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan) (translated from French):
of all I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
rour kind and flattering remarks. Although my merits are
‘ew, I assure you that I did my best to serve the cause of
Beace, a cause which is entirely consonant with the foreign
rolicy of Japan, the country which I represent here.

8 November

MEETING
1967, at 4 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The letter
dated 3 November 1967 from the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo [S/8218/ requesting
this meeting of the Council contains references to two
previous complaints which were submitted by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 21
September 1966 [S/7503/ and 6 July 1967 [S/8036] and
considered by the Council in October 1966 and July 1967.
These facts have been taken into account in drawing up the
provisional agenda for this meeting; that is why the
reference to the letter of 3 November is preceded by the
heading: “Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.
The agenda was adopted.
Complaints by the Democratic

Republic of the Congo

Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/821 8)

6. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, I should like, if there is no objection, to
invite the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to participate without vote in the discussion of this
agenda item.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Umba di Lutete
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a place at the
Council table.

I.

Tirst

I.

I should also like to offer you my warmest congratulaon this solemn occasion when you assume the
lresidency of the Security Council for the first time. I am
lappy to have the opportunity of working for peace under
rour direction, the more so since we already know you. We
;ot to know you during the informal meetings we held
luring the month of October. We know how able you are
Ind how devoted to the service of peace, and I am
:specially pleased to see you presiding over the Security
:ouncil.

7. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): In a cable
dated 5 November 1967 [S/8221], the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Portugal requested that the Portuguese delegation
be invited to participate without vote in the discussion of
this item. If I hear no objection, I shall invite the
representative of Portugal to take a seat at the Council
table.

ions

At the invitation of the President, Mi: F. de Miranda
(Portugal) took a place at the Council table.

8. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The President of the Security Council has also received communications from the representatives of Burundi, Zambia and
Algeria requesting that they be invited to participate
withnut vote in the discussion on this agenda item. Since

Rhodesia, to bear in mind that the existence of this
anachronistic situation on the very borders of our
country will continue to be a threat to our countrya”

there is not sufficient room at the Council table for all
these representatives I propose, in accordance with the
practice followed on previous occasions, to invite them to
take the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber. They will, of course, take a seat at the Council
table when it is their turn to speak.

[1367th meeting, para. 144.1

It should be noted that at that time our representative /lad
the gift of prophecy. He went on to say:
“Since all the members have shown today that they
favour peace in the Congo and uphold its territorial
integrity, they will no doubt find a practical way to put
an end to the colonial situation that exists in South
Africa.” [Ibid./

At the invitation of the President, Mr. T. Nsanzd
[Burundi), Mr. J. B. Mwemba (Zumbti) and Mr. I:
Bouattoura (Algeria) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

9. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): We shall
now proceed to the consideration of the second item on the
agenda. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on whom I now
call.

cang
once

autsidl
givenI
tl1eco
tlleir I
situatil
Congo
mercei
interve
Angoli
Nation
irxlSic

14. This is the third time in the space of a year that my
country has had to come before the Council in connexion
with a matter which has become, alas, all too notorious.
Portugal, which administers the territory of Angola, con.
tinues to represent a threat to my country’s territorial
integrity. In actual fact, the mercenaries stationed in
Angola launched an aggressive attack on our country on
1 November 1967, as can be seen from the letter dated
3 November 1967 from the representative of the Demo.
cratic Republic of the Congo [S/8218/ enclosing a letter
from the Congolese Minister for Foreign Affairs and
External Trade to the President of the Security Council.

10. Mr. UMBA DI LUTETE (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (translated from French): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you very much for allowing me to speak. I
shall try to make the most of this opportunity without
being too lengthy and abusing the Council’s patience.
Accordingly, I shall endeavour to be fairly brief, although
the facts which I must bring to the attention of the Council
and which most of you already know are extremely serious.

1.5. What does the first of November represent? In our
country, as in many others, it is All Saints’ Day. Therefore,
it is a holiday when we honour the saints. The second of
November is All Souls’ Day. In our country, we honour the
dead and we do not work on that day either. We had
relaxed our vigilance, so it was a good time for the
mercenaries stationed in Angola to attack the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

11. A little over a year ago, on 14 October 1966, the
Security Council adopted a resolution [226 (1966)] calling
upon Portugal not to allow the Territories under its
domination to be used for interfering in the domestic
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As will be
remembered, the complaint (S/7503/ arose from the
discovery of a training camp in the Department of Ardbche,
France. We had an opportunity of thanking the French
Government at the time for the attitude it took in the
matter. The complaint, therefore, came at the time of the
discovery of the Ardeche camp, a discovery which served
only to corroborate the information already in the possession of the Congolese Government, namely, that there were
training camps for mercenaries in Angola and that those
mercenaries were only waiting for the appropriate moment
to move into the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

16. Through the numerous paths along our common
border with Angola, bands of mercenaries invaded my
country via Luashi. From there, they advanced towards
Kisenge, an important town where manganese is mined.
There the mercenaries presented a requisition order signed
by the notorious mercenary and bandit Bob Denard for
trucks which happened to be there and they requisitioned
them on the spot.
17. Another group tried to outflank our troops by way 01
Bulolo, but since Bulolo is a large town, the soldiers;
stationed there were able to cope with them and crush the:
attack of the mercenaries. At Divuma, on the other hand,,
they requisitioned a rail car in order to go to Kasaji and.
then to Mutshasha. Figllting took place in those two placer;
and it was there that the mercenaries’ advance waschecked
There too most of the mercenaries were dispersed.

12. Mr. President, since Mali was a member of the Security
Council at that time, you are familiar with the spirited and
self-assured manner of the honourable representative of
Portugal, Mr. de Miranda. Not only did he deny that such
camps had ever existed in Angola; he said in essencethat
the Portuguese Government would not tolerate the existence of such camps and that the camp the existence of
which was being denounced in the Security Council was
nothing but a figment of our imagination.
13. I shall not dwell on how the distinguished representative of Portugal categorically denied what we contended
were the facts. Be that as it may, a few months later, on 10
July 1967, a meeting of this Council was convened to
consider a similar complaint [S/8036/. During the discussion which took place on that occasion, the representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo declared:

18. Where were the mercenaries heading? What were thei
plans? In the first place, they wanted to provoke a PoPuIal
uprising. In that way no one would have been able ta1
accuse the mercenaries and they would have been able te
repeat the same old refrain, that this was nothing but a~
internal conflict and that outside forces had absolutelb
nothing to do with it. Unfortunately for the mercenaries, 2
did not work. The local population did not obey them.

“But I should like to stress the need for the Security
Council, when it takes up the questions of Angola and

19. What else did the mercenaries want? They wanted to
reach Kolwezi, which is one of the large towns in the
2

20. T
comeI
weary
heretl
dispos
denoul
aware
neccss

21, E
Portug
manne
that t
border
An&
not ev
facts(
difficu
Mr,Pn
here ir

\vould
22, w
iinpres
press2
thefat
tion tc
23. M
factst
that I
disturl
fhePa
thesag
of tllol

24. I
that t

Chav&
should
Nova-(
membl
Caver
beens
lessin
Well I
soldie~
plates,
these1
havea

0, situated on a plain of great strategic importance.
:oflg they held that plain, they could receive help from
)flce
,,tside and establish an operational base which would have
then1 a firm foothold in the Democratic Republic of
~&ngo.
From here they could have gone to the help of
,,ejr friends in Bukavu; at that time, as you know, the
itoation was very bad for the mercenaries in Bukavu. The
:ongoIese National Army was gradually closing in on the
,er,-enaries in Bukavu. That was what motivated the
,teaention
of the mercenaries who entered through
,agoIa. Unfortunately for them and happily for us, the
lational Army was on the alert and was able to nip the
lvasion in the bud.

already have. These are not Portuguese soldiers; they are
mercenaries who are also training former Katangese

gendarmes.

25. I should also like to circulate to the members of the
Council a Belgian magazine which has reproduced and
enlarged most of these photographs. If I knew these
mercenaries or had anything to do with them, I might be
able to identify some of them. But since I have never had
the honour of meeting them, I cannot recognize them!
Members of the Council will be able to see clearly what is
shown in these photographs which, I repeat, were taken at
Nova-ChavBs. But let that be as it may. How did we manage
to obtain these photographs ? That is our business. The
members of the Council have only’to look at them.

0, This is the second time in 1967 that my country has
O,ne before this august Council, I was even afraid I might
,eary some of you by coming here. However, we come
,ere through no fault of our own. With so few means at our
isposal and such a weak position, we are forced to
enOunce this aggression in this Council, so that it will be
ware of what is happening and be able to take the
ecessary measuresagainst these forces of evil.

26. I have other things to say. When I was in Brussels
before coming here, I received the following note which I
have taken the trouble to have copied. It comes from the
Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and ExternaI Trade. I
feel that I am all the more justified in using this note as a
basis for my argument as no one can accuse me of collusion
with the Belgian Government. I also feel I can use it
because it is written on paper with an official letter-head by
an ally of Portugal, no less, indicating that it should be
regarded as an important document, This note, For which
the Belgian Government takes responsibility, takes up the
narration of events obtained from eyewitnesses who saw
the mercenaries attack, saw where they came from, saw
those who fled and those who returned to Angola and saw
how they fought. I hasten to add that this note was signed
by the Comte d’Urse1, Minister Plenipotentiary in the
Belgian Foreign Office. I should like to read it to YOU:
“Wednesday, 1 November. Eighteen European mercenaries and two Katangese gelzdarmesentered Kisenge.
They entered Kisenge on bicycles, coming from Luashi
over the Cornu Bridge.”

:l, Every time that we have come before this Council,
lortugal, in its usual composed, sadistic and cynical
nanner, has denied that anything happened in Angola, or
hat there were any mercenaries there who crossed the
,order to attack us. The fact that there are mercenaries in
ingola at this very moment is so self-evident that I should
ot even dwell upon it or make any effort to prove it. The
acts of the case are so simple that I would find it very
ifficult to prove them if I were asked. For example,
Ir. President, if I was asked to prove that you are sitting
ere in front of me, although it is quite obvious, to do SO
rould put me in a very difficult and embarrassing situation.
2. What I have to say will only serve to support the
npression and conviction you already have. Indeed, the
lress agencies on the spot have given you a full account of
hefacts and eyewitnesseshave provided abundant informaion to their Governments.

Kisenge is the place I was speaking about just now, where
there is a manganese mine, and Luashi, which I also
mentioned before, is the first important post reached by
the mercenaries on entering the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from Angola. The note continues:

:3. However, as for myself, I should like to bring a few
acts to the attention of the Council. I merely wish to add
llat some Governments, which have been particularly
‘isturbed by Portugal’s attitude, have remonstrated with
he Portuguese Government. But you know that it is always
he Same-Portugal is not disarming and even ridicules some
If tIlose who have approached its officials.

“They went to the headquarters of the B C K Corporation (the’ manganese mining firm) to requisition vehicles.
Their requisition order bore the letter-head of the
National Liberation Army and was signed by Denard. The
mercenaries, who had appropriated a truck, patrolled the
area of the town inhabited by the Congolese workers
firing machine-gun bursts into the air in order to
intimidate the people. However, considering that they
were too few in number to hold the whole town, they
ordered the European population, men, women and
children, to assemble at the Cercle d’Agr6ment. The
wounded were taken to a convent. This first group of
mercenaries was under the command of a Frenchman,
Major
Piret, and naturally included no Belgians. Most of
them were French, but there was one Colombian and one I
Viet.Namese. The group of mercenaries took UP battle
positionsalong the Divuma-Kisenge Road.”

y 1 can asserthere without any fear that I may be wrong
hat training camps for mercenaries do exist at Nova‘havhs, at Henrique de Carvalho and at Teixeira de Souza. I
houId like to distribute a few photographs taken at
J”va-Chav&s. I shall not comment upon them, since the
nembers of the Council will be able to see from them that I
Iaye not. deceived them These photographs were to have
“en sent to the young& brother of Mr. Tshombe, doubtess in order to show that the family’s money was being
lell spent! You may say: “But these are Portuguese
oldiers.” But you will see that the jeeps have no licence
‘lates, and that the soldiers are dressed as they please. If
hese were really Portuguese soldiers, I think that I should
lavc an even poorer opinion of Portuguese soldiers than I
3

Divuma is the place where the mercenaries rec$isitioned’a
Kii’ CZll-.
,*,.4..,
%.
‘.

:
A-

“Meanwhile three men left for Luashi in a truck to
bring reinforcements, expecting to return at midnight.

The facts, ,gentlemen, are quite plain and need no comment,
You have only to draw your own conclusions,

“Thursday, 2 November. After a quiet night without
any shooting, during which the mercenaries awaited
reinforcements, the three trucks returned at 11 a.m. with
about thirty whites armed with machine-guns, ammunition, mortars, and two bazookas. A few minutes later, the
Congolese National Army attacked in force with 150
men, according to the mercenaries. Thereupon, Major
Piret summoned the management of the manganese firm
and ordered them to evacuate the locality immediately.
At 5 pm., while the fighting was going on between the
mercenaries and the Congolese National Army, the
former using mortars and the latter sniping from the bush
where they had fanned out, the column of refugees set
out
in private cars with a small escort of mercenaries,
Only three wounded, two nuns, a nurse and a doctor
remained. However, at 5.30 p.m. the mercenaries gave the
order to evacuate the sick. They were evacuated to
Kaynnda in Angola, in a truck belonging to the TabacCongo Corporation.”

29. However, I should like to add in support of the
information I have just given a few quotations from an
article which appeared several days ago in The New York
Times. The New York Times of 5 November 1967 reported
that since last June there has been an intensive traffic in
arms of all kinds, including fighter planes, ammunitjon and
mercenaries, between Lisbon and African areas, especially
the troubled areas of Nigeria and Angola. This material and
these men are being delivered to the dissident forces in
Nigeria and mercenary camps in Angola. However, in spite
of these facts some Governments have remained sceptical.
But since everyone knows the facts which I have just laid
before you and some have had first hand experience of
them, they cannot but give the lie to the scepticism of some
Governments. Nearly 600 mercenaries have entered Angola
to date. Here they were joined by Bob Denard who, after
recuperating in a private hospital in Belgium, no less,
continued his convalescence where-in Lisbon, of coursewhile waiting to return to Angola, which washis jumpingoff point for another attack on the Congo.

27. Sometimes the representative of Portugal is not
familiar with the names of some places in Angola, but I did
not invent the name of Kayanda and I should like to
remind the Portuguese representative that Kayanda is
situated in Angola. I continue to quote:

30. But what is even more serious is that the planes taken
by Bob Denard when he was wounded and fleeing with a
group of mercenaries have not yet returned to the Congo,
and I should not be surprised if they were now in Angola. It
would be useless to go and look for them: planes fly and
you would never find them. Perhaps the Portuguese
authorities in Lisbon are unaware of all this. That is the
only excuse they can have. If Lisbon is really unaware of all
these facts, I have this to say: it is not possible for Lisbon
not to know what is going on. Portugal has a fanatical
police force known, I believe, as the PIDE. This police force
even tracks down Portuguese citizens and imposes incre.
dible sacrifices on them. With such a police force, of a type
highly suited to a colonialist and medieval country like
Portugal, how can Portugal be unaware of movements of
such great scope? Be that as it may, if Portugal were indeed
unaware of such movements, it would have reason to
comply with the various resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly calling upon the Lisbon Government to aticelerate the decolonization process.

“On the way, Dr. Baudry decided to call at the Kasaji
mission to pick up three nuns who had remained there.
The local Congolese told him that everything was quiet
there. However, contrary to their report, he ran into a
group of about fifty mercenaries who took him to their
command post. Here he found Bob Denard, who had his
men pick up the nuns from the mission, which wasabout
eleven kilometres
away. The journey was resumed
towards Luashi. The mercenaries had ordered the driver
of the truck to continue towards Kayanda in Angola,
taking care to flash his headlights and directional signals
ten kilometres before and beyond the border so that the
mercenaries would let him pass. In fact, the refugees
encountered many mercenaries in the area who, on seeing
the agreed signal, allowed them to pass. The truck arrived
in Kayanda (hence, in Angola) on Friday, 3 November, at
about four or five o’clock in the morning.

3 1. The Lisbon authorities are no doubt also unaware that
this traffic is co-ordinated by Mr. LaurBs, a Frenchman,
who buys the arms and ammunition from French, Spanish
and Swiss firms and transports them by means put at his
disposal by adventurers who obtain them from companies
such as Air France, Iberia, TAP, etc. In spite of all the
evidence, the Portuguese authorities are presumably also
unaware that mercenaries coming from Angola crossed the
Congolese border and started trouble in Katanga.

“Friday,
3 November.
In’ Kayanda (Angola), the
refugees were taken in hand by the Portuguese Army,
which offered a helicopter to transport the seriously
wounded and the doctors. Among the seriously wounded
were Mr. Stievenart and Father Van Peteghen, who had
been in hospital prior to these events. Mr. Sti6venart died
en route and was buried in Henrique de Carvalho (also in
Angola). On arriving in Luanda, the doctor and the
surviving wounded man boarded a plane for Brussels
where they arrived on 5 November at 10 a.m.”

32. Portugal is responsible for many of our troubles-I do
not say all our troubles, but many of them-and it is
certainly responsible for those about which we have just
learned. Consequently, Portugal should be penalized for its
reckless and criminal enterprises. In a word, what doesmY
country want? We repeat that we have suffered a great
deal, and many countries represented here have helped usin
our misfortunes. All we want is to live in peacein our Own
country, and we want both the Congolese and the

28. Thus the witnesses who made this statement arrived in
Brussels direct from Angola. I did not invent this, nor was
this statement issued by the Congo. Finally, the note says:
“AS
for the refugees who have remained in Angola,
their evacuation to Belgium will be arranged shortly.”

4

,

fcre&ners living among us to be able to go about their
businessin peace without having to defend themselves
against
highway robbers and mercenaries.

I-1
)

non-compliance
Council?

with

the

decisions of the Security

36. For our part, we would point out to the Western
Powers that Portugal is doing a disservice to the interests of
the West and of peace. Its African policy, which consists in
Perpetuating the monopoly of certain financial circles or in
resurrechng the old slavery-like concept of international
co-operation, is doomed to failure. As a Member of the
United Nations, Portugal’s attitude is contrary to the
obligations of the Charter. My Government therefore
requests that in addition to a unanimous and purely moral
condemnation of Portugal, concrete measures be taken
against that country.

33, mat has just happened in Bukavu-the destruction
caused by the mercenaries, all the ruined houses and
devastatedfields left behind by the foreigners, everything
that constitutes our country’s wealth and its infrastructure-all this has been destroyed through the fault of
cae country. I can understand. its reaction: that country is
not very rich itself, either in natural wealth or in intelligence,but this is no reason to bear a grudge against us.

34. Before concluding, there is still one important question which my delegation would like to see clarified. How is
it that such large bands of mercenaries can leave their
country, pass through Lisbon, arrive in Angola and continue their training there? In short, who pays them? In the
end, who reaps the benefit of these crimes? With respect to
this latest aggression of which we have been the victim, I
hasten to quote the proverb that it is an ill wind that blows
no one any good. This attack, this aggression against us
from Angola was perhaps necessary to some extent, since it
tore the mask away from Portugal once and for all. Up to
the present, as long as the mercenaries were in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, their mutinies have
always been regarded as an internal affair. Now the
mercenaries have COI~C from the outside and attacked us.
Portugal has been unmasked and cm no longer deny the
facts. But Portugal is like a toad which is accustomed to
walk with its belly on the ground. Perhaps we cannot now
ask Portugal to change its ways. It will not change; it will
continue to deny what it has always denied in the face of
the evidence. A man or a child can repudiate his mother,
but the biological bond between them is still there. This is
the casehere. Portugal may deny the facts, but the facts are
there and speak for themselves.

37. The progressiveforces of the young African States, the
movements towards emancipation and freedom in Africa,
carried out with the effective aid of justice-loving and
peace-loving peoples, are determined to fight and to
frustrate racist and colonialist policy in Africa.
38. After all the evidence which I have given the Council,
my country, which has suffered enough, only wants to be
left in peace with its neighbours and with all the nations of
the world. In view of that evidence, I would request the
Council-since that is all I can obtain from it-that this time
at least there be an unequivocal and unhesitating condemnation of Portugal’s attitude.
39. The second request I would make-for perhaps
Portugal may now pay attention-is a reaffirmation of the
Security Council’s previous resolutions concerning this
matter, particularly resolution 226 (1966) of 14 October
1966, and resolution 239 (1967) of 10 July 1967.
40. My third request to the Council is a condemnation of
the whale principle of mercenary armies. It is inconceivable
that men should be able to be hired aspaid killers to bring
devastation upon specific countries. In this connexion,
Member States should take whatever measures are necessary
to prevent the rec%ment of mercenaries in their territories. Some co&tries have already had occasion to take
such measures. Some countries have taken strong measures
when it a,ppeared that their territory might be used for such
purposes. I have already mentioned the case of France. It is
to be hoped that others will follow its example.

35. One may wonder how a small and, what is more, a
poor country like Portugal can continue to disregard the
unanimous wishes of the international community. Indeed,
the General Assembly has repeatedly called upon Portugal
to decolonizc. The Security Council has twice requested
Portugal not to use its territory to interfere in our domestic
affairs. But Portugal flouts the resolutions, wishes and
recommendations of the international community, even
though some, if not most, of those resolutions have always
been supported, at least verbally, by the great Powers. In
the circumstances, how can a country like Portugal persist
in flouting all these resolutions‘? In the relations between
Portugal and some of the great Western Powers are there
not, unfortunately, some disturbing elements, proof of
which may be seen by Wbt
is happening in so-called
Portuguese Africa? Is not Portugal encouraged to pursue its
colonialist policy through the sale ,by some great Western
Powersof arms and ammunition which are obviously used
for the relentless repression of the African population?
HOW can one fail to see a regrettable collusion between
Portugal and some Governments which allow their territory
to be used for the activities of imperialist and colonialist
forces directed against the liberation movements which
those same Governments claim to support? Is not this
contradiction between the words and deeds of those
Governments sufficient reason for Portugal’s obdurate

41. Finally, I ask that countries which have privileged
relations with Portugal should decline to support it in its
undertakings; for Portugal could not continue to gout the
resolutions of the international community if it did not feel
that it had the support-at least the tacit support-of
certain countries.
42. That js what I wanted to ask of the Council.
43. Now the only problem is that the mercenaries who
attacked US, and whom we defeated in Bukavu, are now in
Rwan’da and are going to return to their respective
countries. It is essential that their countries of origin, which
are going to give them asylum, should take the necessary
measures to prevent those mercenaries from using their
regular
channels to make another foray and from coming
back through Angola to attack us again. For what guarantee
5

Council and by the Secretary-General. The Portuguese offer
of investigation contrasted flagrantly with the ~asubstantiated Congolese accusation. Unfortunately our of.
fer was not followed up. Instead a resolution was adopted
asking Portugal to conduct itself towards the Congo ia
terms of its own declaration uf non-interference-an ea.
tirely superfluous resolution.

have we that these mercenaries will not return once they
have been evacuated? The example of Bob Denard is
particularly cogent, He was wounded, he left, he recuperated in a private hospital in Belgium, he then returned to
Lisbon, he recruited mercenaries and here he is again.
44. Those are the requests my delegation wishes to lay
before the Council. We earnestly hope that the sufferings
we have endured throughout the last few years, and
particularly this year, will induce the Council to heed our
requests.

50. Several months later, in July 1967, there was a
mercenary uprising in the Congo. The uprising was a purely
internal development in the Congolese Democratic Republic. Yet the Government of Kinshasa invented all sorts
of stories insinuating that the rebels had entered from
Angola and elsewhere and did not fail to send complaints
about Portugal to the Security Council. Portugal rejected
the complaints. Today everybody knows that the merce.
naries of Kisangani and Bukavu did not go there from
outside: they had been in the Congo all the time servingin
the Congolese armed forces.

45. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
46. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): Mr. President, it is my
pleasant duty to thank you for inviting me under the
relevant rules of procedure to participate in this debate and
through you I should also like to thank your colleagues in
the Council.

51. I mention those past facts in order to demonstrate
what I have stated: that whenever there is trouble inside the
Congo the Government of Kinshasa tries to throw the
blame on some outsider and finds Portugal a conveni8enl
target for that purpose.

47. A little over a year ago the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo came to this Council
with a complaint against Portugal (S/7503/. The Government of Kinshasa, on that occasion, could not establish
even a prima facie case; it could not produce the slightest
shred of evidence. Yet it wanted Portugal to be condemned
by this Council on no other basis than its own unfounded
and entirely gratuitous allegations. Then, without waiting
for a decision of the Council the Government of Kinshasa
acted on its own. After our embassy in Kinshasa was
attacked and our diplomatic and other personnel, including
our Chargk d’Affaires, manhandled, the Government of
Kinshasa, as if to demonstrate its solidarity with the
assailants, cut off diplomatic relations with us. Having done
that, the Government of Kinshasa came back to this
Council, which had meanwhile suspended its deliberations,
to reiterate its demand that Portugal be condemned, which
the Council of course did not do.

52. Before I go further, I must tell the Council most
emphatically that Portugal does not interfere in the internal
affairs of the Congo. Portugal practises the policy of good
neighbourliness and scrupulous respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of other States. Portugal has
followed that policy in relation to the Congo, Quite
independently
of any resolutions of the Sccuritj
Council-we do not need resolutions to do what we have
never failed to do spontaneously-and notwithstanding the
acts of hostility which the Government of Kinshasa
commits against us daily and avowedly, Portugal has not at
any time deflected from its policy of good neighbourliness.
For the last seven years the Congo has been promoting
armed aggression against us. It makes no secret of providing
bases and all sorts of other material aid to those who cross
into Angola on their murderous missions. Here in the
Security Council itself the Congolese Government has
admitted by word and in writing that it assiststhe groups
and individuals who carry out armed raids against Angola.

48. I recall these facts because they are indicative of the
peculiar processes which the Government of Kinshasa finds
convenient to adopt against Portugal in the United Nations,
while back home it indulges in daily acts of hostility against
Portugal. It all, fits into a single pattern. What we are
witnessing today is but a repeat performance of what the
Congolese Government did last year-and for the same
reason. Every time trouble flares up in the Congti, which as
everyone knows happens frequently enough, the Government of Kinshasa finds it convenient to blame Portugal.
And when the trouble deepens into a crisis, the Government of Kinshasa rushes to the Security Council with
dramatic accusations against Portugal. But the fact is that
the Government of Kinshasa is caught in a web of its own
making. It is not by coming to the Security Council with
false accusations against Portugal that Kinshasa will disentangle itself from that web. The diversionary tactic will
not help. Portugal has nothing to do with the internal
situation in the Congo.

53. Notwithstanding those avowed acts of hostility against
us we have not failed to be good neighbours to the
Democratic Republic. Without going into details of the
manifold assistance we have given the Congo, in former
times even at the personal request of its present Head of
State, I should like only to recall the inestimable serviceWe
continue to render to the Congo by keeping open our lilies
of transport for its external trade. The Congolese Govern.
ment does not seem to appreciate the fact that without oilr
co-operation its external trade would be facing enormoUs
difficulties to say the least. On the other hand, while the
Congolese Government has given basesin its territory to bc
utilized for armed attacks against us, we have not paid the
Congo back in the same coin, We have never allowedbases
in our territory nor consented that our territory shouldbe
utilized in any way for attacks against the Congo,

: 49. Last year the Congolese Government complained to
the Council about Portugal. It imagined that there were
mercenary basesin Angola. Portugal denied this and offered
to have the Congolese accusation investigated by the

54. Having made this categorical statement, which 1 ask
the Council to note, I now turn to the complaint wIA the
6

Government has brought against Portugal this
time, J request you, Mr. President, and the Members of the
Council, to examine the letter dated 3 November I967
from the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
coIlgo {,.$‘/8,218/. That letter begins with a rcferencc to an
earIjer letter sent by the Congolese Government to the
Security Council dated 10 August 1967 [S/8118/. That
letter has been fully answered by the Portuguese Government in its letter dated 19 August 1967 /S/8JZY/ to which
I drawthe attention of the ~OUIlCi~. The POrtUgUese
answer
js a point-by-point refutation of the Congolese complaints
of 28 July 1967 [S/8102] and 10 August 1967 [S/8118].
Congolese

border into Angola, perhaps thought that we were paying it
back in the same coin. In this it is mistaken. gut in this
connexion let me quote the official statement issued by the
Portuguese Government on 3 November 1967. The Portuguese Government, after alluding to the fanciful allegations
of the news media and the Congolese Government, says:
“With reference to the foregoing, the Portuguese
Government denies most emphatically the good foundation of these reports and desires to affirm categorically
that the Republic of the Congo has not been invaded or
threatened, or attacked by any Portuguese troops or
other forces, or by any foreign troops or other forces,
which might have been stationed in Angola. The Portuguese Government desires to affirm equally categoricaIly
that there are no bases in Angola and there have been
none at the service of mercenaries, nor have any groups,
whether armed or unarmed, crossed the frontier posts in
the direction of the Congo. The Portuguese Government
is not aware that any incidents took place along the
frontier. In view of the reports which have disseminated,
and although it is not essential to go from Angola in order
to get into the Congo, the local authorities are investigating, as a matter of scruple, whether along the extensive
frontier line there might have been any infiltrations other
than those which the Congo allows against Angola and
which are carried out by persons enjoying the protection
of the Congolese Government and having their military
basesin its territory.”

55. la the remaining text of the letter now under
consideration one searches up and down in vain for any
new grounds of accusation against Portugal. In fact, one
wonderson what grounds this complaint is based. There is a
description of mercenary activities inside the Congo, which
are sought to bc linked with messages said to have been
intercepted, apparently by the Congolese authorities. Now
what about those messages, Mr. President? I read from the
Congoleseletter: “A number of messages from Major
Schrammerequesting armed intervention on behalf of the
mercenarieshave been intercepted on their way to Angoia
from Bukavu.” [S/8218./ As this is the only ground on
which the Congolese Government bases its complaint it
callsfor somecomment.
56, Granted that the Congolese Government captured
messages:who sent them? Major Schramme. Portugal has
nothing to do with that. From where were they sent?
From Bukavu. Portugal has nothing to do with that. To
whom were they sent? That is not stated, but they are said
to havebeen intercepted in transit on their way to Angola.
Werethey addressed to someone inside Angola? Were they
going between Bukavu and the Angola frontier but addressedto someone inside the Congolese Territory? If the
latter werethe case, Pdrtugal is evidently not concerned at
all, But would the Portuguese authorities be responsible if
messages
were addressed by Major Schramme from Bukavu
to someone inside Angola? If someone here in New York
wereto receive a messagefrom abroad, would the American
authorities be held responsible?

The Portuguese Government’s statement goes on:
“The Portuguese Government, like all other Governments, has received other reports giving accounts of
unrest in various parts of the Congo. In order to explain
or justify that unrest, it is not correct to seek to throw
the responsibility on Portugal. The Portuguese Government desires, on the other hand, to recall the numerous
invitations it has already addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to visit Angola, a.nd to the
Congolese Government, on the terms which were indicated, to investigate the alleged mercenary bases which,
according to the Congolese Government, exist in that
Province. These invitations were never accepted, and the
least hat can be said is that it must be considered hardly
proper for organizations and governments to insist on
gratuitous accusations which they refuse to investigate.”

57, But supposing, for argument’s sake, that Major
Schrammedid ask for help from Angola, What followed for
which the Portuguese authorities could be held responsible? The mischief, as far as the Portuguese authorities are
concerned, is not in someone having received messages
asking for help supposing, I repeat, for argument’s sake,
that they were received. The mischief would arise if, as a
resultof suchmessages,help were sent from Angola.

I should like to repeat this part of the Portuguese
Government’s press note:
“These invitations were never accepted, and the least
that can be said is that it must be considered hardly
proper for organizations and governments to insist on
gratuitous accusations which they refuse to investigate.

58, Let us examine that point. It seems to my delegation a
matter of no mean significance that certain news media
undertook to invent and propagate the wildest fantasies
alleging an invasion of the Congo from Angola, and that
Portuguese and foreign troops had crossed the border
supportedby heavy artillery, aviation, etc.

“In the course of the last two years, the Congolese
Government has levelled the same kind of accusations a
number of times and has asked the Security Council to
take up its complaints as a matter of urgency. lt could
never produce
any proof, and all that it succeeded in
doing
has been to bring discredit on its own attitudes and
to lower the prestige of the Security Council.”

5% Later the Congolese Government no longer alleged an
invasion but an infiltration of some hundred mercenaries
acrossthe Angolan border. The Congolese Government,
whichofficially allows infiltrations of armed men across the

The Portuguese
7

Government’s statement Says in CCdUSioIl:

---

“In the face of the present allegations, the Portuguese
Government maintains the above-mentioned invitations
and insists that they be accepted with a view to assessing
the grounds of the accusations, which have been given a
facile hearing in certain international circles.”

in Angola without
authorities.

the knowledge of the Portugue

64. I do not think that anyone will doubt that in facta
new contingent of mercenaries has just arrived. And1do
not imagine that anyone can suggest that they calnefro,,
anywhere else. It is and was a clear duty of the Portugue
Government to take every possible measure to preventan
force from assembling in Angolan territory or usingAnIola
as a base. Still more, it is their positive duty to preye
mercenaries from attacking the Congo from Angola.

60. I have read out the statement which the Portuguese
Government issued, and which I think answers in fi.111the
accusations brought against us by the Congolese Government. I have not had time to examine the exhibits which
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has circulated here in the Council and I certainly cannot
comment off-hand on the alleged Belgian document which
he read out some moments ago. I should like to go into
these matters carefully and, if I find it necessary, should
like to reply. Therefore I should like to reserve my
delegation’s right to intervene again. But I think the
purposes of this debate will be served by what I have
already stated and, having’ read out the official statement of
my Government, I need only reiterate here the invitation to
investigate the charges which the Congolese Government
gratuitously levels against us. We have nothing to conceal,
and we can give no better proof of our good faith than
to ask the Council to investigate their charges.

65. I am glad that the representative of PortugalllaE
informed us that an inquiry is being undertaken byihe
Portuguese authorities. But if the facts reported to usa,3
established, that the force of mercenaries in fact entere
the Congo from Angola, then my Government, aadi&d
all Governments here represented, could not fail to be
gravely disturbed. And all those who had made slicha
mercenary attack possible would carry a very heab
responsibility indeed.

66. The stand of my Government is based 011the
resolution [239 (1967)] we adopted in July 1967andon
the necessity of preventing external intetierence of 81~
kind in the internal affairs of the Congo. It is basedontll
necessity of putting a stop to all mercenary interventio
which has led to so much needless terror and bloodshed.\k
have a right and a duty to expect the PortugueseGover
ment faithfully to discharge its responsibility to suppo
and observe those clear requirements.

61. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): We daily read
accounts of the confused and tangled situation in the
Congo. It is not by any means easy to be clear or confident
in our conclusions but one thing is plain, one thing we can
be sure about. We can be sure of the baneful and evil
consequences of the activities of these new mercenary
intruders. Mercenaries are the curse of the Congo. They
stand in the way of a return to order and peace; they are
barriers on the hard road back to constructive development
and revived prosperity. They perpetuate the violence and
destruction, and disruption too, which have plagued the
Congo for far too long. It is the clear duty of this Council
to do everything possible to eliminate this evil. It is a
responsibility which must surely be recognized and faced
by every one of us.

67. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, allown
first of all to take this opportunity of addressingto youmy
delegation’s felicitations and best wishes on your electio
to the high office of President of the Security Councilh
the month of November.

68. You are one of the latest to join our ranks,but
already, within the short span of time of close associat
with us in the work of the Council, you have impressed
with your great qualities of wisdom and good judgemen
You have thus lived up to the high tradition alrea
established by your predecessors at the United Nations,ac
we all feel sure that your presence here will ensure
the
valuable contribution that your country has been lnaki@
work of our Organization. The Ethiopian delegationwisll
to assure you of its whole-hearted co-operation in lilt
fulfilment of the high mission entrusted to you duri%thes
critical times.

62. I said last July in this Council [1367th nzeeting] that
we consider it vital, if the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is to be permitted to develop peacefully, that there
should be no external interference whatsoever from any
source in its internal affairs. We voted for Security Council
resolution 239 (1967) of 10 July 1967 calling on Governments to ensure that their territories are not used for the
planning of subversion and the recruitment, training and
transit of mercenaries designed to overthrow the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is with
that resolution in mind that we must now deal with the
present situation.

69. Once again the Security Council is ccnveni@t0
consider a matter with which it should by now be familia
foreign subversion against the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo. Foreign interference is by no means newto the
Congo. The Congo was, in fact, baptised at its indepen
ence by disorder and by chaos provoked by foreig
intervention. This intervention has continued UPtonowi
one guise or another, The only difference is that toda
more indirect and more subtle methods of interventiona
being employed.

63. It will be a matter of most serious concern if it is
shown that the resolution of the Council has been
disregarded or flouted. I am not going to attempt now to
state conclusions on the reports we have received. Without
an impartial inquiry, I agree that it is difficult to know all
the facts, But I say now that in spite of what the
representative of Portugal has said to us today, it is hard-it
is very hard-to believe that the latest band of mercenaries,
who apparently came into the Katanga Province of the
Congo from Angola, could have been assembled and armed

70 The United Nations has of course, been &edofrhe
question of foreign interveniion in the domestic affairs
8

the Congo since the independence of that nation. Thus the
various forms this interference assumed, and the various
stages it passed through, are all too well known for me to
necessitate a recital of events. The very first resolution
which the Council adopted on the Congo in 1960
(143 (1960)/ contained a demand that foreign interference
in the domestic affairs of the Congo should cease and that
the United Nations should assist the Government of the
Congo in maintaining law and order. Characteristically,
nearly all the other resolutions adopted subsequently, both
by the Security Council and the General Assembly, either
affirmed the necessity of preventing foreign interference, or
have called for the cessation of foreign interference.

ments have been accumulating evidence for weeks of its
presence there. Washington was right to emphasize
‘strongly’ to Portugal its ‘grave disquiet’ over this dcvelopment .”
Again, TheNew

York Times went on to say:

“The thrust from Angola into Katanga is evidently
linked to the presence in Bukavu of the forces led by the
Belgian, Col. Jean Schramme . . .
“The ramifications of this latest development, if it is
not checked quickly, could be very dangerous. Many
Africans arc convinced that the white minority regimes in
South Africa, Rhodesia and the Portugue’se territories
have been planning a power move against hostile African
governments to the north. They believe the invasion of
the Congo represents a first step in that strategy.”

71. Only three months ago, the Security Council, concerned by the threat posed by foreign interference to the
independence and the territorial integrity of the Congo, in
its resolution 239 (1967), condemned any State which
“persists in permitting or tolerating the recruitment of
mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with
the objective of overthrowing the Governments of States
Members of the United Nations”. Again, in its resolution
226 (1966) of 14 October 1966, the Security Council was
even more pointed in its request. In that resolution the
Council urged “the Government of Portugal, in view of its
own statement, not to allow foreign mercenaries to use
Angola as a base of operation for interfering in the
domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.

This telling and informative analysis was followed by a
report on Sunday, 5 November 1967, in which The New
York Times said that Lisbon was seen as becoming
increasingly the centre for a traffic of arms and mercenaries
and that Lisbon airport was the jump-off point for what
had developed into a regular airlift to the Portuguese
territory of Angola. The cargoes were a mixed bag of
people and arms from various sources.
75. The Congolese Foreign Minister in his letter of
3 November 1967 to the President of the Council [see
S/8218/ requesting a meeting of the Council states that

72. Having regard to this history of foreign interference, a
history of a continuing and persistent intervention from
outside since the independence of that country, it is quite
understandable that we should have listened with much
concern and preoccupation to the statement just made by
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As it has always done in the past, my country
hastens to declare its solidarity with this sister African
nation, which is once again a victim of foreign machinations
and interference. The serious development that the Deputy
Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has brought to our attention today is but part of a greater
offensive launched by the enemies of African independence, The latest manifestations of intervention and subversion are the continuation of that same action which the
United Nations has repeatedly condemned and with which
the United Nations has continually sought to cope.

‘6. . * an armed band of mercenaries invaded the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo at Kisenge.
They went to Kasaji, where they seized a track motor car,
and they are now approaching Kolwezi”.
The Foreign Minister went on to say that this band
occupied Mutshatsha at 1 p.m. local time on 2 November.
76. As was to be expected, the Portuguese Government
has of course characteristically denied that it has ever been
responsible for such activities, but the statement made
today by its representative is as convincing, I am afraid, as
other Portuguese declarations in this regard. There is one
thing that cannot be denied, These activities take place.
And if they do take place such activities cannot simply
come from out of thin air.

73. Today, once again, the evidence of interference and
subversion in the Congo is at the doorstep of Portugal. The
launching pad for these activities is, of course, Angola, a
territory under Portuguese control. The evidence is there
for all to see, and those who are engaging in these acts of
international banditry have made little effort to hide their
hideous deeds from the international community or the
world press.

77. On the contrary, it is clearly obvious that operations
of the magnitude and character that have been launched
from Angola against the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through the instrumentality of mercenaries could not have
taken place without the knowledge and, I would even say,
the tolerance of the Portuguese authorities. That much the
international community at large must recognize. To us,
and surely to all impartial observers, Portuguese complicity
in organizing such operations must be all too evident.
Subversive operations carried out by mercenaries with the
overt and covert assistance of the twin alliance of colonialism and racism have increasingly become a source of
concern to African Governments. The long-term consequences of this offensive, launched through the instrumentality of nameless and faceless soldiers of fortune, a

‘74. The New York Times, which is usually authoritative,
had this to say in its editorial columns on Saturday,
4 November 1967, with regard to the activities and preparations of white mercenaries on Portuguese controlled
territories:

“Portugal denies that the mercenary force came from
Angola, but the United States and other Western Govern9

method clearly designed to “denationalize”
intervention,
have recently been examined by African Governments at
the highest level. The fourth session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity, which met in September 1967 in the capital
city of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, addressing
itself to the problem posed by mercenary activities,
considered all such activities a serious threat to the security
of African States, and the continued presence of mercenaries, as a danger that would inevitably arouse strong and
destructive feelings and put in jeopardy the lives of
foreigners in the Continent. The Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African Unity
also condemned the aggression of mercenaries against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and called upon the
United Nations to deplore and take immediate action to
eradicate such illegal and immoral practices, and appealed
urgently to all States of the world to enact laws declaring
the recruitment and training of mercenaries in th.eir
territories as a punishable crime and deterring their citizens
from enlisting as mercenaries.
78. My delegation would like to take this opportunity of
requesting the Council to agree in this respect with the
assessment of African Governments, the pertinent parts of
which I just quoted, and to condemn the activities of
Portugal and its allies of oppression in Africa. I should also
like to submit to the Council that it should examine the
broad implications of mercenary activities and their
possible effect on race relations in Africa and take
appropriate action to prevent their repetition. We cannot,
however, let this occasion pass without reminding the
Council opce again of the fact that the problem of
mercenary activities is only a ramification of more fundamental problems in southern Africa with which the United
Nations has failed, up to now, to cope effectively. I have in
mind, of course, apartheid in South Africa; the rebellion of
the white settlers in Rhodesia; the usurpation of an
international territory in South West Africa; and Portuguese
colonialism, All those forces have now joined hands to
frustrate United Nations decisions. Apparently, they all feel
that they are threatened by the expanding horizon of
African independence and cannot reconcile themselves to
the equality and freedom that this independence implies.
Thus they want to sabotage and thwart that independence.
In their effort in the Congo, they also enjoy the covert
support of powerful business interests which see in a strong,
unified and independent Congg a threat to their ability to
exploit on their terms the riches of that country, and are
unwilling to contemplate, let alone accept, economic
co-operation based on mutual respect and common benefit.

take a new offensive just as much against African in&.
pendence as against the United Nations itself, an offensive
conceived in a new colonial adventure through the inter.
mediary of mercenaries?
80. And yet, what can YOU expect these racist r&ties to
do when their defiance of international authority
goes
unchecked, when they continue to enjoy the privileges of
membership in an Organization that they continue to defy,
and when many Members of this Organization continue to
patronize them through the maintenance of trade and
profitable relations?
8 1. It is the view of my delegation that the Council must
arrest this dangerous new development of mercenary
activities in its infancy before it is too late. The Council
must say to Portugal that it is really going too far in its
defiance of the United Nations. This Organization of ours
cannot sit and look on when Governments of Member
States that have already openly challenged its authority
carry their challenge and defiance even further by encoup
aging organized subversion of the constitutional authority
of another Member State. The Council is duty bound to
condemn those that are accomplices in such criminal and
illegal acts of subversion and interference and should
demand the immediate cessation of mercenary adventures
once and for all. This is the least that the Council must do
and my delegation urges that it be done without delay.
82. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I should
like to thank the representative of Ethiopia for the tribute
he has paid to my country and for his very flattering words
about me, which I am sure I do not deserve.
83. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): Before
turning to the topic on our agenda today, I should like to
join you, Sir, in the tribute which you paid to Mr. Tsuruoka
for the way in which he presided over our work last month.
I believe that we are all deeply indebted to the representa
tive of Japan for the wisdom, patience and perseverance
which he showed in the conduct of the Security Council
business during the month of October. This wasperhaps
not a month in which we had as many formal meetings as
has sometimes happened in the past. However, as we a]]
know here, frequently the work which is conducted
informally outside the Council chamber is as important, if
not more so, than the work conducted in open meetings,
and I think that we all share a feeling that his conduct of
those consultations revealed a willingness to labour lo%
hard and patiently and in a manner which carried our work
forward as far as could humanly be expected.
84. At the same time, Mr. President, 1 do join ifl
welcoming you to the Presidency. As Mr. Makonnefl
pointed out, you take on this job at a particularly .difficult
.. L
time. It is _.a difficult enough job in any event, ar~ll
.,, It must
T.!be especially so tor a relative newcomer to our tame. III>,
therefore, with special pleasure that the United States
delegation has already observed the very capable, dedicated
and impartial manner in which you have undertaken YOUI
duties. We look forward to close collaboration with YOU
during the coming month and I wish to assureyou that tile
United States will co-operate in every way to try and
contribute to a fruitful outcome of the work which lies
ahead of us.

79. Never has the United Nations been as patient and as
tolerant as it has been of Portugal and also of South Africa.
Over the years they have continued to defy the authority of
the Organization and to trample upon the decisions of both
the General Assembly and the Security Council. They have
continued to scorn the principles of the United Nations
Charter and to disregard the Universal ‘Declaration of
Human Rights. And yet, in spite of this open demonstration of defiance, the United Nations has not taken stern
measures against these Governments, nor has it taken
effective steps to have its decisions implemented. Is it
therefore surprising that those Governments should now
10

41

8.5. Turning to the business at hand, it is a matter of some
regret to my delegation that the Security Council once
again finds it necessary to convene on a serious charge
relating to the activities of armed mercenaries in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As we were reminded
by the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it has been less than four months since
we were called upon to consider the potential threat to the
independence and territorial integrity of the Congo posed
by mercenaries then reported to be assembled in neighbouring territory. On 10 July 1967 in resolution 239 (1967),
the Security Council expressed its concern over this
circumstance and condemned “any State which persists in
permitting or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and
the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations”. That resolution also called upon “Governments to ensure that their territory and other territories
under their control, as well as their nationals, are not used
for the planning of subversion, and the recruitment,
draining and transit of mercenaries designed to overthrow
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.”

89. The PRESIDENT (tramlated from French): I should
like to thank the representative of the United States for the
kind remarks he hasjust made about me.
90. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council
has met again today to examine the question of continuing
interference by the forces of colonialism in the internal
affairs of an African State which is a Member of the United
Nations, the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
91. A letter sent to the Security Council by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and External Trade of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo [see S/8218] provides facts which
reveal another aggressiveinvasion of that country by armed
mercenaries from Angola, a country under Portuguese
colonial administration. The letter states that armed bands
of mercenaries crossed the border of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and occupied several Congolese
towns along the railway line linking Angola with the mining
centres of Katanga.
92. We have followed closely the statement just made by
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who has provided the Security Council with
additional information concerning this new act of aggression against his country. We feel that he showed most
eloquently the criminal role played by the Lisbon r@ne,
which is carrying out a policy of colonialism, racial
oppression and unrelenting aggressive interference in the
internal affairs of the Congo. Once again he appealed to the
Security Council to restrain the forces of Portuguese racism
and colonialism, which are supported by their Western
allies, and to take effective steps to prevent a repetition of
aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
He also appealed to the Council to put an end to the
shameful practice whereby the forces of colonialism and
imperialism send mercenaries with impunity to the territory
of the Congo to commit acts of repression, destr,uction and
violence against the peaceful population of the Congo and
overthrow the existing Government of the Congo.

86. I have listened very carefully to the statement made
today by the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Congo. His
account of the recent incursions into his country gives
causefor deep concern. It is admittedly very difficult under
the prevailing circumstances for any government in a short
time to marshal and present those concrete kinds of
evidence which one would like to have before making a
formal judgement on the merits of a complaint. However,
his report on the current situation and our own knowledge
of the history of the mercenary problem in the Congo
create a strong presumption that the resolutions of this
Council have been violated, Confirmation of his report
would mean, notwithstanding the denials made by the
Government of Portugal and repeated to us today, that
Angola had indeed been used by mercenaries to prepare an
armed incursion into the Congo. It is very difficult for my
delegation to understand how foreign mercenaries could be
present in Angola, make preparations for such a misadventure and then leave Angola for the Congo without the
knowledge or at least acquiescence of the Portuguese
authorities. The implications of Portuguese responsibility,
even if only tacit, would therefore appear to be serious. It is
for this reason that my Government has made known to the
Government of Portugal its concern about this matter.

93. The Security Council cannot close its ears to these
legitimate appeals of the Government of the Congo and is
in duty bound to fulfil the task entrusted to it under the
Charter of our Organization.
94, Thus, the Security Council is faced, as so often before,
with attempts by the forces of colonialism to intervene
openly by force of arms in the Congo, to undermine the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country and to
strike at the national liberation movement of the Congolese
people and of other countries on the African continent.
The forces of colonialism continue to use the Portuguese
colonies in Africa as bases for acts of armed provocation
against the Congo and other African countries. The actions
of the colonialists are a threat not just to the integrity and
independence of the Congo, but to peace in that part of
Africa. For seven years, ever since the independence of the
Congo, the imperialist Powers and the forces of colonialism
have tried time and time again to undermine the movement
of the Congolese people towards freedom and have blatantly interfered by force of arms in the affairs of that
country.

87. It is the hope of the United States that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be able
to deal effectively with this latest mercenary threat so that
it can continue the development of national unity and
economic progress in a framework of peace and security.
88. It is the proper concern of the Security Council that
the mercenary danger which has threatened the Congo for
so long be eliminated and not be permitted to recur. All
countries, particularly those bordering on the Congo, have a
very grave responsibility ‘to ensure compliance with the
resolutions of this Council on the mercenary problem. My
delegation, consequently, calls upon all countries to comply
scrupulously with both the letter and the spirit of Security
Council resolution 239 (1967).
11

95. We recall that in October 1966 the Security Council
examined the alarming situation created in the Congo area
by the concentration of armed mercenary bands which
were being trained to invade the Congo in neighbouring
Portuguese territories. On 14 October 1966 the Security
Council adopted resolution 226 (1966), in which it
“Urges the Government of Portugal, in view of its own
statement, not to allow foreign mercenaries to use Angola
as a base of operation for interfering in the domestic
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.”

Despite the Security Council’s appeal, and in defiance of
the Council’s resolution, this summer the forces of colonialism launched aggressive action against the Congolese
State and dispatched to the Congo armed mercenary bands,
which started military operations against the Congolese
national armed forces. Just over three months ago, in July
1967, the Security Council examined a complaint by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
[S/8036] about this aggression and on 10 July 1967
adopted resolution 239 (1967), in which it reaffirmed the
appeal to all States made in paragraph 2 of its resolution
226 (1966) “to refrain or desist from intervening in the
domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo”
and in which it condemned “any State which persists in
permitting or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and
the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations”.
96. I~owever, despite these clear demands on the part of
the Security Council, the imperialist forces will not leave
the Congolese people in peace and arc trying by force of
arms to regain the positions which they lost as a result of
the Congolese people’s long struggle for independence and
freedom from the colonialist yoke. This new criminal
attack against the Congo shows that the imperialists, far
from abandoning their plans to suppress national liberation
movements in the African countries and to deprive the
young African States of the independence which they
achieved at such cost, are now stepping up their activities
and trying to take advantage of the general state of
international tension caused by the further escalation of
United States aggression against the Viet-Namese people
and by Israel’s aggression in the Middle East.
97. It is obvious that what is taking place iri the Congo is
not a11 isolated action by a band of mercenaries undertaking
a criminal adventure in the Congo at their own risk; it is a
link in the general conspiracy of the forces of imperialism,
which are trying in various parts of the world to stop by
force of arms the movement of the peoples of Asia, Africa
and Latin America towards genuine national independence
and liberation. But where the aggressive inroads meet firm
resistance from peace-loving forces, colonialism cannot
achieve its criminal ends.
9X. In the Congo the forces of imperialism have organized
an invasion by bands of mercenaries, under the illusion that
they will be able to delude the Africans by claiming that
the major imperialist Powers are not involved in aggression
against the country and are even ready to come to its aid.
But nations have learned to recognize these imperialist

tactics. They understand that the aggression against the
Congo is Only a part of the monstrous plan of African
racists and colonialists together with international irr,
perialism to strike at the whole national liberation moye.
ment on the African continent and to thrust hack the
peoples of Africa who are striving to wipe out the
colonialist bastions of the racist rCgimes in South Africa,
Southern Rhodesia, Angola, and Mozambique.
99. The Security Council has just heard a statement by tile
United Kingdom representative, in which he positively
hurled curses at the mercenaries who have invaded the
Congo. But is not a policy of connivance with the racist
regime in Rhodesia, and the statements by United Kingdom
representatives that the United Kingdom will not usefarce
against the Smith regime, at the very time when the
colonialists are waging an offensive against the African
peoples, is not such a policy an encouragement to those
forces whose aim is to strike at the freedom and independ.
ence of the African peoples?
100. Nor was there any lack of verbal condemnation 01
protestations of innocence from the United States repre.
sentativc with regard to the Lisbon rkgime’s criminal
practice of using mercenaries for its criminal purposes.But
are the speeches made by the representatives of theseStates
in the Security Council really what count? Surely the point
is that in practice they act as accomplices and protectorsof
the Lisbon rBgime in its criminal activities.
101. The events in the Congo area show that the political
alliance of racism and colonialism, set up in the southern
part of the African continent with the support of the major
imperialist Powers, constitutes a major threat to the peoples
of Africa. The facts are so obvious that even TheNew York
Times could not ignore them and on 4 November 1961
wrote:
“Many Africans are convinced that the white minority
r6gimes in South Africa, Rhodesia and the Portuguese
territories have been planning a power move against
hostile African Governments to the north. They believe
the invasion of the Congo represents a first step in thal
strategy.”
102. Of course, the peoples of Africa are fully a\val[
whose criminal hand equipped those armed bandits anil
dispatched them to the Congo, where their basesare, Witi
whose money and whose assistance they are attacking fir
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.Thr
letter written by the Minister for Foreign Affairs ant’
External Trade of the Democratic Republic of the Co%(l
/see S/8218/ states, in particular, that the facts of th’l
renewed aggression
“constitute irrefutable proof of Portugal’s cdhsion
with
the mercenaries for the purpose of overthrowingth!
established order in the Congo. They clearly disproveth’:
Portuguese authorities’ claims that they have not inter
vened and the statements of their representative to th’:
United Nations”.
103. It is quite clear that the responsibility for thes’
constant acts of provocation against the Congo and other

AfriC an countries does not lie with Portugal alone, Without

events in the Congo region show yet again that effective
steps must be taken by all countries concerned with the
maintenance of international peace, to condemn and put an
end to aggression. This would be greatly helped by more
rapid progress in drawing up a definition of aggression in
the light of the present international situation, a matter
which, as the Council knows, is due for consideration by
the present session of the General Assembly.

support of more powerful imperialist countries, whose
the
sentatives are sitting here at thistable, Portugal would
repre be able to pursue its present colonialist policy in Africa,
not
in OPP osition to all the African peoples and in defiance of
wor.Id public opinion.
I O4. Portuguese colonialism also derives its strength from
the nlilitary alliance of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), from the loyal assistance and political
sUppOrt given it by its allies and senior partners in NATO,
wI1o are extraordinarily generous in providing Lisbon with
weapons for its struggle against the African peoples.

109. These facts also show that the activities of the forces
of imperialism against African countries are a serious threat
to the freedom and independence of all African countries
and to the maintenance of peace in Africa.

105.
There can be no doubt that the alarming situation in
tI1e Congo and the constant acts of provocation against the
sovereignty of that country are the result of continuous
interference
by the United States, the United Kingdom,
Belgium and Portugal in the affairs of the Congo, with the
aof strengthening the imperialist influence of those
powers,
continuing the rapacious exploitation of the
natural
resources of the Congo by various foreign monopolies
and maintaining the position of Western imperialism
not only in the Congo but in many other
cou 11tries of Africa.

110. The Soviet delegation firmly supports the demands
of the African countries for a condemnation of the criminal
activities of the forces of imperialism against the Congo and
other African countries. It considers that the Security
Council should take effective steps to put to an end the
aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to protect the sovereignty of the Congo and other
young African countries from acts of provocation by the
forces of colonialism and imperialism.
111. The conduct of Portugal should be condemned as
strongly as possible in this connexion, since it constitutes a
violation of the United Nations Charter and the Declaration
on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic
Affairs of States and the Protection of Their Independence
and Sovereignty. The Security Council must demand the
immediate cessation of the criminal practice of recruiting
mercenaries, who are nothing but hired bandits and
murder&s, and providing them with territory and facilities
so that they can interfere in the internal affairs of the
Congo and other independent African countries.

106.
It is, of course, no accident that the forces of
aggression and colonialism are aimed primarily at those
parts
of the Congo where in the past foreign monopolies
held sway under the auspices of the Union Minibre and for
a long time pumped enormous wealth out of the country. It
was this region that served as the main arena for acts of
provocation
by the colonialist agent Tshombe against the
territorial
integrity of the Congo, aimed at the partition of
the country and the secessionof Katanga.

112. The Security Council should also demand that all
Portugal’s NATO allies, which give the Lisbon rCgime
military aid and political support and thus share Portugal’s
responsibility for the interference and aggressionto which
the Congo is subject, should immediately put an end to
their aid and support, adhere strictly to the principles of
the United Nations Charter and respect the sovereignty and
independence of the young African States.

107.
It goes without saying that the policy of interference
in the internal affairs of the Congo, which is directed by
certain
NATO Powers, a policy of supporting Portuguese
aggression against that country, is a flagrant violation of the
Declaration
on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the
Donlestic
Affairs of States and the Protection of Their
Independence
and Sovereignty, which was adopted unaniInously
by States Members of the United Nations in a
WeIl-known resolution of the General Assembly, resolution
2131 (XX). May we remind the Council that NATO
countries which are allies of Portugal, such as the United
States, the United Kingdom, Belgium and others, also voted
in favour of that resolution?

113. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): I
do not need to tell you, Mr. President, how happy I am to
join with those who have expressed our pleasure that YOU
are presiding over this Council and in assuring you of our
warmest co-operation.

IO8.

We see again that it is Katanga and its mining centres
are the main attraction for the colonialists, who
drearn of their former wealth and cannot reconcile themselves to the fact that the Congolese people have angrily
driven out the so-called owners of the Union Mini&e and
have replaced it by the National Congolese Company. The
CoIonialists’ response to the lawful and moderate measures
taken recently by the Congolese Government to protect the
‘OUntry’s
economy from domination and plunder by
for%n
monopolies has been to redouble their efforts to
Undermine
the normal life of the Congo, to send armed
l’Qdits
in to its territory and to engage in sabotage and
terrorism
in order to stir up dissatisfaction with the
nati%al Government of the Congo among the people. The

114. I do not intend to prolong our meeting this evening,
but I would not want it to come to an end before I had had
the opportunity of telling the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo how attentively we listened to
his statement and how sympathetically we considered his
Government’s concerns.

which

115. My delegation and my Government were disturbed at
the new raids by mercenaries into Congolese territory.
Fortunately, our concern was to a large extent allayed by
the evidence which the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has given us indicating that we are
concerned with the activities of only a handful of merce13

several Frenchmen among the mercenaries. That may we11
be: I have no information on that point. What I can say,
however, is that if such is the case, they are soldiers of
fortune. The fact that France is not at war in any part of
the world may explain why these men are seeking otlrer
climes.

naries and that the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have been able quickly and effectively to
meet that threat by using their own resources. The French
Government was extremely gratified because we, perhaps
more than any other Power, want to see internal peace and
stability permanently restored in the Congo as well as
economic development and steady progress towards prosperity. In order that this may be achieved, as the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
said, the activities of mercenaries must cease once and for
all.

122. I should like to add that we do not think it is enough
to take measures to stop mercenaries from leaving the
country. Like the Congolese representative, we think that it
is not enough to throw the mercenaries out through the
door if they could come back through the window.

116. My delegation wishes to reaffirm that it would find it
inadmissible for the existence of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to be threatened once again by foreign
interference and for the United Nations not to condemn
that interference. We in France, devoted as we are to the
principle of non-interference in the domestic affairs of
States, are against any action by any foreign Power
whatever in a country where, I repeat, tranquillity and
economic development are so necessary for that country
itself, for Africa and for the world.

123. This is why my Government is prepared to associate
itself with the measures of co-ordination which may be
proposed to prevent the mercenaries from returning and
resuming their activities. Any suggestions along these lines
and the co-ordination that may be established will receive
the greatest attention of my Government.
124. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I should
like to thank the representative of France for the kind and
encouraging words he has addressed to me.

117. As the representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo pointed out, it is difficult to obtain actual proof
on this question of mercenaries. However, the circumstantial evidence is serious. With regard to the raid carried
out by the mercenaries which began on 1 November, it is
only natural, while awaiting more complete information,
that we should question the attitude of the authorities
administering Angola, since they control the frontier
separating that country from Congolese territory. We
should like to be satisfied that they have brought to bear all
the means’ at their disposal to avoid complaints such as the
one we are considering today. We ask the representative of
Portugal to dispel any doubts we have on this point.

125. I call upon the representative of the United Kingdom
to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
126. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not wish
to keep the Council at this late hour, but there was one
particular point raised in the wide-ranging speech of the
representative of the Soviet Union to which I think I should
make a very brief reply.
127. He referred to the question of Rhodesia. I would
only say that if the representative of the Soviet Union
cannot distinguish between a condemnation of the use of
force in the Congo and a reluctance to use force iI1
Rhodesia, then I cannot help him. At least be must
recognize that our opposition to the use of force is
consistent, and 1 think that it would be difficult for him to
argue that our attitude is contrary to the principles and
precepts of the United Nations Charter.

118, France has been taking radical measures against the
activities of mercenaries for many years. I myself, in 1961,
had the honour to announce to this Council (974th
meeting] the following measures we adopted.
119. Recruitment for foreign armed forces is prohibited
and punishable under the French Penal Code. However, the
French Government not only adopted general measures, on
the basis of the provisions of the Code, it prohibited all
recruitment on French territory for the gendarmerie or
other forces in the Congo. Furthermore, in order to
discourage adventurers who might have been tempted to go
to the province of Katanga, if strengthened the legislation
now in force by means of an ordinance passed on
4 February 1961. By modifying article 97 of the Code of
French Nationality, that ordinance provided that anyone
who joined a foreign army would run the risk of losing his
nationality and his rights as a French citizen. No more
stringent measure could be taken in this matter.

128. I would only say further that I trust that, in this
respect as in many others, my country will continue to find
itself in the happy relationship with France in that we &a11
not be waging a war in any part of the world.
129. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of the United States to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
130. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): I too
apologize for taking the floor at this late hour. I had not
intended to do so until the unwarranted intervention of the
representative of the Soviet Union in which he played a
very familiar record that we have heard often before in this
Council, that is, the so-called plot theory. He said that the
policies of my Government were designed to impede the
process of freedom and independence in Africa.

120. AS a result of the provisions made in 1961 we were
able to nip in the bud attempts such as that of the secret
training camp to which the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo referred. He was kind enough
to thank France for the measures it had taken to disperse
that camp and to prevent similar occurrences in the future.

131. At the age of fifty, we would normally expect a man
to have gained a certain amount of wisdom about world
affairs, and it would seem to us equally reasonable that a

121. A few moments ago, the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo said that there were
14

c

rBgimeof fifty years would gain a more objective and more
informed view of the world scene than is humanly possible
if one tries to squeeze every development around the globe
into a preconceived theory of a world-wide imperialist
conspiracy.

States of America. Our colleague from the United Kingdom
complained that no clear distinction wasma.dein the Soviet
Union representative’s statement between the idea of open
armed intervention by one State in the internal affairs of
another for the most improper purposes and what is
happening in the case of the racist rtgimes in Rhodesia and
other territories, with which the United Kingdom Government, ,as is well known, maintains quite clear relations. The
United Kingdom representative also said that he wasunable
to help the Soviet representative to make the necessary
distinction between these ideas.

132. The policy of the United States towards the Congo
]lasbeen consistent ever since that country achieved its
independence in 1960. We have sought to help the Congo
to maintain its political independence and territorial integrity. We have done this both in our bilateral relations
and through our support of United Nations operations in
the Congo. It might be well to recall, since this issue has
beenraised, that Soviet policy on the contrary has been to
support secession in the eastern Congo when it suited its
purposesand to oppose every United Nations effort to
assistthat troubled country to retain its independence. So I
wouldsay that the United States is quite prepared for a full
andopen comparison of the records of the Government of
theSoviet Union and my Government at any time.

139. We did not actually ask for the assistance of the
United Kingdom representative in defining these ideas. We
are quite capable of working out for ourselveswhat is going
on. The fact that this does not coincide with the ideas of
the United Kingdom representative is quite another matter,
and of course he can hardly expect us to help him there. He
has only himself to blame. We have already said that a
policy of connivance with the racist regime in Rhodesia,
and a statement from London that the United Kingdom
will not use force against the Smith regime at the very time
when the colonialists are waging an offensive against the
African peoples, can only encourage those whose aim is to
strike at the freedom and independence of a people. Is this
not one of the many links-and a very important one-in
the endless chain forged by the colonialist Powers and the
forces of imperialism in an attempt to suppressthe national
liberation movement, to undermine the democratic regimes
in African countries, and to prevent, the African peoples
from raising their heads in those countries where white
minorities exercise merciless domination? Does it not
expose the policy of the United Kingdom as the very same
cblonialist policy which is pursued by its junior partners,
including the Portuguese rhgime? Are they not one and the
same?

133. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
uponthe representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congoin exercise of his right of reply.
134. Mr. UMBA DI LUTETE (Democratic Republic of the
Congo)(translated from French): Following the example of
the preceding speakers, I must first of all apologize for
detaining the Council at this late hour. I apologize also for
referringback to a statement which provided no grounds
forcriticism or paraphrase-I refer to the statement by the
representativeof Portugal. I said that the representative of
Portugal would deny everything and he did deny everything, with the self-possession and cynicism which are so
characteristicof his country. NC brought up all the old
storiesagain; indeed, merely by looking up all the staternentshe has made before this Council one can seethat he
alwaysrepeats the same things and never supplies any new
argumentin support of his allegations.

140. The United States representative, as was to be
expected, could not bear the accusations levelled at
Washington policy..But is it not a fact that the Portuguese
colonialists are encouraged to defy decisions of the United
Nations and to use mercenaries to commit acts of aggression against the Congo by the huge quantities of weapons
of various kinds supplied by the United States and other
States members of NATO, and that they are using those
weapons in their criminal fight against African peoples
struggling for their right to freedom and independence?
Can the United States representative produce any evidence
to refute this? It is the United States of America and other
Western Powers which maintain the closest comniercial and
other economic links with Portugal and which are increasing their investments in Portuguese dominions in Africa,
and we have not heard one single word from the United
States representative to indicate that Washington has the
slightest intention of putting pressure on Portugal to
comply with the principles of the United Nations Charter
by decreasing its assistance to that country. We have only
heard a sort of murmur of surprise and incomprehension,
on the grounds that the Lisbon rBgime has allegedly been
unable to detect the presence in its territories of the
mercenaries who are committing criminal acts against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. But who can be
deluded by such an argument? Who can believe such

135. With regard to the assistance received by my country,
I do not know whether there are many States represented
in this chamber which receive assistance from that country.
But I should like to say that my country is indeed
privilegedto receive assistance from it. I shall not, however,
ventureto dwell too long on this point.
136. I have been cheered by the fact that, in the various
iaterventions which have been made, all the speakers have
recognized, perhaps in a somewhat veiled fashion, the
flippancy which has characterized the Portuguese representative’sreply. I hope that he will continue in this
lnannerand trap himself even more in lies, since this will
Serveto strengthen still further the conviction of the
membersof the Council.
137. The PRESIDENT (translated j+om French): I call
upon the representative of the Soviet Union to speak in
exercise
of his right of reply,
138. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)(translated j+onz Rlissian): I have taken the floor to
reply to some rather hasty statements made by the
representativesof the United Kingdom and the United
15

words? We have long since learned the value of that sort of
statement in the Security Council.

ment, which made its statement with a full sense of
responsibility.

141. The United States representative even ventured to
make a kind of excursion into past history, touching on the
tragic fate of the long-suffering I,tiople of the Congo. We
feel we must remind the United States representative of the
true facts in the history of the struggle of the Congolese
people for independence against the forces of colonialism
and imperialism.

146. There has been a lot of talk of mercenaries and
although, as I understand, the Congolese Government itself
has not alleged that the mercenaries in question were of
Portuguese origin, it has been said here-and repeated-that
Portugal has been sending its mercenaries. So it appears that
the allegation made against us goes even further than was
originally intended by the Congolese Government. In this
respect I should greatly appreciate it if the Soviet delegation, which made such a statement, would ask the
Congolese delegation sitting at this table if it confirms that
there were any Portuguese nationals among the mercenaries.

142. Possibly the United States representative’s memory
fails him and he has forgotten the suffering and the
bloodshed caused in the Congo by the intervention of the
forces of imperialism in an attempt to regain their former
rights and privileges and to maintain their colonialist
domination in the Congo. The blood of the many Congolese who gave their lives for the liberation of their
homeland, the blood of thousands of Congolese patriots,
including Patrice Lumumba, will always keep this alive in
our minds. The United States representative should not
forget these facts, when he so rashly makes excursions into
the recent past, when he starts going into such facts and
taking over a history which cannot fail to expose the policy
of imperialism.

147. Finally, I must remind the Council that my delegation has not simply limited itself to denying everything; my
delegation made a very positive and very constructive
suggestion. We said that if there should be any doubt about
the statement we have made, the Council should undertake
an investigation. I submit that this is fair enough. In fact
this is what any delegation, any Government, would offer
in proof of its good faith; and that would give the Council
an opportunity of basing its decisions not on mere
gratuitous accusations, not on mere presumptions, but on
facts.

143. The PRESIDENT (trurzsluted jkm Frenclz):
I call
upon the representative of Portugal who has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply.

148. The PRESIDENT (trunslated from French): The
photographs and the magazines brought by the reprcsentative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
the members of the Council have had a chance of seeing
during the present meeting, will be left with the secretariat
of the Security Council and be available to delegations
wishing to refer to them.

144. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): I regret very much
delaying the Council at this late hour, but I feel that some
observations from my delegation are called for in view of
the remarks made by the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the exercise of his right of reply.
He said that, as he had expected, my delegation had limited
itself simply to denying everything. Such a remark is very
surprising. It would seem that the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo expected me to admit
everything simply because the Congolese Government had
made accusations.

149. I have no further speakers on my list. In the light of
the Security Council’s agenda for tomorrow, it appears
from informal consultation that members of the Council
would agree to suspend the discussion on the complaint of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo until Friday,
10 November, at 10.30 a.m. Since there is no objection, it
is so decided.

145. We are fully conscious that the accusations levelled
against us do not correspond to any facts. I quoted a
statement made by my Government, and I must say
emphatically that my Government is a responsible Govern-

The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m

16
.

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications.moy
the world,
Consult
your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
des Nations
Unies
sent
en vente
darts
les librairies
et les ogences
dbpositoires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
oupres
de votre librairie
ou odressez-vour
fi:
Nations
Unier,
Section
des venter,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicociones
de las Naciones
Unidos
estdn
en todos portes
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventas, Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho in U.N.

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y cosos distribuidoros
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccibn

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

35353January

1971-2,100
