S/2017/982

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 November 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the forty-fifth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system 1 and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as from other Syrian and open sources. Data from agencies of the United
Nations system on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period
from 1 to 31 October 2017.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points in October 2017
1.
Military activities and instances of significant military escalation that were
reported in September continued to be reported in many areas, in particular
activities targeting Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) areas in the
Governorates of Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqah, as well as in Idlib Governorate and the
eastern Ghutah enclave in Rif Dimashq Governorate.
__________________
1

17-20456 (E)

Inputs provided from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the International Organization for Migration, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, the United Nations Population Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, th e
United Nations Mine Action Service, the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat.

241117

*1720456*

S/2017/982

2.
In eastern Ghutah, severe shortages of food supplies and a sharp increase in
the prices of basic commodities were reported. The United Nations also received
alarming reports that children in besieged eastern Ghutah were suffering from
severe acute malnutrition, and that an estimated 400 people with health problems
urgently required medical assistance and evacuations.
3.
On 17 October, the Syrian Democratic Forces announced that Raqqah city had
been fully retaken from ISIL after months of intense air strikes and fighting, amid
reports of scores of civilian casualties, significant damage to the city’s basic
infrastructure and the displacement of nearly all civilians from the city. The
presence of explosive remnants of war across the city remains a major concern for
the protection of civilians and their eventual safe return, and is hampering access of
humanitarian partners to Raqqah city.
4.
Military operations in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate continued to impact civilians
despite the announcement by Syrian Government forces that they had broken the
ISIL-imposed siege on parts of Dayr al-Zawr city last month. In October alone,
some 270,000 people were displaced from Dayr al-Zawr Governorate according to
the displacement monitoring tracker of the United Nations and its partners, mostly
to other parts of Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, but also to Raqqah, Aleppo and
Hasakah Governorates. Many of those who remained in Dayr al -Zawr could not be
reached with humanitarian assistance owing to the proximity of the fighting or as
areas continued to be under ISIL control.
5.
On 12 October, the only vaccine cold room in Mayadin district, Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate, was reportedly damaged by an airstrike, resulting in the destruction of
over 135,000 doses of United Nations-provided measles and polio vaccines. This
represents a setback for the response to the polio outbreak in the area. The United
Nations received credible reports of three further attacks that impacted health -care
facilities and personnel in October.

[
[


6.
In October, the United Nations reached millions of people in need with
humanitarian assistance from within Syria, including some 2,793,440 people who
received food assistance through regular deliveries; 797,700 people were reached
through cross-border convoys and 199,000 people were reached through five
humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys. Humanitarian inter-agency cross-line
convoys reached 41,500 people in the besieged locations of Qabun, Kafr Batna and
Saqba in Rif Dimashq Governorate, out of a total of 419,920 people besieged in the
Syrian Arab Republic.

3.
On 26 October, the Special Envoy for Syria announced his intention to
convene the eighth round of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva on 28 November. He
noted that talks should focus on the schedule and process for drafting a new
constitution, as well as on the precise requirements for United Nations-supervised
elections in accordance with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). In support of
the intra-Syrian talks, the Special Envoy continued to stress that existing
de-escalation and ceasefire arrangements being discussed in Astana should be
strengthened, while ensuring that serious and concrete steps ar e taken to increase
humanitarian access, and to further advance on the issues of detainees, abductees
and missing persons and humanitarian mine action. At their meeting in Astana on
30 and 31 October, the guarantors of the memorandum on de -escalation of 4 May —
the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey — emphasized
progress in the fight against terrorism and underlined that the Syrian conflict had no
military solution and should be solved only through a political process in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).

2/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

4.
The implementation of the de-escalation and de-confliction areas continued to
face challenges in reducing violence. Fighting in these areas, and across Syria,
continued to affect civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as schools and
hospitals. Throughout the reporting period, fighting continued in the Governorates
of Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Hama, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah, Aleppo, Idlib, Homs,
Ladhiqiyah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr.
5.
In Rif Dimashq Governorate, fighting, ground -based strikes and air strikes
continued in the eastern Ghutah enclave, where almost 400,000 civilians remained
besieged by Syrian Government forces, representing nearly 95 per cent of all those
besieged across Syria. Civilians in eastern Ghutah are facing gravely deteriorating
conditions. A recent World Food Programme (WFP) assessment reported severe
shortages of food supplies and a sharp increase in the prices of basic commodities,
further eroding coping mechanisms. The cost of a standard food basket in October
was almost 10 times higher than the national average. The United Nations also
received alarming reports indicating that children in the besieged enclave are
suffering from severe acute malnutrition, and that an estimated 400 people urgently
require evacuation as there is no adequate medical assistance available in the area.
6.
Fierce fighting continued between Government forces and Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in the Governorates of Hama, Ho ms, Dayr al-Zawr and
Raqqah, where Government forces captured Mayadin city on 14 October. The
Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the United States-led international counterISIL coalition and led by the Kurdish People’s Protection Units (Yekîneyên
Parastina Gel, or YPG), announced on 17 October that Raqqah city had been fully
retaken from ISIL. This announcement came after months of intensified airstrikes
and heavy shelling had reportedly resulted in hundreds of civilian deaths,
widespread destruction of homes and basic infrastructure and the displacement of
nearly all civilians from the city. The Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the
United States-led international counter-ISIL coalition, also continued to advance
against ISIL in Raqqah, Hasakah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates. Fighting between
non-State armed opposition groups and ISIL was reported in Dar‘a province with no
significant changes in frontlines. Fighting continued in Hama province, where
non-State armed opposition groups again reduced the footprint of ISIL in the area.
Explosive weapons continue to be fired into populated areas, indiscriminately
killing and injuring people, destroying and damaging vital infrastructure and leaving
thousands of communities in areas littered with explosive remnant s of war that
continued to kill and injure civilians and impede humanitarian access years after
their intended use. The use of improvised explosive devices in certain areas adds to
the complexity of the explosive hazard threat.
Figure I
Key dates in October 2017
17 October
Early October

Wafidin crossing point
into eastern Ghutah
closed

17-20456

12 October

135,000 vaccine doses
destroyed in Mayadin

Syrian Democratic
Forces declare
Raqqah city under its
full control

30–31 October

Seventh round of highlevel Astana meeting

3/20

S/2017/982

Box 2
United Nations response to polio outbreak in Syria
1.
A polio outbreak began in the first half of 2017 and has continued to spread
throughout the year. Some 63 children have been diagnosed with the virus, most
(60 cases) in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, with three cases reported in Raqqah and
Homs Governorates. The median age of those infected is 15 months old.
2.
Before the onset of the Syrian humanitarian crisis in 2011, the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic was procuring all its vaccine requirements. Following a
first outbreak in 2013, the Government, together with the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations, undertook multiple vaccination campaigns, as part
of a broad effort to increase resistance to the debilitating virus. Unlike the first wild
outbreak in 2013, the current outbreak is a circulating vaccine -derived poliovirus
type-2 (cVDPV2). Such viruses are extremely rare, but can occur in instances when
population immunity against polio is very low; this is often a result of compromised
access to immunization services.
3.
Since the outbreak there has been a concerted effort by the United Nations, led
by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), in coordination with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
local authorities, to carry out a strategic response to swiftly stop cVDPV2
transmission. Two mass vaccination rounds have been carried out in Dayr al -Zawr
and Raqqah Governorates, reaching resident, refugee and internally displaced
children. More than 255,000 children were reported vaccinated in Dayr al -Zawr and
more than 140,000 reported vaccinated in Raqqah.
4.
Campaign implementation in affected areas has not been without significant
challenges, and this achievement has relied on strong coordination between all
response partners. In addition to vaccination against polio, surveillance for acute
flaccid paralysis, a major indicator for the disease, continues around the country,
particularly where infections have been reported.

7.
The United Nations has not been able to verify first-hand the situation in
Raqqah, owing to lack of access but has received reports that most of the city has
been damaged or destroyed as a result of the fighting. Humanitarian actors have not
had access to the city in view of the continuation of military operations and the
presence of explosive remnants of war. The city is reportedly littered with a
complex array of explosive hazards, including unexploded ordnance, landmines and
improvised explosive devices that pose a direct risk to civilians and humanitarian
workers. There are reports that thousands of people have been allowed to return to
certain parts of Raqqah city and its surroundings after the Syrian Democratic Forces
declared specific areas to be safe following unexploded ordnance clearance
operations.
8.
Meanwhile, the United Nations continues to provide humanitarian assistance
to people in need in camps and across Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates where
there is a high concentration of internally displaced persons, wherever and
whenever access permits. Since the beginning of the anti -ISIL offensive in Raqqah
in November 2016, more than 436,000 people have been displaced within and from
Raqqah Governorate. The United Nations and its partners are reaching 450,000
people in need across the north-eastern part of the Syrian Arab Republic each
month, including 56,000 people in 48 camps and temporary shelters in Raqqah,
Hasakah, Aleppo and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates. Reports of recruitment of fighters
by the People’s Protection Units (YPG) in internally displaced person camps in the

4/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

north-east of the country, including the recruitment of children and adolescents,
have continued. Four cases of child recruitment, including two of unaccompanied
minors, have been identified in the last two months.
9.
Military operations in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate continued to affect civilians.
In mid-October, in Mayadin city and surrounding areas in rural Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate, around 15,000 people were reportedly without access to health
services following air strikes on the city, rendering hospitals and medica l points
inoperative. Overall, air strikes and clashes resulted in the displacement of 270,000
people (according to the displacement monitoring tracker of the United Nations and
its partners), mostly to other parts of Dayr al-Zawr Governorate and also to Raqqah
and Hasakah Governorates. Many of those who remain in Dayr al -Zawr cannot be
reached owing to the proximity of the fighting or because areas continue to be under
ISIL control. Most of those who fled north into Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates
are arriving at reception areas for security screening by the Syrian Democratic
Forces, before moving onwards to camps such as those in Ayn Isa or Arishah in
Raqqah and Hasakah Governorates, respectively. While humanitarian partners are
responding in these locations, additional support is needed, in particular at the
reception areas where thousands of people are gathered while awaiting security
screening.
10. In Homs Governorate, ISIL fighters carried out a ground offensive into
Government-controlled areas east of Tadmur (Palmyra) and south of Sukhnah in
early October. Following an ISIL attack on the Government-controlled Qaryatayn
town in late September, heavy clashes reportedly killed 23 civilians. About 11,000
people reportedly remain in the area, without adequa te supplies of water and food.
11. In Idlib Governorate, fighting, ground-based strikes and air strikes continued
to affect civilians. Attempts by Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham, led by Jabhat Fath al Sham
(former Nusrah Front), designated as a terrorist organizat ion by the Security
Council, to interfere in civil governance and the provision of humanitarian aid in the
Governorate also impacted civilians. While humanitarian assistance was not
affected during the reporting period, there are concerns that onerous requ ests, such
as specific limitations on procurement of goods could result in limited ability to
reach those in need. As part of the de-escalation zones agreed among the Astana
co-guarantors, Turkish armed forces were deployed as of mid -October to be
stationed at observation posts in parts of Idlib.
12. During the reporting period, an estimated 50,000 –55,000 Syrians remained
stranded along the Syrian-Jordanian border, in the area known as the berm. The last
cycle of partial aid assistance to this area was halted over four months ago, on
15 June, with the food security and health situation of many of those stranded,
notably children, having continuously deteriorated. The United Nations has
continued to urgently call for emergency humanitarian access to make pos sible the
delivery of food and essential non-food assistance in the immediate term, while
longer-term solutions for this population are pursued. Meanwhile, critical health
assistance and water supplies continue to be provided from the Jordanian side of the
berm to this community.
Protection
13. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians in
significant numbers throughout the month. Explosive weapons continue to be fired
into populated areas, indiscriminately killing and injuring people, destroying and
damaging vital infrastructure and leaving thousands of communities in areas littered
with explosive remnants of war that continue to kill and injure civilians and impede
humanitarian access years after their intended use. The large number of civilian
17-20456

5/20

S/2017/982

casualties remains a strong indication that violations of the prohibition on launching
indiscriminate attacks and of the principles of proportionality and precaution are
continuing. Children are particularly affected by the fighting and, in some incidents,
have constituted the majority of the casualties.
14. Fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. On the basis of information
received by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), civilian casualties occurred in various governorates (see annex), in
possible violation of international humanitarian law. OHCHR has documented
alleged incidents perpetrated by many parties to the conflict, including Government
forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups and Security Councildesignated terrorist groups.
15. In addition, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic provided OHCHR
with information on alleged violations. In a note verbale received on 3 November,
the Permanent Mission of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
United Nations provided OHCHR with a list of reported casualties and injured
civilians between 22 September and 21 October in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Dar‘a,
Suwayda’, Homs, Hama, Tartus, Ladhiqiyah, Idlib, Aleppo, Dayr al -Zawr, Hasakah,
Qunaytirah, and Raqqah. A total of 61 civilians, 15 of them children, were reported
to have been killed and 238 injured, including 73 children. The casualties w ere
reported to have been the result of mortars and explosive devices.
16. Despite the call made to the Syrian authorities in Human Rights Council
resolution 19/22 to cooperate with OHCHR, including through the establishment of
a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human rights, further
reporting by the Office remains curtailed by the denial of access for it to the Syrian
Arab Republic.
17. The United States Department of Defense publicly confirmed that, in October,
the United States-led coalition carried out 495 strikes against ISIL targets in the
Governorates of Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr. Nearly 75 per cent of the
strikes (or 371 air strikes) were reported to have been in the vicinity of Raqqah city
and 21 per cent in Dayr al-Zawr. In addition, the United States Department of
Defense reported that the coalition had conducted airstrikes near Mayadin on 2 and
3 October, near Hajin on 3 October, and near Albu Kamal on 9 October.
18. The Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation issued a statement on
13 October noting that there had been intensified airstrikes on Dayr al -Zawr
Governorate, with Russian aircraft carrying out 383 sorties which hit 993 targets in
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate over the previous week. They further noted that three
large-scale strikes had been launched using both sea- and air-launched cruise
missiles over the month.
19. The United Nations and its health partners received credible reports of four
attacks that affected health-care facilities and personnel in October, of which two
have been verified. On 6 October, an attack on Shifa ‘ primary health care centre in
Duma, Rif Dimashq, resulted in damage to the facility building, as well as damage
to at least one ambulance. The facility went out of service. On 12 Octo ber, the
World Health Organization (WHO) received reports of an attack that destroyed the
only vaccines cold room in Mayadin district, Dayr al-Zawr Governorate. More than
100,000 doses of measles vaccines and 35,000 doses of polio vaccines were stored
in the facility, together with equipment, syringes and stocks for all vaccine preventable childhood diseases. This is a setback for efforts to control the polio
outbreak in the area, with new cases continuing to be reported.

6/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

20. Educational facilities also continued to be affected by the fighting. Reports of
attacks on or around schools in late October in Rif Dimashq Governorate, in Kafr
Batna on 16 and 29 October, and in Jisrayn and Misraba on 31 October, allegedly
resulted in the deaths of several children.
21. On 16 October, demonstrations broke out inside Homs Central Prison following
an attempt by the security forces to raid a wing overrun by the protestors. On
21 October, the governor and police chief of Homs Governorate visited the prison and
met with the detainees who had been on hunger strike since the demonstrations
began. The authorities agreed that judicial bodies would visit the facility to examine
the relevant pending cases; that cases sentenced under the now-abolished Supreme
State Security Court would be reviewed; and that the detainees’ cases would be
brought to the attention of the President. The detainees agreed to immediately
suspend their hunger strike and their demonstrations for at least seven days.
Humanitarian access
Box 3
Key points for humanitarian access
1.
In October, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all available access modalities, including
from within the Syrian Arab Republic, in cooperation with the Syrian authorities.
Regular programming from within the country resulted in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to millions of people in need, including some 2,793,440
people who received food assistance during the month through more than 1,575
deliveries.
2.
In October, five humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys delivered muchneeded assistance to 199,000 people. The total number of people reached under the
October–November plan through 31 October was 110,000 or 9.1 per cent of the
overall number of people to whom access was originally requested under the plan.
In October, humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys reached 41,500 people in
the besieged locations of Qabun, Kafr Batna and Saqba in Rif Dimashq
Governorate, out of a total of 419,920 besieged nationwide.
3.
Cross-border activities remain a vital part of the humanitarian response in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014) in July 2014, assistance has been delivered from Turkey to millions of
Syrians in various parts of Aleppo, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Hama Governorates, and
from Jordan to Dar‘a, Qunaytirah and Suwayda’ Governorates. In October, 420
trucks in 20 convoys delivered much-needed life-saving assistance to more than
797,700 people in need in northern and southern areas of the Syrian Arab Republic.
4.
The removal and delisting of medical supplies from inter -agency cross-line
convoys remained a major challenge, with supplies sufficient for more than 12,195
treatments removed or not allowed to be loaded in October (see table 2). This brings
the total number of medical items removed or not allowed to be loaded to more than
630,000 since the beginning of the year.

22. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions imposed on the
movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict. In particular, access by
the United Nations and its partners to those people living in besieged and hard -toreach locations remains a critical concern.
17-20456

7/20

S/2017/982

23. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for October and November
requested access to 33 locations in besieged and hard -to-reach areas, seeking to
reach 1,206,000 people. Inter-agency convoys are prepared for areas with
multi-sectoral needs where access is limited, to ensure that United Nati ons support
is needs based. In October, only five inter-agency convoys could be dispatched to
besieged and hard-to-reach locations, reaching 199,000 people in need (see table 1
for a list of inter-agency convoys sent in October). Four of these deliveries were
under the October–November plan, reaching some 110,000 people; the 5 October
delivery to Hulah, Homs Governorate, and Harbinafsih, Hama Governorate
(reaching 89,000 people) was a delayed delivery under the August-September plan.
The total number of people reached under the October–November plan to
31 October is 110,000, or 9.1 per cent of the overall number of people to whom
access was originally requested under the bimonthly plan. That number does not
include convoys carrying supplies delivered by other humanitarian actors.
Table 1
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys in October 2017
Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

Number of
beneficiaries
reached

Type of
assistance

Date

Location

5 October

Hulah and Harbinafsih

89 000

89 000

Multisectoral

15 October

Qabun

1 500

1 500

Multisectoral

19 October

Dar al-Kabirah, Ghantu,
Tayr Ma‘lah

40 250

33 500

Multisectoral

26 October

Yalda, Babila,Bayt Saham

57 200

35 000

Multisectoral

30 October

Kafr Batna and Saqba

93 000

40 000

Multisectoral

24. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency deliveries
during the reporting period to locations throughout the country. Single -agency
deliveries are undertaken in areas where access is possible; there are therefore fewer
concerns about the ability of the United Nations to address assessed needs in those
areas. In October, WFP submitted 1,575 official requests to the authorities to obtain
facilitation letters for the transport of food assistance to locations throughout the
country, all of which were approved. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees submitted 65 facilitation letters for the movement of
core relief items and livelihood kits, of which 62 were approved and 3 not, citing
security concerns. Both international and Syrian non -governmental organizations
continued to undertake needs assessments and to provide support (including
medical, educational, psychosocial and protection services) in besieged and hard -toreach locations, under extremely challenging circumstances and in accordance with
humanitarian principles.

8/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of
people reached each month in besieged areas
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September October

25. Humanitarian access continues to face restrictions by parties to the conflict in
besieged and hard-to-reach locations. On average in 2017, only 26 per cent of
beneficiaries scheduled for assistance under specific requests have been reached
through inter-agency cross-line convoys each month. Bureaucratic impediments,
such as non-issuance of facilitation letters by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, continue to be a significant factor in these delays or non -deliveries,
despite the creation of a tripartite coordination mechanism to address such
problems. Access was also restricted by non-State armed opposition groups for
United Nations staff on convoy to Yalda (Damascus Governorate) on 26 October,
who were not granted the security guarantees necessary to travel. This meant that
critical assessments could not be conducted. During the reporting cycle, the
majority of agencies of the United Nations system and United Nations partners
continued to be unable to gain access to the populations in need in areas of the
country still controlled by ISIL.
26. Land deliveries to the north-eastern governorates via the Aleppo-Manbij route
proceeded in a regular manner in October. Through those deliveries, the United
Nations provided food and nutrition assistance to over 380,000 people in Hasakah
and Raqqah Governorates, as well as to accessible parts of north -western Dayr
al-Zawr Governorate. The United Nations and its partners have been responding at
scale to the needs, providing assistance to displaced persons and host communities
in 60 sites, camps and/or areas of high concentrations of internally displaced
persons in Raqqah, Aleppo, Hasakah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates.

17-20456

9/20

S/2017/982

Figure III
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, October 2017

199,000 people reached
People reached in hard-to-

People reached in besieged

Cross-line convoys

reach areas

areas

157,500

41,500

5

6.2 %

9.9 %

Proportion of people in hardto-reach areas reached

Proportion of people in
besieged areas reached

Airdrops

0

2

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas: 2.56 million
Number of people in besieged areas: 419,920
27. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for more than 12,195
treatments were rejected or removed from convoys in October by the Syrian
authorities, according to WHO. Details regarding the treatments and supplies
removed are shown in table 2. Additional medical supplies were scheduled to be
delivered as part of the bimonthly inter-agency convoy plan; however, only five
inter-agency convoys were able to proceed in October. Since the beginning of 2017,
WHO has submitted 10 single-agency requests to the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to gain access to 14 locations in six governorates. The Government
has approved nine requests and one has been rejected.
Table 2
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys in October 2017
Location

Number of
treatments

Types of supplies

Hulah and
Harbinafsih

3 412

Phenobarbitone, amitriptyline hydrochloride, haloperidol, gastroresistant sodium valproate, ketamine hydrochloride injection,
carbamazepine, beclomethasone dipropionate nasal spray, atracurium

Kafr Batna and
Saqba

5 720

Psychotropic medicine or medicines for common symptoms in
palliative care (valproic acid, carbamazepine, haloperidol tablets,
phenobarbitone); medical consumables (syringes, intravenous
catheter, sterile surgical gloves); medical supplies (including
Sphygmomanometer, scale, N95 mask, safety box for used
syringes); medical kits such as pneumonia kits A and B, trauma kits,
emergency health kits and surgical supply kits; medical equipment,
including ultrasound system, oxygen concentrator-sterilizer, benchtop, hot-air surgical cautery device, ventilator for adults, portable
x-ray machine, autoclave mobile x-ray system

__________________
2

10/20

Airdrop operations to Dayr al-Zawr city were discontinued in early September, as military
developments enabled the United Nations and its partners to resume land access.
17-20456

S/2017/982

Location

Number of
treatments

Types of supplies

Dar al-Kabirah

603

Tetracycline hydrochloride, ketamine hydrochloride, oxytocin,
atracurium besylate

Yalda, Babila,
Bayt Saham

2 460

Medical equipment such as water bath, diagnostic ultrasound
system, minor surgery instruments, surgical supply kits, stainless
steel instruments for minor surgery, medicine such as analgesic,
pneumonia kits, antihypertensive, anti-epileptic

Humanitarian response
28. In October, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all available access modalities, including
(a) regular programming from within the Syrian Arab Republic, whereby humanitarian
deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines, (b) cross-line
convoys, whereby assistance from inside the country is delivered across conflict
lines, and (c) cross-border deliveries, whereby assistance is provided to those in
need from Jordan and Turkey (see table 3). In addition to the United Nations and its
partners, non-governmental organizations continued to deliver life -saving assistance
to people in need. The Government continued to provide basic services both in areas
under its control and in many areas beyond its control. Local authorities in many
areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to provide
services, when possible.
Table 3
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through
all modalities in October 2017
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Organization for Migration

Number of
people reached

9 780
44 556

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 705 976

United Nations Children’s Fund

>6 000 000

United Nations Development Programme

461 818

United Nations Population Fund

370 900

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
World Food Programme
World Health Organization

216 703
>3 560 000
396 662

29. During the reporting period, cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey
and Jordan into the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (see figure IV).
In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian authorities in
advance of each shipment, including its content, destination and number of
beneficiaries.
30. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 663 crossborder consignments, with more than 16,844 trucks (11,854 via Bab al -Hawa and
1,596 via Bab al-Salam from Turkey; and 3,394 via Ramtha from Jordan). The
United Nations cross-border operations complement the critical role played by

17-20456

11/20

S/2017/982

international and Syrian non-governmental organizations that provide assistance and
services to millions more from neighbouring countries.
31. In October, for example, the United Nations and its implementing partners
delivered food assistance for more than 797,700 people through cross -border
deliveries from Turkey and Jordan. In October, WHO in Gaziantep conducted two
cross-border deliveries (one via Bab al-Hawa and one via Bab al-Salam) providing
supplies for 9 health care facilities and 80,567 beneficiaries. More than 546,600
people in the southern Syrian Arab Republic benefited from improved access to
clean water through maintenance operations of water and sanitation systems. In
addition, United Nations nutrition partners continued to provide services to more
than 56,000 beneficiaries.
32. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations during the reporting cycle, monitoring 420 trucks used in
20 consignments by seven United Nations entities in October, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each
shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit from the excellent cooperation of
the Governments of Jordan and Turkey. Mechanism monitoring is further supported
by additional monitoring mechanisms in place for the delivery of cross -border
assistance. The United Nations provides 48-hour notice to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic for all shipments. Once in the country, the United Nations
partners that deliver aid ensure that shipments arrive at warehouses. Independent
third-party companies contracted by the United Nations ensure independent
verification of the assistance arriving at the warehouses and further monitor the
distribution and/or service provision of the assistance.
Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners by cluster
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, October 2017
(Thousands)

33. During the reporting period, WHO, UNICEF and their implementing partners
launched a national polio vaccination from 8 to 12 October, targeting 2,738,323
children under 5 years of age. In total, 2,136,759 children under 5 were reached,
representing a coverage rate of 78 per cent. The United Nations Fund for Population
Activities was able to reach 370,900 people in Syria, including 27,992 in hard -toreach areas, with sexual and reproductive health services.
34. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) began its fourth and final round of cash distribution for 2017 on
22 October and it is expected to conclude in the first week of December. By
31 October, 145,865 Palestine refugees had received cash assistance out of the

12/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

418,000 targeted beneficiaries. The third round of UNRWA food assistance delivery is
still ongoing and is expected to conclude in November. During October, 39,130 food
parcels were distributed, benefiting 61,639 Palestine refugees across the country.
35. Throughout October, the Russian Federation sent information bulletins to the
United Nations from the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the
Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance.
Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms of
humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian financing
36. As at 1 November, the humanitarian response plan for the Syrian Ar ab Republic
was 43 per cent funded, with $1.43 billion of the requested $3.35 billion received
under the plan.
Figure V
Humanitarian response plan funding, 31 October 2017
(Millions of United States dollars)

Food security and agriculture

42%

Non-food items and shelter

22%

484.6

Health

29%

464.9

Water, sanitation and hygiene

21%

287.0

Protection and community services

13%

249.9

Education

40%

218.7

Early recovery and livelihoods

8%

161.9

Coordination and common services

92%

65.5

Nutrition

10%

56.7

Camp coordination and camp management

12%

32.6

Unmet
requirements

Logistics

145%

16.5

$1.92 billion

Emergency telecommunications

64%

0.9

1 312.1

43 per
cent
57 per
cent

Cluster not yet specified

Visas and registrations
37. A total of 49 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in October. Of those, 27 were approved in
October, 3 were denied and 19 remain pending. Of the 485 new visa applications
submitted in earlier months, 43 were approved in October and 5 were denied. A total
of 60 United Nations visa renewal requests were submitted in October, of which 39
were approved and 21 remain pending. An additional 620 requests for visa renewals
were submitted in earlier months; all were approved.
38. A total of 23 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to operate in the country. Some 220
national non-governmental organizations are authorized by the Syrian Arab
Republic to operate through 315 branches countrywide.
17-20456

13/20

S/2017/982

Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
39. Programmes of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes are
implemented in areas affected by frequent clashes among belligerents, airstrikes,
regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and asymmetric attacks. ISIL is also
increasingly reverting to carrying out asymmetric attacks.
40. On 1 October and 15 October, the UNRWA distribution centre in Damascus
was hit with mortars, damaging part of the infrastructure, including the roof and the
guard’s booth. No casualties were reported.
41. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 21 staff members of the United Nations or agencies of the United
Nations system, of whom 17 were UNRWA staff members, 66 were staff members
and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and 8 were staff members and
volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of
international and national non-governmental organizations are also reported to have
been killed.
42. A total of 28 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and 27
UNRWA staff members) are detained or missing.

III. Observations
43. I remain concerned that, despite the creation of de-escalation zones and
intense effort by some countries to reduce the level of violence, violations of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law continue to be
reported month after month, causing harm to civilians and damage to civilian
objects throughout the country.
44. I once again call on all parties to the conflict to take constant care to spare
civilians and civilian infrastructure and to comply with all their other obligations
under international humanitarian law. I remind all Member States of their obligation
to ensure that the parties that they support on the ground also comply with
international humanitarian law.
45. Beyond the violence and insecurity limiting humanitarian access, admini strative
restrictions by all parties to the conflict continue to impede humanitarian access.
These restrictions directly hinder the ability of the United Nations and its partners to
deliver lifesaving assistance to those in need.
46. I reiterate my call for the renewal of Security Council resolution 2165 (2014)
and subsequent resolutions, pursuant to which the United Nations provides a vital
lifeline of assistance to those in need across northern and sout hern parts of the
country. The United Nations does not have an alternative form of delivery that can
replicate the reach of its cross-border activity, particularly as cross-line convoys
continue to be hindered from reaching those most in need. Improved acc ess through
cross-line convoys is critical to ensure that the severe and worsening situation of
civilians, including children, as observed by the United Nations in eastern Ghutah,
is brought to an end.
47. It is critical that assistance continues to be delivered through all possible
modalities, through regular deliveries providing aid within the Syrian Arab Republic,
through convoys providing aid across conflict lines and through cross -border
assistance in vast areas across the northern and southern parts of the country.
Without any one of these operations, civilian suffering will increase. International
humanitarian law requires all parties to the conflict to allow and facilitate rapid and
14/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for civilians in need whic h is impartial in
character and conducted without adverse distinction.
48. Accountability is central to sustainable peace. I reiterate my call for the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International Criminal
Court. I also call upon all States, all parties to the conflict, civil society and the
United Nations system as a whole to cooperate fully with the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
49. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic has caused and continues to cause
immeasurable suffering to millions of civilians. It is imperative to see suff ering
lessened through the provision of immediate life-saving assistance for all in need.
This is the least that should be done, yet every month far fewer are reached than is
needed. At the same time, we must remain focused on a sustainable solution to end
the conflict. This can be achieved only through a political agreement, guided by
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva Communiqué of 30 June
2012. In that regard, I welcome the announcement by my Special Envoy, Staffan de
Mistura, of the eighth round of intra-Syrian negotiations, to be held in Geneva on
28 November. I echo his call on all parties to negotiate in good faith and with real
intent to end this conflict. Ultimately, an inclusive political process convened under
the auspices of the United Nations, together with the backing of the international
community, is the only course that can provide a lasting solution to the Syrian
conflict and bring an end to the tremendous suffering of t he Syrian people.

17-20456

15/20

S/2017/982

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
October 2017*
Rif Dimashq and Damascus Governorates
• On 2 October, a twin suicide attack was carried out on a police station in the
southern Damascus neighbourhood of Maydan, allegedly killing at least 15 men .
ISIL reportedly claimed responsibility shortly after the incident.
• On 6 October, residential areas of Duma were simultaneously hit by airstrikes
and ground-based strikes, reportedly killing four civilians (including a child),
injuring at least 10 others and severely damaging a medical facility.
• On 11 October, two suicide attackers attempted to storm a police station on
Khalid Ibn Al-Walid Street in Damascus and detonated their explosives at the
main entrance, reportedly killing two men. ISIL allegedly claimed responsibility
for the attack.
• On 15 October, ground-based strikes hit Qishla Street and other areas in the
old city of Damascus. At least three civilians were allegedly killed and five
others injured.
• On 15 October, a female teacher was reportedly killed in Saqba when a
ground-based strike hit a bus stop in the main street connecting Failaq
Ar-Rahman-controlled Saqba to Kafr Batna.
• On 16 October, ground-based strikes in the vicinity of a school in Kafr Batna,
allegedly killed a female teacher and her daughter and injuring at least three
other civilians.
• On 16 October, airstrikes hit a residential area in opposition -held Hazzah and
partly destroyed a building, allegedly killing a girl and her grandmother.
• On 20 October, a series of ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Kafr
Batna, reportedly killing a 9-year-old boy and injuring at least 17 other
civilians, including women and children.
• On 26 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Duma allegedly
killing six civilians, including a woman and a boy, and wounding at least 10
other civilians.
• On 26 October, ground-based strikes hit a residential and market area in
Saqba, reportedly killing two civilians employed as cleaners by the de facto
local authorities.
• On 29 October, two successive ground-based strikes hit residential areas of
Kafr Batna in the vicinity of a kindergarten, causing a state of panic among
children in the kindergarten and local inhabitants, but reportedly causing no
severe casualties.
* In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on
the ground and the incidents that occurred during the month that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to compliance with
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the
Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing
of all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of internation al
human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
16/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

• On 29 October, four ground-based strikes reportedly hit a residential area in
Hamuriyah, killing at least eight civilians, including three women. Two
journalists reportedly heading to the kindergarten in Kafr Batna were hit by
one of the strikes: one of them was allegedly killed outright while the other
was transported to a medical facility in the area.
• On 29 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Saqba, reportedly
killing three civilians including a boy, and injuring an unknown number of
other civilians.
• On 31 October, a ground-based strike hit the entrance of a primary school in
Jisrayn, reportedly killing four boys and one adult civilian, in addition injuring
an unknown number of others, including several children. The strike occurred
at the moment when children were leaving school, in accordance with the
schedule followed in the area.
• On 31 October, two ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Misraba. One
of the strikes fell in the vicinity of a school and reportedly killed three
civilians, including a girl, a boy and his father, and injured an unknown
number civilians.
Dar‘a and Suwayda’ Governorates
• On 7 October, ground-based strikes hit opposition-controlled Mismiyah city
north-east of Dar‘a Governorate, reportedly killing a civilian man, his wife
and their son, who were all displaced from the Rural Damascus town of Duma.
• On 10 October, a male civilian was allegedly hit and killed by gunfire in
Eastern Ghariyah as clashes between Government forces and their allies, and
Southern Front-linked armed opposition groups occurred in the vicinity of the
Dar‘a/Damascus highway.
• On 13 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Government controlled Dar‘a al-Mahattah in Dar‘a city, reportedly killing three civilian
men, including one displaced from opposition-controlled Dar‘a al-Balad.
• On 14 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Dar‘a al-Balad and
reportedly killed a boy and injured at least two civilians.
• On 19 October, ground-based strikes hit opposition-controlled Harah,
allegedly killing a 12-year-old boy and a civilian woman.
• On 28 October, a civilian woman reportedly died as a result of her injuries
after being hit by unidentified airstrikes carried out on Saham al-Jawlan on
23 October.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 16 October, unknown fighters captured 11 male civilians from their houses
in Tall Rif‘at town in northern Aleppo Governorate. The whereabouts of those
civilians remain unknown.
Idlib Governorate
• On the morning of 6 October, airstrikes hit residential areas in the Eastern
neighbourhood of Khan Shaykhun city, reportedly killing a 13 -year-old boy
and injuring an elderly man and a girl.
• On 7 October, airstrikes hit residential areas in the Eastern neighbourhood of
Khan Shaykhun city and allegedly killed a woman and another civilian from
the same family and injured two others, one of them a woman.
17-20456

17/20

S/2017/982

• On 9 October, airstrikes hit residential areas in the Western neighbourhood of
Khan Shaykhun city, reportedly severely injuring five civilians, including one
woman.
• On 11 October, a girl was allegedly killed when an improvised explosive
device detonated near a Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham checkpoint in a residential area
of Armanaz town, and at least three other civilians, including a woman, were
injured. The incident also reportedly killed at least six Hay’at Tahrir Al -Sham
fighters.
• On 28 October, airstrikes hit residential areas in Sinjar, reportedly killing a
male civilian and his son and injuring another boy. The victims were all from
the same family.
Hama Governorate
• On the morning of 4 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Kafr
Zayta city and reportedly killed three male civilians.
• On 16 October, ground-based strikes hit agricultural lands in Lataminah,
allegedly killing a male civilian and his three-year-old son and severely
injuring another male civilian from the same family.
Homs Governorate
• On 14 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of oppositioncontrolled Ghantu in northern rural Homs, reportedly killing a boy and
injuring at least six other civilians including women and children.
• On 16 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in oppositioncontrolled Talbisah city and reportedly killed a civilian woman and injured at
least four other civilians.
• On 26 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of oppositioncontrolled Rastan in northern Homs, reportedly killing a male civilian an d two
boys from the same family, including a father and his son. The strikes also
injured a number of other civilians.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 1 October, airstrikes hit several residential areas near a hospital and
Masriyah roundabout in ISIL-controlled Albu Kamal city in eastern Dayr
al-Zawr Governorate. At least nine civilians from two families, including two
women and a girl, were reportedly killed and nine other civilians injured. In its
public reporting, the United States-led coalition stated that, on the same day, it
had conducted three strikes destroying an ISIL wellhead and engaging two
tactical units near Albu Kamal.
• On 1 October, airstrikes hit a residential area in the vicinity of a hospital
behind Arba’in Street in Mayadin city, allegedly killing at least two male
civilians and injuring another civilian.
• On 4 October, airstrikes in ISIL-held Asharah city in eastern Dayr al-Zawr hit
water crossings while civilians were reportedly trying to cross the river,
allegedly killing at least 15 civilians, including one woman and five boys.
Civilians are understood to use the point to cross from Asharah towards Darnaj
town as the majority of the bridges in the area have been destroyed.
• On 5 October, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of the Governmentcontrolled Qusur neighbourhood in Dayr al-Zawr city, allegedly killing nine
18/20

17-20456

S/2017/982

civilians, including three women and three boys. The United States -led
coalition publicly reported that on the same day, it conducted two strikes and
engaged an ISIL tactical unit and destroyed two improvised explosive devices
and a logistics node near Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 11 October, airstrikes hit residential areas near Omar Ibn Al -Khattab
mosque in the centre of Albu Kamal city, reportedly killing at least 13
civilians, including five women and six children from one family. In its public
reporting, the United States-led coalition stated that, on the same day near
Albu Kamal, it had conducted a strike engaging an ISIL tactical unit and
destroying an ISIL vehicle.
• On 11 October, airstrikes hit water crossings between Qurayya city and
Tayyani town on the Euphrates River in eastern Dayr al -Zawr while civilians
were reportedly trying to cross and allegedly killed 11 civilians, including two
women, one girl and two boys.
• On 17 October, airstrikes hit a group of commercial vehicles near Masriyah
roundabout close to Suwa’iyyah Bridge in Albu Kamal city, and reportedly
killed at least eight civilians: three Iraqi refugees, four displaced civilians from
Dayr al-Zawr city and one civilian from Albu Kamal. The United States-led
coalition publicly reported that on the same day, coalition military forces had
conducted two strikes consisting of three engagements against ISIL targets
near Albu Kamal. The strikes reportedly engaged an ISIL tactical unit and
destroyed two vehicle-borne-bomb factories and an ISIL headquarters.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 3 October, airstrikes hit close to water wells in ISIL -controlled Shuhada’
neighbourhood in northern Raqqah city and allegedly killed at least 14
civilians, including six women and one girl, and injured no less than 11 other
civilians. The civilians — many of them internally displaced persons from
Tadmur in Homs Governorate — reportedly gathered around the wells to get
water. On the same day, airstrikes hit a residential building on Marandiyah
Street in the Badu neighbourhood of Raqqah city and allegedly killed 16
civilians, including three women and 11 children. On 3 October, at least 15
civilians from one family were reportedly killed when airstrikes and ground based strikes hit residential areas of the ISIL-held Tawasiꞌiyah neighbourhood
in Raqqah city. The airstrikes hit a building near Hadiqah al-Mururiyah area
which was used by the civilians as a shelter. In its public reporting, the United
States-led coalition stated that on 3 October near Raqqah, it conducted 35
strikes, which engaged 16 ISIL tactical units.
• On 4 October, ISIL-controlled Badu neighbourhood in Raqqah city was hit
with airstrikes and ground-based strikes that allegedly killed at least seven
civilians, including two women and four children. The United States -led
coalition publicly reported that, on the same day near Raqqah, it had
conducted 51 strikes engaging 17 ISIL tactical units.
• On 11 October, airstrikes hit a residential building in the heart of Raqqah city
and reportedly killed 27 civilians, including 15 women and seven children
(two boys and five girls). In its public reporting, the United State s-led
coalition stated that, near Raqqah on the same day, it conducted 32 strikes
engaging three ISIL tactical units.
• At noon on 12 October, airstrikes hit residential areas in Badu neighbourhood
in Raqqah city and allegedly killed at least seven civilians, including one
woman and a child. The United States-led coalition publicly reported that, on
17-20456

19/20

S/2017/982

the same day near Raqqah, it conducted 29 strikes and engaged nine ISIL
tactical units.
• On 14 October, Badu neighbourhood in Raqqah city was hit with airstrikes
that reportedly killed eight civilians.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 12 October, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device was detonated
close to a Kurdish militia-controlled checkpoint in Abu Fas village at the
border of Hasakah and Dayr al-Zawr Governorates, and reportedly killed at
least 17 civilians, including at least two women and four children. The
majority of those killed were believed to be displaced persons from Dayr
al-Zawr.
• On 25 October, Kurdish fighters raided the makeshift Al -Sadd internally
displaced person camp located in Arish village in southern Hasakah
Governorate. They searched the cell phones of all the internally displaced
persons in the camp, allegedly looking for those who sent pictures and
documented violations taking place inside the camp.

20/20

17-20456
