S/2018/209

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2348
(2017), in which the Council requested me to report to it every six months on the
implementation of the commitments made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1 It provides
an overview of peace and security developments in the Great Lakes region since the
issuance of my previous report (S/2017/825) and covers the period from 15 September
2017 to 28 February 2018. The report also sets out my vision on furthering the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, as requested in
Security Council resolution 2389 (2017).

II. Major developments
A.

Security situation
2.
During the period under review, the security situation in the Great Lakes region
was marked by persistent conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and the Central African Republic; continued activities by armed groups; and
slow progress in the repatriation of disarmed foreign combatants. Continuing tensions
around political processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
further contributed to instability in the region.
3.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the security situation remains a cause
for serious concern. Non-State armed groups continued to attack civilians and target
Congolese security and defence forces and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MO NUSCO). As
detailed in my report on MONUSCO dated 5 January 2018 ( S/2018/16), a number of

__________________
1

18-03569 (E)

In this context, the region includes the 13 signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four intergovernmental
organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Communi ty and the
United Nations

120318

*1803569*

S/2018/209

Mai-Mai groups opposed to the Government joined forces in coalitions, such as the
Mouvement national pour le renouveau and the Coalition nationale du peuple pour la
souveraineté du Congo. Of note was the attack by Mai-Mai Yakutumba on Uvira, the
second largest city in South Kivu, on 28 September, which was repelled by
MONUSCO and the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic o f the Congo
(FARDC). On 8 February, the newly appointed FARDC commander for Operation
Sukola II in South Kivu, General Philemon Yav, announced that FARDC operations
had resulted in the death of 83 Mai-Mai Yakutumba elements and 6 FARDC soldiers,
as well as the capture of 120 Mai-Mai elements. He added that almost all localities
formerly under the control of the armed group had been recovered by FARDC,
including the Ubwari Peninsula and the coastline of Lake Tanganyika from Kalemie
to Uvira.
4.
On 11 October, a coalition of the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda/Forces combattantes abacunguzi (FDLR-FOCA) and Nyatura attacked
Bwiza, Rutshuru territory, killing three officers of the Congolese National Police and
five civilians. In a separate development, a former leader of FDLR, Colonel Evariste
Nizeyimana, voluntarily surrendered to MONUSCO on 17 December. He was
transferred to the Congolese authorities on the understanding that the death penalty
would not be applied.
5.
In another worrisome development, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
stepped up their attacks after a lull in activities. On 9 October, suspected ADF
elements attacked a MONUSCO base in Beni territory, North Kivu. Two Tanzanian
peacekeepers were killed and 18 injured. On 7 December, the Mission suffered the
heaviest loss in recent memory when presumed ADF elements attacked a MONUSCO
contingent in Semuliki, North Kivu, killing 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers and wounding
43 others. On 22 December, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces stated that they had
launched air attacks on ADF camps in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
reportedly killing 100 rebels. On 13 January, FARDC announced the launch of an
offensive operation against ADF and other armed groups in the Beni and neighbouring
Lubero areas in North Kivu. On 14 January in Entebbe, Uganda, the President of
Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, in his capacity as Chair of the East African Community,
convened a meeting of the military and intelligence chiefs of Burundi, Kenya,
Rwanda, South Sudan, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania to review the
security situation in the region. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and South
Africa were also represented. Participants agreed on the need for a coordinated
approach to neutralize ADF, including through the operationalization of the Joint
Follow-up Mechanism in Kasese, Uganda.
6.
Insecurity also continued in the border areas in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In one incident, on 15 September, FARDC
soldiers reportedly killed 36 and injured 117 Burundian asylum seekers who had been
protesting the detention of Burundian nationals in South Kivu. The Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo stated that the soldiers had acted in self defence, as they had been attacked by armed elements within the group. It announced
that it had opened an inquiry into the incident. On 13 February, clashes reportedly
broke out between the Rwanda Defence Force and FARDC in Virunga National Park,
in North Kivu Province. At the request of both countries, the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
launched an investigation into the incident.
7.
In a separate development, the Vice Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Léonard
She Okitundu, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Burundi, Alain Aimé Nyamitwe, met in Bujumbura on 24 and 25 October to discuss

2/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

border security, including the neutralization of negative forces and the stabilization
of the Ruzizi plains, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
8.
There has been no significant progress in the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations, including the repatriation of elements of t he former Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) still in Rwanda and Uganda. In a report published on 4 December,
Human Rights Watch alleged that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had recruited at least 200 former M23 militants in neighbouring countries to
help suppress public protests by opposition supporters. The Government refuted the
allegations. For its part, the political leadership of the former M23 claimed, in a
statement dated 4 December, that the Government had covertly recruited deser ters
and other undisciplined elements expelled from its ranks.
9.
Meanwhile, a technical committee set up by the Ugandan authorities discussed
the granting of legal status to the former M23 combatants living in Uganda. On
4 January, the committee recommended that a refugee eligibility committee hold
hearings on the 263 former M23 combatants still in Bihanga camp. Those deemed
eligible would be relocated after undergoing a rehabilitation, reinsertion and
reintegration programme.
10. No progress was recorded regarding the repatriation to Rwanda of FDLR
ex-combatants and their dependants who remain in Congolese transit camps.
11. There was progress, however, in the relocation of elements of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) accommodated in
MONUSCO premises. As of January 2018, 256 SPLM/A-IO elements out of an initial
total of 627 had relocated to third countries as a result of joint efforts by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO.
12. In South Sudan, fighting between forces of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition continued, despite the signing
of a new cessation of hostilities agreement by the warring parties that took effect on
24 December. As a consequence, new influxes of South Sudanese refugees were
recorded in the Provinces of Haut-Uélé and Ituri in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
13. Continued instability and an upsurge of violence in the Central African Republic
continued to affect the region. Increasingly fractured armed actors with loose
affiliations to anti-balaka or ex-Séléka factions and driven by competition over
resources carried out attacks mostly along ethnic and confessional lines. Clashes
between rival militias broke out in Bangui and Ouham-Pendé prefecture in western
Central African Republic. As a result, thousands of refugees crossed the border into
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

B.

Political developments
14. Delays in electoral processes and disagreements over election results, as well as
disputed constitutional amendments, perpetuated tensions and unrest in some
countries in the region.
15. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Independent National El ectoral
Commission published an electoral calendar on 5 November, postponing the
presidential, legislative and provincial elections until 23 December 2018. On
24 December, the President, Joseph Kabila, promulgated an amended electoral law
and the 2018 Finance Law, which allocated $619 million to the upcoming elections.
On 31 January, the Commission announced the completion of voter registration in the
Kasai provinces, marking a key electoral milestone. According to estimates by the

18-03569

3/17

S/2018/209

Commission, over 46 million potential voters have been registered countrywide, 47
per cent of whom are women.
16. The overall political climate in the country, however, remained characterized by
deep divisions among Congolese stakeholders. On 31 December 2017, on the
occasion of the first anniversary of the political agreement of 31 December 2016,
which had been brokered by the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Comité laïc de coordination (CLC), supported by the Catholic Church,
opposition parties and a number of civil society groups and mainstream opposition
stakeholders, including the Félix Tshisekedi-led faction of the Rassemblement des
forces politiques et sociales de la République démocratique du Congo acquises au
changement, organized a march to call for the full implementation of the agreement
and a commitment by the President not to seek a third term in office. National security
forces in Kinshasa and other cities violently dispersed the protests of 31 December,
as well as a subsequent protest organized by CLC on 21 January. The disproportionate
use of force by security services during the two protests resulted in 16 people killed,
more than 100 injured and around 100 arrested. A demonstration by CLC on
25 February resulted in 2 people killed, 47 injured and 102 arrested. During a press
conference held on 26 January, the President reaffirmed that the electoral process was
under way, with oversight from the Independent National Electoral Commission and
in line with the electoral calendar published on 5 November. On 31 January, during
an interview with international media, the Government Spokesperson and Minister of
Communications, Lambert Mende, indicated that the presidential majority would
announce the name of its candidate in July, in accordanc e with the electoral calendar.
17. Regional stakeholders and organizations continued to support efforts to break
the political impasse and ensure a peaceful transition in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Chairperson of the Southern African Develo pment Community
(SADC), the President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, travelled to Kinshasa on 14 and
15 October 2017 to discuss the political and security situation with Mr. Kabila. In a
joint statement issued on 15 October, the two Presidents reaffirmed the ir commitment
to the decisions adopted by SADC at its thirty-seventh summit, held in Pretoria on
19 and 20 August 2017, in which SADC, inter alia, called for the continued
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement. The Executive Secretary of
SADC, Stergomena Tax, travelled to Kinshasa from 30 January to 2 February to
examine progress and challenges in the preparations for the elections. In a press
briefing, she expressed satisfaction at the progress achieved and called for concerted
support for the electoral process from the international community.
18. A delegation of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union visited
Kinshasa from 22 to 26 October. In a communiqué dated 7 November, the Peace and
Security Council, inter alia, welcomed the publication of the electoral calendar and
called upon all Congolese actors to exercise restraint, favour dialogue and respect the
electoral calendar. It also called for the establishment of a coordination mechanism
comprising the countries in the region, the African Union, SADC, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the United Nations and the European Union to ensure effective and coherent
support for a political solution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Subsequently, a senior official of the African Union Commission held meetings with
Mr. Kabila and other Congolese stakeholders on 11 January in Kinshasa. Speaking at
the opening of the thirtieth African Union Summit, on 28 January, th e Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, stated that recent tensions
and violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo had again underscored the
importance of fully implementing the 31 December 2016 agreement, with a view to
holding elections by December 2018.

4/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

19. On 9 December, the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, in his dual
capacity as Chair of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and Chair of the International Confer ence on the Great Lakes
Region, hosted a tripartite summit with the leaders of Angola and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to review preparations for the electoral process and assess the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreement. On 14 February, Mr. Sassou
Nguesso and the President of Angola, João Lourenço, visited Kinshasa for a second
tripartite summit with Mr. Kabila. In a communiqué issued after the summit, they
expressed their commitment to peaceful elections, welcomed the progress achieved
in the “consensual process emanating from the 31 December agreement ” and called
upon all stakeholders “to exercise restraint”. They also called for the urgent
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the Nairobi
Declarations. They agreed to meet again in April 2018 in Luanda.
20. In Burundi, the political situation remained fragile. On 24 October, the Council
of Ministers discussed proposed constitutional amendments, including the
replacement of the current two five-year presidential terms with two seven-year
terms. The Government has stated its intention to put the amendments to a
referendum. Members of the opposition criticized the proposed amendments, noting
that a referendum under the current political conditions would not b e free or fair.
Furthermore, various Burundian stakeholders and partners raised concerns that the
proposed revisions could reverse some of the gains that had accrued from the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
21. The East African Community convened the fourth session of the inter-Burundi
dialogue from 27 November to 8 December in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania,
facilitated by the former President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin
Mkapa. Following the session, Burundian opposition groups met in Nairobi on 26 and
27 January. On 19 February, they sent a communiqué to Mr. Mkapa, expressing
concern over the proposed constitutional changes and the absence of political space.
On 23 February, the East African Community held its nineteenth ordinary summit of
Heads of State in Munyonyo, Uganda. The summit expressed appreciation for the
efforts of Mr. Mkapa and Mr. Museveni in facilitating and mediating the inter-Burundi
dialogue and indicated that the East African Community would c ontinue to lead the
process.
22. On 21 October, security forces in the United Republic of Tanzania reportedly
arrested senior leaders of the Forces populaires du Burundi, including the leader of
the armed group, General Jérémie Ntiranyibagira, and the second in command,
Colonel Edouard Nshimirimana. Reports as to whether the two leaders were
extradited to Burundi have not been confirmed.
23. With regard to South Sudan, from 18 to 22 December the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development organized in Addis Ababa the first phase of the high-level
forum on the revitalization of the 2015 peace agreement. On 21 December, the parties
signed an Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access. The second phase of the talks co mmenced on 5 February,
dealing with, inter alia, power-sharing and governance issues. The talks were
adjourned on 19 February.
24. In Kenya, the political environment deteriorated amid divisions over the rerun
of the presidential election of 26 October, following a ruling by the country’s
Supreme Court in September. The incumbent President, Uhuru Kenyatta, won more
than 98 per cent of the vote and was sworn in for a second term on 28 November. The
leader of the opposition National Super Alliance, Raila Odi nga, refused to recognize
Mr. Kenyatta’s re-election. On 30 January, the Alliance organized a ceremony to
swear in Mr. Odinga as the “People’s President”. In reaction, the Government of
18-03569

5/17

S/2018/209

Kenya issued a statement calling the ceremony an attempt to subvert th e legally
constituted Government. It announced its decision to conduct an investigation. The
Government also temporarily shut down some media houses that had broadcast the
ceremony.
25. In Uganda, a parliamentary bill that removes from the country’s Constitution
the age limit for the President and local leaders was enacted on 27 December.
Opposition and some civil society groups criticized the move and filed petitions
against the bill in the High Court. On 2 January, the leader of the opposition Forum
for Democratic Change, Kizza Besigye, called for a defiance campaign against the
Government.
26. On 14 February, Jacob Zuma resigned as President of South Africa. Cyril
Ramaphosa of the African National Congress will serve as President of South Africa
until 2019, when he is expected to run in the presidential election.

C.

Humanitarian situation
27. Ongoing conflicts, political tensions and food insecurity continued to affect
millions of people across the Great Lakes region, causing an alarming humanitaria n
crisis and further undermining regional stability. Close to 11 million people have been
forcibly displaced. Yet despite rising needs, funding for humanitarian operations
remained inadequate. As of mid-February 2018, two regional refugee response plans
totalling $1.891 billion had been launched for South Sudan and Burundi, and the
response plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo was being drafted.
28. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
deteriorated drastically in 2017. There are over 4.4 million internally displaced
persons, more than double the amount recorded in 2016. This is the largest population
of internally displaced persons in any country on the African continent. In addition,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo hosted over 537,000 refugees from other
African countries, and influxes from Burundi, the Central African Republic and South
Sudan continued. Conversely, over 683,000 Congolese lived as refugees in
neighbouring countries. According to the Internal Displ acement Monitoring Centre,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo was, for the second consecutive year, the
country worst affected by conflict-related displacement in the world. In the light of
the dramatic increase in humanitarian needs, the United Nations activated the highest
level of emergency preparedness in the Provinces of Kasai, Tanganyika and South
Kivu and supported the development of a humanitarian response plan, which requires
$1.68 billion to address the urgent needs of 10.5 million people.
29. In South Sudan, the humanitarian crisis reached emergency levels. More than
7 million people were in need of humanitarian assistance, including nearly 2 million
internally displaced persons. There were over 2.4 million South Sudanese refugees
and asylum seekers, more than 1 million of whom are in Uganda, which remained the
largest refugee host country in Africa, with more than 1.4 million refugees in total.
30. A sharp increase in humanitarian needs was also reported in the Central African
Republic, with over 542,000 people having fled to neighbouring countries. Over
688,000 people were internally displaced, an increase of 70 per cent from early 2017.
31. The humanitarian situation in Burundi remained dire. An estimated 180,000
people were internally displaced, and close to 425,000 were refugees in neighbouring
countries. Of the more than 250,000 Burundian refugees in the United Republic of
Tanzania, some 13,000 have returned home on a voluntary basis. On 9 February, the
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, John Magufuli, announced that the

6/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

country was withdrawing from the comprehensive refugee response framework,
citing insecurity and the lack of international funding.
32. The cessation of refugee status for Rwandan refugees in various host count ries
entered into effect on 31 December 2017. However, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has not invoked the cessation clause, nor has it pronounced on a possible date
for the cessation of refugee status or on arrangements for durable solutions, for
instance, local integration for those affected. Despite voluntary returns on a large
scale, totalling around 18,000 in 2017, the country continues to host an estimated
220,000 Rwandan refugees. The organized voluntary repatriation of Rwandan
refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo has continued into early 2018.

D.

Human rights
33. Serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law continued
to be reported, especially in countries affected by conflicts and political and electoral
crises. Those violations include extrajudicial and arbitrary executions, enforced
disappearances, rape and other forms of sexual violence, restrictions on the rights to
freedom of expression, association and assembly, and arbitrary arrests and de tentions.
34. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, human rights violations were
increasingly reported. In a separate development, on 15 December, the International
Criminal Court decided that the former President of the Union des patriotes
congolais/Forces patriotiques pour la libération du Congo, Thomas Lubanga, was
liable for $10 million in collective reparations to former child soldiers.
35. On 26 October, the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi, established by the
Human Rights Council, presented its report to the Third Committee of the General
Assembly. The report documented serious human rights violations, including the
repression and intimidation of civilians and opposition members, committed since the
beginning of the crisis in 2015. The report also noted that most violations were
committed by State agents, including intelligence services, the police and the army,
with support from the youth league of the ruling party, known as Imbonerakure.
36. On 25 October, the International Criminal Court announced its decision to open
an investigation into alleged crimes against humanity committed in Burundi, or by
Burundian nationals outside the country, between April 2015 and October 2017. The
Court argued that there were reasonable grounds to believe that State agents and
groups implementing State policies, together with the Imbonerakure, had launched a
widespread and systematic attack against Burundian civilians. On 27 October,
Burundi withdrew from the Rome Statute and thus became the first country to leave
the International Criminal Court.
37. In South Sudan, all parties to the conflict continued to commit gross human
rights violations. The Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan, established in
March 2016, collected several accounts of incidents during a v isit to the country in
December 2017.
38. In the Central African Republic, serious violations of human rights continued.
In a communiqué dated 11 October, the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide expressed concern about the scope of the criminal atrocities committed with
impunity by armed groups and condemned the incitement to ethnic and religious
hatred instigated by armed groups and accomplice politicians.

18-03569

7/17

S/2018/209

III. Implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
39. During the reporting period, signatory countries continued to uphold their
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, despite
significant challenges, including ongoing activities by negative forces in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region; the slow repatriation of
disarmed combatants present in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in neighbouring countries; and ongoing conflicts and political crises in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan, all with significant cross-border implications.

A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
40. Further information on the implementation of the national commitments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is contained in my most recent report on
MONUSCO (S/2018/174).

B.

Commitments of the region
41. The International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and SADC, together
with other subregional organizations, including the East African Community,
continued to collaborate with the African Union and the United Nations to address
political and security challenges in the region.
42. On 19 October, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region held its
seventh ordinary summit of Heads of State and Government in Brazzaville. With
regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, member States of the International
Conference called for the implementation of the 31 December 2016 agreemen t. They
also urged relevant stakeholders to accelerate the repatriation to Rwanda of FDLR
ex-combatants who remain in Congolese transit camps, and to urgently convene a
meeting to review implementation of the commitments of the Nairobi Declarations
with regard to M23.
43. In addition, member States of the Conference called for the rapid
operationalization of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism, created to coordinate regional
efforts to neutralize ADF. They also recommended the strengthening of operations
conducted by FARDC against negative forces, with support from the Intervention
Brigade of the MONUSCO force. At the summit, the Congo took over as Chair of the
Conference from Angola.
44. On 23 February in Kampala, the East African Community held its fourth retre at
for Heads of State on infrastructure and health financing and development, which was
focused on deepening and widening regional integration through infrastructure and
health sector development. Initiatives to boost transport, energy, civil aviation and
cross-border health services were identified.

C.

Commitments of the international community
45. On 12 October, at a meeting of the International Contact Group for the Great
Lakes Region held in The Hague, Netherlands, participants reviewed the political,
security and humanitarian developments in the Great Lakes region, in particular in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. They reiterated the centrality of

8/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

the 31 December 2016 agreement and called for more proactive and concerted action
by the members of the Contact Group.
46. Other international partners continued to support the implement ation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including Norway, which the Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region visited on 19 February to meet the State Secretary
of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of International Development and other stakehol ders.
Norway renewed its yearly financial support to the Special Envoy’s trust fund for the
implementation of his road map.
47. With a view to enhancing efforts by regional organizations to implement the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, my Specia l Envoy met with the
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
Zachary Muburi-Muita, in Bujumbura on 16 November. He also met the new Special
Representative of the African Union for the Great Lakes Region and Head of th e
African Union Liaison Office in Burundi, Basile Ikouébé, in Nairobi on 20 December.
Furthermore, my Special Envoy met the Executive Secretary of SADC on 6 February
in Gaborone. Discussions included the need for resolute action to neutralize negative
forces, repatriate disarmed foreign combatants and their dependants and support
dialogue and political processes in the region. During my Special Envoy ’s meeting
with the Executive Secretary of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the two agreed on joint activities in the areas of women’s empowerment,
natural resources, displacement and judicial cooperation.
48. On 22 January, my Special Envoy convened a biannual meeting with United
Nations Resident Coordinators and Regional Directors, with a view to promoting a
shared analysis of political and security developments in the Great Lakes region,
reiterating the need to address cross-border issues and ensuring that programmatic
interventions are aligned with the political objectives stated in the road map of the
Special Envoy.

IV. Implementation of the road map of the Special Envoy
A.

Oversight mechanisms of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
49. On 2 October, the Technical Support Committee held its nineteenth meeting in
Nairobi to prepare the eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The Committee
reviewed the recommendations from its field visit to the eastern p art of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in September, especially with regard to the
neutralization of negative forces, the repatriation of ex-combatants and new security
concerns.
50. On 19 October, following the seventh ordinary summit of Heads of Sta te and
Government of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Congo
hosted the eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held in
Brazzaville. The President of the Congo took over from the President of Angola as
Chair of the Mechanism. The meeting was preceded by a gathering of ministers for
foreign affairs on 17 October, at which the report and recommendations of the
Technical Support Committee were endorsed.
51. With regard to negative forces, the Regional Oversight Mechanism called for
the strengthening of the Intervention Brigade of the MONUSCO force. The leaders
of the region also called for the repatriation, without conditions, and no later than
20 October 2018, of disarmed FDLR combatants and their dependants still in camps

18-03569

9/17

S/2018/209

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and of ex-M23 members who remain in
Rwanda and Uganda. The leaders also recommended the reactivation of the regional
follow-up mechanism to expedite the repatriation process.
52. The Regional Oversight Mechanism noted that, despite delays, the 31 December
2016 agreement remained a viable framework for resolving the political crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard, regional leaders stressed the need
to implement confidence-building measures, publish a consensual electoral calendar
and pass the requisite electoral legislation and an electoral budget.
53. Regional leaders also expressed concern over the increasing displacement of
populations in the Great Lakes region over the past year. They encouraged my Special
Envoy to hold consultations with relevant stakeholders to further promote durable
solutions to displacement.
54. On the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, my Special Envoy and the African Union Special
Representative for the Great Lakes Region hosted a meeting on 26 and 27 February
at the African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa to review the implementation of
the Framework. Experts and representatives of signatory countries, guarantor
institutions, international partners and civil society noted the progress made,
including through the neutralization and weakening of some negative forces;
cooperation on security, economic and judicial matters; and greater ownership of the
Framework by the signatory countries. They observed, however, that progress is still
modest compared to the expectations raised by the Framework, as evidenced by
persisting conflict, political crises, the continued presence of armed groups, illegal
cross-border activities and the ongoing displacement crisis. Participants noted,
however, that the Framework remains a relevant vehicle to promote dialogue and
cooperation and to assist countries and institutions in the region in achieving peace.
55. On 28 February, the Technical Support Committee held its twentieth meeting in
Addis Ababa, co-chaired by my Special Envoy and the African Union Special
Representative. The Executive Secretary of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, a senior official of SADC and my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO also attended. The
Committee, building on the conclusions of the workshop, recognized that continued
tensions and mistrust among the core countries in the region were impeding progress.
They called for greater political commitment and confidence -building among those
countries and for enhanced diplomatic efforts, as a matter of priority. The Committee
agreed on its workplan for 2018. Committee members further decided to follow up
on key decisions made during the eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, held in Brazzaville on 19 October, with a particular focus on the
strengthening of the Intervention Brigade of the MONUSCO force an d the
repatriation of former combatants.

B.

Good offices of the Special Envoy
Negative forces
56. My Special Envoy met the President of the Congo during a visit to Brazzaville
from 16 to 19 December. They discussed, inter alia, the neutralization of negative
forces and the repatriation of foreign disarmed combatants in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As a result, the President addressed identical
letters dated 10 January to me and to the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission requesting us to take all actions necessary to strengthen the Intervention
Brigade of the MONUSCO force, as recommended by regional leaders at the eighth
high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism. My Special Envoy also

10/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

encouraged Mr. Sassou Nguesso to promote talks between the leaders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda on the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations and the repatriation of former M23 elements still in Rwanda
and Uganda. He suggested that Mr. Sassou Nguesso use his good offices as Chair of
the Regional Oversight Mechanism and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region to help defuse tensions between countries in the region.
57. From 28 January to 1 February, the Office of the Specia l Envoy dispatched a
technical mission to Kinshasa and Goma to develop recommendations, together with
MONUSCO, for the follow-up mechanism on the repatriation of disarmed FDLR
combatants in transit camps in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and ex -M23
elements in Rwanda and Uganda.
Support to dialogue and political processes in the region
Democratic Republic of the Congo
58. During the period under review, my Special Envoy undertook a number of
initiatives to promote a harmonized regional and international approach in support of
a consensual electoral process and full implementation of the 31 December 2016
agreement.
59. In this regard, on 5 October, my Special Envoy travelled to Pretoria to meet the
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, Maite NkoanaMashabane. The Minister reaffirmed the readiness of SADC to assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in efforts to ensure the holding of elections by the end of 2018.
60. My Special Envoy also undertook a series of consultations that led to the holding
of a meeting of representatives of the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework on 22 November in Addis Ababa. In preparation for the
meeting, my Special Envoy and my Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo held meetings with the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, Smaïl
Chergui, on 9 and 10 November in Addis Ababa.
61. In a communiqué issued following the meeting of 22 November, the
representatives of the guarantors, inter alia, called upon all stakeholders to create the
conditions necessary to ensure the holding of timely, peaceful and credible elections.
They urged the Government to provide the necessary and timely financial and
logistical resources to allow for implementation of the electoral calendar; ensure the
required political space throughout the country, including freedom of peaceful
assembly and equitable access to State media; and fully and effectively implement
the confidence-building measures as stipulated in the 31 December 2016 agreement.
They also decided to visit Kinshasa in January 2018 to engage the Congolese
stakeholders.
62. My Special Envoy also met separately with representatives of t he European
External Action Service and with the special envoy of Belgium, Renier Nijskens, in
Brussels on 5 and 6 December. Discussions were centred on the political and security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on Burundi and on the reg ional
situation.
63. In his meeting with the President of the Congo held on 18 December, my Special
Envoy raised concerns about the continued political impasse in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The President exchanged views with the Special Envoy o n
the tripartite summit (between Angola, the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo) held in Brazzaville on 9 December, and informed him of the intention of those
countries to reconvene in Kinshasa in early 2018. The Special Envoy committed to
coordinate and align the guarantors’ initiatives with the efforts of the Presidents of
18-03569

11/17

S/2018/209

the Congo and Angola. It was therefore agreed that the planned visit to Kinshasa by
the guarantors should be postponed to give precedence to the tripartite summit, which
took place on 14 February.
Kenya
64. Together with the Resident Coordinator, my Special Envoy supported the
Director-General of the United Nations Office at Nairobi and contributed to the joint
United Nations task force established to monitor developments related to the electoral
process in Kenya and promote dialogue and reconciliation among stakeholders.
Furthermore, at my request, the former President of Nigeria and member of the High level Advisory Board on Mediation, Olusegun Obasanjo, visited Kenya o n 17 and
18 January to encourage dialogue between the President of Kenya and the leader of
the National Super Alliance coalition, Raila Odinga.
Promotion of women, youth and civil society
65. During the reporting period, the Office of the Special Envoy continued to
promote the role of women in peace and political processes in the region. In
September, women representatives participated in the field visit of the Technical
Support Committee to the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Subsequently, regional leaders agreed, at the eighth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism, to address the situation of women and children in
transit camps for disarmed FDLR elements as a matter of urgency. On 22 February in
Nairobi, the Advisory Board of the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework held its ninth meeting. Senior women leaders, including the
former President of the Central African Republic, Catherine Samba -Panza, the former
Vice-President of Uganda, Speciosa Wandira Kazibwe, the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on Women and Peace and Security,
Bineta Diop, and the former Executive Secretary of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, Liberata Mulamula, attended the meeting. The Deputy
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Isabelle Durant, also contributed via video link. Participants recommended greater
support to the women and peace and security agenda in the region an d the
organization of missions to Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and South Sudan by the Women ’s Platform and the Regional
Women’s Forum of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to
promote the role of women in peace and political processes. They encouraged the
convening of a meeting of ministers for gender to endorse the regional plan of action
for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and to address
shrinking space for women in political processes in the region.
66. Thanks to resource mobilization efforts by the Office of the Special Envoy,
grants were allocated to grass-roots women’s organizations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi. The grants are supporting confidence -building
and conflict prevention in the region, including through projects on women ’s
economic empowerment, the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence and
human rights awareness.
67. The Office of the Special Envoy promoted the participation of youth leaders
from the Great Lakes region in the Youth Forum of the Economic and Social Council,
held in New York on 30 and 31 January, on the theme “The role of youth in building
sustainable and resilient urban and rural communities”. On 29 January, the Great
Lakes youth delegation met my Envoy on Youth to discuss how to advance the youth
development agenda, including ways to promote the implementation of the
recommendations of the ministerial meeting on youth held in June 2017 in
Livingstone, Zambia, which was supported by the Office of the Special Envoy.
12/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

Displacement
68. The Office of the Special Envoy continued to call the attention of regional and
international stakeholders to the refugee and displacement situation in the Great
Lakes region. On 22 January in Nairobi, my Special Envoy convened a meeting of
the United Nations regional team and other partners at the principals level to discuss
opportunities to leverage the mandate of the Special Envoy on displacement-related
issues. They also discussed plans for a stakeholder meeting to be organized jointly by
the Office of the Special Envoy and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region to raise awareness on the situation of internally displaced persons and make
recommendations on durable solutions for displacement.
Judicial cooperation
69. Following the successful launch of the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation
Network in November 2016, the Directors of Public Prosecution of member States of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region convened on 1 and
2 November in Khartoum for the first meeting of the Network. The initiative was
supported by the Office of the Special Envoy and the United N ations Office on Drugs
and Crime. The Network aims to facilitate and improve cooperation among members
on judicial matters, including extraditions, joint investigations and mutual legal
assistance, training and the exchange of best practices.
Natural resources
70. The Office of the Special Envoy continued to cooperate with the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, the European Union, the United Nations Environment Programme
and other partners to follow up on the expert and stakeholder consultations on natural
resources in the region held on 5 and 6 July 2017. Efforts were also focused on
preparations for the second meeting of the Judicial Cooperation Network, to be held
in Kampala later in 2018, which will deal with the challenges posed by criminal
networks with regard to the exploitation of resources. On 28 November in New York,
representatives of the Office of the Special Envoy and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region jointly briefed the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
on the implementation of the Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources of the International Conference.
Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great Lakes Region
71. The Office of the Special Envoy, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Rwanda Convention Bureau finalized a memorandum of
understanding outlining the division of responsibilities in preparation for the second
Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great Lakes Region, slated for later in
2018 in Rubavu, Rwanda. The conference aims to promote cross-border investment
in the extractive industries, agriculture, tourism and infrastructure in the core
countries of the Great Lakes region.
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework
72. Following my Special Envoy’s engagement with senior European Union
officials on the implementation of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework,
detailed in my previous report, the European Development Fund approved, on
14 November, a €1.5 million peace and security grant to the Great Lakes cross -border
multi-partner trust fund. The funds will support regional projects for women ’s
empowerment, the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and reintegration of
18-03569

13/17

S/2018/209

ex-combatants and the forums of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (on women, youth, civil society and the private sector). The Peacebuilding
Fund finalized the approval of a $2 million cross-border project addressing
displacement between Burundi and the United Republic of Tanzania under the
Regional Strategic Framework. The project was launched on 1 January. In a visit to
Brussels on 6 December, my Special Envoy engaged officials of the European
Commission to mobilize additional support.
73. On 27 November, my Special Envoy and the Head of the Peacebuilding Support
Office briefed the Peacebuilding Commission on the need to support the approach
outlined in the Regional Strategic Framework. They also convened a panel discussion
with experts and representatives of Member States, the World Bank, other
international organizations and civil society to discuss programmatic and funding
opportunities to support cross-border priorities in the Great Lakes region.
74. On 23 January, my Special Envoy and the Regional Director for Southern Africa
of the World Food Programme, representing the Chair of the Regional United Nations
Development Group, co-chaired the second meeting of the Management Board of the
Regional Strategic Framework. Participants reviewed progress and challenges faced
by the six pillars of the Regional Strategic Framewo rk and agreed to extend its
validity to 2020.
75. On 24 January, my Special Envoy convened a meeting in Addis Ababa with the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and representatives of Burundi, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and the Unite d Republic of Tanzania, as
well as the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security and the African
Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region. Participants discussed key
regional issues and how to increase awareness of and support for th e Regional
Strategic Framework. They also discussed ways to revitalize the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries.

V. Implementation of paragraph 24 of Security Council
resolution 2389 (2017)
76. The Security Council, in its resolution 2389 (2017), invited me to engage in
high-level dialogue, in collaboration with the African Union, the signatory States and
the guarantor institutions of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, as well
as key regional and international partners, to assess progress, challenges and
shortcomings in the implementation of the Framework and to present my vision,
supported by concrete recommendations. In this regard, at the African Union Summit
held on 28 and 29 January in Addis Ababa, I engaged with the leaders of signatory
countries on the situation in the region. Furthermore, my Special Envoy conducted
consultations with key stakeholders, including at the wor kshop held on 26 and
27 February on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and at the twentieth meeting of the Technical Support
Committee, held on 28 February, as reported in paragraphs 54 and 55 above.
77. On the basis of the consultations, immediate priorities and guiding principles
are described below, which should inform the vision of the United Nations for the
region in the coming years.
Immediate priorities
78. Achieving peace in countries experiencing political crises and armed conflict
should remain the first priority, including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, South Sudan and the Central African Republic. Ensuring a peaceful electoral
14/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

process and transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is paramount, as the
country remains at the heart of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Furthermore, we must ensure an end to the fighting and an inclusive and lasting
political settlement in South Sudan, given the scale of the atrocities being committed,
the suffering of the population and the implications for the region.
79. Second, more must be done to neutralize non-State armed groups in the region.
In addition to increasing the effectiveness of ongoing military ope rations by FARDC,
supported by the MONUSCO Intervention Brigade, we will need to strengthen our
non-military initiatives. We must consider concrete measures to improve
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration and to
prevent recruitment of the population, especially youth, by non-State armed groups.
We must also look at ways to curb illegal financial flows to armed groups while
maximizing the positive potential of the exploitation of natural resources in the
region.
80. Third, we need to urgently address the humanitarian crisis resulting from forced
displacement in the region, which has reached unprecedented levels over the past
year. This will require an increase in humanitarian funding; greater solidarity and
cooperation between countries in the region, in pursuit of durable solutions for forced
displacement; and enhanced collaboration with regional and international partners to
support such solutions.
81. Fourth, promoting and protecting human rights and fighting impunity in the
Great Lakes region is critical to achieve the objectives of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. In close collaboration with the African Union and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the United Nations will work
with the countries in the region to ensure effective action to support the protection of
human rights and basic freedoms enshrined in national constitutions and international
instruments.
Guiding principles
82. To support the implementation of these priorities, the United Nations will be
guided by the principles set out below on the basis of lessons learned from its
experience in the Great Lakes region and elsewhere.
83. First, ownership. I welcome efforts, led by my Special Envoy, to strengthen the
governance structures of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. They have
led to growing ownership by signatory Governments, as demonstrated by the previous
two summits of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, hosted by Angola and the Congo,
and the next summit, to be hosted by Uganda. We must continue to promote ownership
of the Framework by the signatory States.
84. Second, partnership. We need to strengthen cohesion, promote the
complementarity of efforts and ensure a common approach among the guarantors of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the international community to
prevent conflicts and deliver peace and security in the region. In this regard, we must,
among other things, deepen the partnership between the United Nations and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, bearing in mind the
complementarity of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region of the International
Conference.

18-03569

15/17

S/2018/209

VI. Observations and recommendations
85. In my previous report, I highlighted a number of challenges relating to peace
and security in the region, including stalled political processes, ongoing activities by
armed groups, human rights violations and a worsening humanitarian crisis. The
present report shows that these challenges continue to affect the stability of the region
and the lives of millions of people. Renewed efforts at the national, regional and
international levels are required to achieve sustainable peace in the Great Lakes
region and to prevent further crises. I call upon the signatory countries to renew their
commitment to the full implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, with enhanced support from the guarantors.
86. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite progress on the electoral front,
the political, security and humanitarian situation is of great concern. We must spare
no effort to avert an escalation of violence in the country. I call upon all stakeholders
to fully implement the 31 December 2016 agreement, including through the faithful
implementation of the confidence-building measures. I urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to lift the ban on demonstrations and ensure the
release of all political prisoners.
87. The United Nations will continue to collaborate with the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, SADC, the European Union and
other partners to foster a coordinated regional and international approach to peacef ul,
timely and credible elections in the country. I encourage the leaders of the region,
whose engagement is critical to prevent an escalation of tensions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to remain fully engaged.
88. Uncertainty surrounding the political situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is compounded by the persistent activities of local and foreign armed
groups in its territory. We must once and for all eliminate the threat posed by these
“negative forces”, through military operations carried out by FARDC, supported by
the Intervention Brigade of the MONUSCO force, on the one hand, and by weakening
their political ties and economic lifelines on the other. I take note of the decision taken
at the eighth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, which called
for the strengthening of the Intervention Brigade. The United Nations will continue
its efforts, in collaboration with the troop-contributing countries, to increase the
effectiveness of MONUSCO and its Intervention Brigade.
89. I welcome the renewed commitment by the leaders of the region to support the
repatriation of disarmed foreign combatants and their dependants in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring countries. I encourage the
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to work closely with
the leaders to operationalize the follow-up mechanism on the repatriation of disarmed
foreign combatants.
90. I remain concerned by the lack of progress in the inter-Burundian dialogue led
by the East African Community, despite the efforts of the facilitator, the former
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa. The United Nations
will continue to support the East African Community and promote an inclusive
dialogue. I urge the Government of Burundi to engage in dialogue with all
stakeholders and to preserve the legacy of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. Peace in Burundi will also require addressing the human rights situation.
I call upon all Burundian stakeholders to cooperate with efforts to ensure respect for
human rights.
91. There will not be sustainable peace and stability in the Great Lakes region unless
we implement durable solutions for the more than 11 million forcibly displaced

16/17

18-03569

S/2018/209

persons in the region. Considering the significant deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, my Special Envoy plans to host a stakeholder meeting to highlight the
urgency of addressing what humanitarian organizations have termed a “forgotten
crisis” and to recommend how to advance durable solutions for the affected
populations. I call upon the donor community to step up its support for our efforts in
pursuit of durable solutions to displacement.
92. I am pleased that women are increasingly engaged in efforts to advance peace
and security in the region. Their participation in political and dialogue processes must
be further promoted. The leadership of the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework and that of the Regional Women’s Forum of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in developing and implementing
the regional plan of action for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) is important in this regard.
93. The Great Lakes region will not achieve its full potential without consistent
respect for fundamental rights and freedoms and the eradication of impunity for
serious crimes. To that effect, the Judicial Cooperation Network should be supported
to become an effective mechanism to address priority cases, including those involving
alleged perpetrators harboured in signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
94. Natural resources must be an asset for peace and development in the Great Lakes
region, not a fuel for conflict. The Office of my Special Envoy will continue to
collaborate with the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
partners in support of the implementation of the recommendations of the expert a nd
stakeholder meeting on natural resources held in Nairobi on 5 and 6 July 2017.
95. Recognizing the importance of a comprehensive approach to address the root
causes of conflict in the region, my Special Envoy and the Chair of the Regional
United Nations Development Group Team will continue to rally support for the
implementation of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework.
96. I thank my Special Envoy and his Office and reiterate my appreciation to my
former Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head
of MONUSCO, Maman Sidikou. I am grateful to the leadership of the African Union,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and SADC for their efforts
to promote peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and t he region. I call upon
the Security Council and the wider international community to intensify their efforts
to support the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
other regional instruments intended to advance peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region.

18-03569

17/17
