S/PV.8698

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8698th meeting

Wednesday, 8 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Auväärt
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Baati
Mr. Roscoe
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2019/1005)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-00526 (E)
*2000526*

S/PV.8698

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Expression of welcome to the new members
of the Security Council and of thanks to the
outgoing members
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council this year, I should like to extend
my warm wishes on the occasion of the New Year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.
In presiding over this first formal meeting of
the Council in 2020, I am happy to welcome the new
members: Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam. We look forward
to their participation in the work of the Council. Their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council’s responsibilities.
I shall also take this opportunity to
express the Council’s gratitude to the outgoing
members — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait,
Peru and Poland — for their important contributions to
the work of the Council during their terms.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Her
Excellency Ms. Kelly Craft, Permanent Representative
of the United States, for her service as President of the
Council for the month of December. I am sure that I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Craft and her team for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (S/2019/1005)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, to participate in
this meeting.
2/18

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

08/01/2020

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/1005, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chambas.
Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be here today to
brief the Council on the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2019/1005).
Since my most recent briefing in this forum, in July
2019 (see S/PV.8585), the West Africa and Sahel region
has experienced a devastating surge in terrorist attacks
against civilian and military targets. The humanitarian
consequences are alarming. I will highlight some of
these challenges as well as ongoing initiatives to tackle
them. I will also address overall political developments
in the region, with a focus on forthcoming elections
this year.
The West Africa and Sahel region has been shaken
by unprecedented terrorist violence in recent months.
As I emphasized during my briefing to the Security
Council of 16 December 2019 (see S/PV.8685),
relentless attacks on civilian and military targets have
shaken public confidence.
In Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, casualties
from terrorist attacks have increased five-fold since
2016, with more than 4,000 deaths reported in 2019
alone as compared with an estimated 770 deaths in 2016.
Most significantly, the geographic focus of terrorist
attacks has shifted eastward from Mali to Burkina Faso
and the Niger and is increasingly threatening West
African coastal States. The number of people killed in
Burkina Faso increased from 80 in 2016 to more than
1,800 in 2019. The number of displaced persons has
also increased — in this case, ten-fold — to about half
a million, in addition to the 25,000 who have sought
refuge in neighbouring countries.
The terrorist attacks are also often deliberate
efforts by violent extremists to capture weapons and
trafficking routes and engage in other illicit activities,
including illegal artisanal mining, in certain areas that
sustain their networks.
Terrorism, organized crime and intercommunal
violence are often intertwined. This is especially true in
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

peripheral areas where the State’s presence is weak. In
those places, extremists provide safety and protection
to populations, as well as social services, in exchange
for loyalty. For that reason, at the July 2019 High-level
Conference on Counter Terrorism and Prevention of
Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism, in Nairobi,
the Secretary-General emphasized that counterterrorism responses must focus on gaining the trust and
support of local populations.
Governments, local actors, regional organizations
and the international community are mobilizing across
West Africa and the Sahel to respond to terrorism and
violent extremism. Indeed, many solid frameworks,
resolutions and declarations already exist at the strategic
level. On 21 December, at its Summit of Heads of State
and Government, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) adopted a 2020-2024 action
plan for the eradication of terrorism in the subregion,
following the Community’s extraordinary summit in
Ouagadougou in September, during which it pledged to
mobilize $1 billion internally. The African Union-Lake
Chad Basin Commission Regional Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected
by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region is
also a regional approach that sets the parameters for
early warning and early engagement on all forms of
local conflicts.
Now is the time for action. Regional and subregional
leaders must follow through on the pledges made, and
international partners must lend their full support
to the implementation of existing mechanisms. We
need to prioritize a cross-pillar approach at all levels
and across all sectors to ensure the most effective
support for Governments in the region. The United
Nations response in the Sahel serves as a template in
this approach. UNOWAS also worked closely with the
Mano River Union to resuscitate the basin’s crossborder security and confidence-building measures.
Farmer-herder clashes remain some of the most
violent local conflicts in the region. Close to 70 per cent
of West Africa’s population is dependent on agriculture
and livestock rearing for a living. That is why it is so
important to ensure peaceful coexistence between
farmers and herders. Climate change, among other
multiple factors, is increasingly exacerbating farmerherder conflicts. The impact of climate change on
security also spawns a negative relationship among
climate change, social cohesion, irregular migration
and criminality in some places.

S/PV. 8698

The all-too-worrying trends in terms of security
must not distract from positive political developments
in many parts of West Africa and the Sahel. Dialogue
with citizens and across political divides is taking
place in several countries. For example, the people of
the Gambia have successfully concluded the second
round of public consultations on a new constitution
and peacefully conducted the truth, reconciliation
and reparations process. In Sierra Leone, Mauritania,
Senegal and elsewhere, encouraging dialogues are
under way with a view to promoting national unity.
In the months ahead, the electorates in six West
African countries will choose their leaders in democratic
contests. In that vein, the people of Guinea-Bissau and
their Electoral Commission deserve congratulations
for the exemplary conduct of last year’s presidential
election, which marked an important step forward in
Guinea-Bissau’s democratic development. The United
Nations will continue to support the Government and
the people of Guinea-Bissau in their efforts towards
consolidating peace and development.
On 22 February, Togo will hold its next presidential
election. Following recent electoral and constitutional
reforms, it is urgent that any outstanding pre- and
post-electoral grievances be addressed using legal
channels. Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea
and the Niger are also preparing for polls later in the
year. Unresolved grievances, incomplete national
reconciliation processes and the sentiment that
institutions and processes are being manipulated carry
risks of tensions and manifestations of political violence.
The resumption of dialogue in Guinea, with the
impetus generated by the United Nations and partners,
has yielded timely results, including the release of
political prisoners. The United Nations reiterates its calls
on national stakeholders to overcome their differences
in the spirit of building consensus in order to ensure
the holding of peaceful legislative elections scheduled
for February. In the months ahead, UNOWAS will
continue working closely with all national stakeholders
and regional partners, especially ECOWAS, to promote
consensus and inclusiveness in all the elections to be
conducted in the region.
In that regard, UNOWAS will also continue to urge
Member States in the region to adopt legislation or
implement existing laws to promote the participation
of women and youth in those important milestone
polls. UNOWAS will continue to work in tandem

20-005263/18

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.8698

with regional and other partners to convey consistent
and firm messages in that regard, especially as we
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) this year, in which, I might
add, West African women played an important role 20
years ago.
In conclusion, as I have just outlined, the stakes are
high in the region this year, in terms of both security
and political developments. As the UNOWAS mandate
is renewed, we count on the Council’s continued full
support to accomplish the tasks assigned to us.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Chambas

for

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to commend the commitment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), who continues to provide outstanding
support for the region’s efforts in the search for peace
and sustainable development. The Niger welcomes
his support for inclusive approaches in national
dialogues and elections, as well as his assistance in
promoting and ensuring respect for human rights and
institutional reforms.
Despite the multidimensional efforts that have
been made in the Sahelo-Sahara region, the security
situation there remains extremely worrisome. The year
2019 saw more than 700 terrorist attacks in the region.
Violent non-State actors, including terrorist groups,
criminal networks and community and tribal militias,
repeatedly carried out attacks on civilians and defence
and security forces, in particular in Burkina Faso, Mali
and my own country, the Niger. That has undoubtedly
constituted an obstacle to achieving regional stability
and the Sustainable Development Goals in West Africa
and the Sahel.
The Niger reaffirms its support for the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, whose
overarching goal is to complement the Strategy and
build on the gains made. While recalling that the
Sahel is the lynchpin in the fight against terrorism,
the Niger recommends that UNOWAS be given a
mandate that enables it to address, with the same level
of effectiveness, the challenges facing the Sahel today,
4/18

08/01/2020

namely, terrorism and intercommunal conflicts, among
others. In addition to its role in preventive diplomacy
and support for political processes in the region,
UNOWAS will need to address the challenges I have
just outlined.
It is heartening to note that, aware of the fact
that peace, security and stability in the region are
a prerequisite for the integration and economic
development of their region, the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), over which the Niger
currently presides, have committed themselves to
strengthening governance and democratic institutions
in their countries, as well as promoting respect for
the rule of law. In that regard, in addition to GuineaBissau, which recently completed an electoral process
that was difficult but enjoyed a successful outcome,
elections will be held this year in six other countries of
the region, as detailed by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General earlier.
The progress made in Mali, with the launch
in Bamako, on 14 December 2019, of the inclusive
national dialogue, which saw the participation of nearly
all parties of the Malian nation, must also be noted.
Likewise, we must also welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, emanating from the Algiers
process, particularly in the area of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. Such progress,
which was achieved in a particularly difficult context,
deserves to be encouraged and supported.
In addition to national commitments in the fight
against terrorism, which varies from 15 to 30 per of
a given country’s budget, mobilizing the region in the
fight against terrorism has resulted in the adoption
by the ECOWAS Priority Action Plan for 2020-2024,
aimed at eradicating terrorism, with a financial
package of $2.3 billion, of which $1 billion will come
from internal resources.
In the same vein, five countries of the region
have established the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force, which, although having accomplished successful
missions, is still struggling to reach its full level of
operationalization due to a lack of adequate financial
and material resources. Here too, the international
community should help those countries, which are
now directly affected by the attacks of armed terrorist
groups, to deal with them in the most efficient way by
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

helping them to secure predictable funding. We wish to
express our deepest gratitude to the friendly countries
that support our armed forces in these difficult times,
through multifaceted support.
The Council will have noted that, while serious
security concerns persist, the political prospects in the
region are rather encouraging. More than ever, West
Africa and the Sahel need the solidarity and concrete
action of the international community in order to ensure
that the democratic gains achieved are not thwarted by
the criminal activities of armed terrorist groups, which
undermine the very foundation of the State.
The Niger commends the tireless efforts of
the Special Representative, as well as his personal
commitment and that of his teams. We are also aware
of the difficulties involved in the implementation of
his mandate, the scope of which is broadening with the
closure of some offices in the region, in addition to the
growing security challenges. I take this opportunity to
call on the Council, on behalf of the region, to provide
him with all the assistance necessary, in terms of both
human and financial resources, to enable him to continue
his efforts to promote dialogue, peace and security in
West Africa and the Sahel with the same effectiveness.

S/PV. 8698

I commend the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for substantially
raising awareness of that issue. The task now is to
implement the various good practices identified,
in particular in collaboration with the Economic
Community of West African States.
In Burkina Faso, the spread and increase in
number of attacks on the civilians and the State of
Burkina Faso in the north, east and even south of
the country is a particularly alarming development.
Those terrorist attacks undermine development and
threaten regional stability. We commend the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to adjust the United Nations presence
in Burkina Faso in order to support the country in
addressing the challenges that it faces. In Nigeria, the
persistence of violent attacks by Boko Haram is also a
disturbing phenomenon.
Belgium commends the courage and sacrifices
of security forces throughout the region in their fight
against terrorists. It is crucial that this fight be carried
out in accordance with human rights and international
humanitarian law. Otherwise, the successes of the
security forces will be only ephemeral and jeopardize
reconciliation and a lasting end to the crisis.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on both joining the Security Council and
directly assuming its presidency, and to assure you of
our full support. I would also like to thank the United
States delegation for its presidency in December.

Moreover, as the Secretary-General points out in his
report (S/2019/1005), the response to the challenges in
West Africa cannot be solely security-based. A holistic
approach is needed to deal with violent extremism, with
emphasis also on good governance, the fight against
impunity and sustainable and inclusive development.

I would further like to warmly thank Special
Representative Chambas for his comprehensive
briefing. Belgium commends the work that he carries
out on a daily basis to promote prevention, mediation,
sustainable peace and the rule of law in West Africa
and the Sahel.

The efforts of several countries of the region,
such as the Gambia, Liberia and Sierra Leone, deserve
our support. National reconciliation, post-conflict
reconstruction and security sector reform are major
challenges for those States, the democratic institutions
of which are in the process of consolidation. The
political will to entrench good governance, democracy
and human rights will be decisive in order to sustain the
gains made and ensure sustainable development.

The precarious security situation continues to be a
source of concern for us. I am thinking in particular of
the intensification of intercommunal violence in several
countries of the region, such as Nigeria, Burkina Faso
and Mali, as well as of terrorist attacks, which have
unfortunately not diminished. That deterioration has
a direct impact on the humanitarian situation, causing
hundreds of thousands of innocent people to suffer.
The persistence of conflicts between pastoralists and
farmers deserves special attention, as those tensions are
currently a major driver of insecurity in the subregion
and even beyond.

In that regard, I wish to underscore the important
role played by the Peacebuilding Commission in
supporting those countries by maintaining dialogue
among all interested parties. Likewise, the activities
carried out by the Peacebuilding Fund remain essential
to meeting specific needs. Belgium welcomes its
approach focused on prevention. Those efforts must be
based on the new structure of resident coordinators in
an integrated approach common to the three pillars of

20-005265/18

S/PV.8698

Peace consolidation in West Africa

United Nations action: peace and security, humanitarian
development and human rights.
UNOWAS also plays a leading role in studying
the impact of climate change on security as part of a
conflict prevention approach. That is crucial work,
and I encourage the Special Representative to pursue
such efforts.
In conclusion, I would also like to stress the key
role played by regional and subregional organizations. I
commend their close coordination with UNOWAS and
encourage them to maintain it in the future.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
commends the Special Representative and the team
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) for their work. West Africa is an area
of strategic importance for France and the European
Union. The region faces myriad challenges and is one
where our common future is largely at stake, whether
in terms of security, economic development, freedom
and democracy, the development of young people, the
preservation of nature or the ability to work together.
Progress has been made in recent years, in terms
of both human development and democracy. Several
elections in the past year have led to democratic
changeovers, notably in Mauritania in August and in
Guinea-Bissau in March and December, which is to be
welcomed. With regard to human rights, the launching
of the work of the Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations
Commission in the Gambia is also a major step forward.
However, the region faces significant challenges.
In the Sahel, the security situation continues to
deteriorate, with serious humanitarian consequences,
particularly for the most vulnerable civilian
populations, and repercussions for the entire subregion,
especially with regard to the increase in the number of
forced displacements. France reiterates its call for the
urgent mobilization of all of us to help the countries
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) combat
terrorism, curb organized crime and address the root
causes of instability. The President of the French
Republic, Emmanuel Macron, will in fact meet with
the Presidents of the countries of the G-5 Sahel and
multilateral partners on 13 January — next Monday — in
Pau, to reaffirm our collective commitment and define
a common road map.
Presidential elections will be held in no fewer than
eight West African countries in 2020 and 2021. These
6/18

08/01/2020

processes could be a source of tension. We encourage
the Special Representative to make active use of his
good offices and convey strong political messages. It
is particularly useful for the United Nations to provide
electoral assistance when countries request it.
In view of the legislative and presidential elections,
we believe that it is important that efforts be continued
in Guinea, which the Special Representative visited at
the end of November. Tensions between the Government
and the people remain high in that country. Several
people lost their lives during demonstrations last
year. An in-depth dialogue among political leaders
is essential to ease tensions. Next month’s legislative
elections will be crucial for an ongoing political process
in Guinea, and it is important that they be conducted in
a transparent, credible and consensus-based manner.
The Council must renew the UNOWAS mandate
this month. France supports the strengthening of the
Office in order to enable the Special Representative
to deploy his good offices to the maximum extent
possible. Moreover, the United Nations has many tools
at its disposal on the ground, including its agencies,
funds and programmes, which must work with synergy
towards the same goal. That is why France believes
that it would be appropriate to give UNOWAS a greater
role in coordinating the work of the United Nations
in the region, in line with an integrated approach
that incorporates security and development. Based
on that approach, we call on UNOWAS to promote
the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, which must produce concrete
results in the area of development.
Lastly, it is essential that UNOWAS present in its
reports security-risk analyses of the impact of climate
change, as well as recommendations for action to
prevent the realization of these risks. We are of the view
that the priority given to fragile countries and countries
in transition is relevant, as are capacity-building
activities, partnerships with regional and subregional
actors and the promotion of good governance, the rule
of law and human rights. We also stress the importance
of the commitment of UNOWAS to the Lake Chad
basin region, in cooperation with the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa. We support the
mobilization of the two Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General on the issue, which deserves a
high level of attention, at a time when the security and
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate.
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The work of UNOWAS is diverse and extensive,
commensurate with the challenges in West Africa and
the Sahel. In this regard, and in conclusion, we believe
that the United Nations should be better equipped to
enable it to be more effective in the region.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas for his briefing.
The Dominican Republic commends the peaceful
electoral processes in some countries of West Africa
and the Sahel. At the same time, we acknowledge the
considerable efforts made by countries of the region
and regional and international actors to address the
ongoing deterioration of the political and security
situation in the Sahel, in particular in Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Niger. These countries face recurrent
attacks, which cause mass displacement of people,
instability and poverty.
We condemn intercommunal violence and terrorist
attacks against humanitarian actors and civilians, in
particular women, and the numerous casualties suffered
by the security and defence forces of Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Niger. We hope that those responsible will
be brought to justice and that the Multinational Joint
Task Force and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) will receive the necessary resources and training
for enhanced joint cross-border operations.
It is important that the memorandum of
understanding between the Economic Community of
West African States and the G-5 Sahel be implemented
in order to deepen their cooperation on security and
development issues and strengthen the implementation
of the G-5 Sahel and INTERPOL security coordination
platform. The high number of deaths and clashes
between farmers and cattle breeders keep a region that
is already affected by mass displacements of innocent
people on edge. There are reports of serious human
rights abuses, food insecurity and an adverse impact
on education and health services. Communities are also
deeply affected by the effects of climate change and
must be assisted in building a strong resilience to the
many adverse factors.
With regard to women, we agree with the fact
that their role in politics should not be limited to
mobilization and support functions. We therefore
expect more inclusive and meaningful participation
of both women and young people in peace and
decision-making processes.

S/PV. 8698

We hope that the holistic approaches and measures
put in place by countries to alleviate political and
security tensions will be supported by all actors in
society and lead to changes in political, governance,
development and human rights trends. Such changes
are necessary to ensure that pending electoral processes
and other challenges are conducted and overcome
smoothly and that progress is made in creating better
opportunities for West African societies. The lack of
opportunities exposes populations to recruitment by
armed groups. It provides the ideal scenario for such
groups to expand their operations and increase the
number of attacks against civilians and the military in
order to exercise control.
There is an increasing need for greater cooperation
in advancing the battle against the threat of terrorist and
criminal groups. At the same time, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
must be strengthened with the necessary resources
and clear and realistic mandates for working with
regional partners on cross-cutting threats to peace and
security in the region. We commend the good offices
and continued efforts of UNOWAS in the quest for
peaceful solutions to the various challenges faced by
West African countries.
In conclusion, only by developing coordinated
actions aimed at resolving the root causes of fragility,
inequality and poverty in the region and by providing
the military with sufficient resources and training will
it be possible for State authorities to obtain a greater
presence in the affected areas and create opportunities
to achieve the human development index needed for the
sustainable development of their peoples.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): As this is the first time
Estonia is taking the floor in the Chamber as an
elected member of the Security Council, allow me to
congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of January and thank the
United States for its presidency in December.
Allow me to express Estonia’s support for Special
Representative Chambas and for all of the activities of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) over the most recent reporting period. The
work on mediation and good offices in West Africa and
the Sahel play an important role in supporting overall
United Nations efforts in the region.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/1005)
draws attention to the worrisome trends in the

20-005267/18

S/PV.8698

Peace consolidation in West Africa

security situation in the wider West Africa and Sahel
region. Estonia remains concerned about the negative
developments in the region, such as the spread of
violent extremism and organized crime. The most
recent terrorist attack, which took place just this past
Saturday in Burkina Faso on a bus carrying students,
leaving 14 people dead, must be condemned in the
strongest terms. Each one of these terrorist attacks is
simply unacceptable.
Considering the transnational nature of the threats,
cross-regional collaboration is of key importance.
We highly commend the cooperation efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States and
encourage the exchange of good practices between
UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa. We hope to see this collaboration
strengthened and coordination enhanced.
We note positively that the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel — together with the
French-led Operation Barkhane, to which Estonia also
contributes — has been conducting successful counterterrorist operations. However, considering the growing
number of violent attacks, including against civilians,
we need to further stress the role played by the States of
the region. Full political ownership and effective State
presence, including an adequately trained military
presence, are of key importance here. All perpetrators
of violence need to be held accountable.
Addressing the root causes and long-term
drivers of conflict and violence are at the core of
the peacebuilding activities of UNOWAS and of
preventative diplomacy. We commend the engagement
of UNOWAS in promoting the meaningful participation
of women and youth in the political process, but it is
clear that greater efforts from all relevant parties are
needed. In this regard, we would like to stress the need
for an integrated gender perspective in the design and
implementation of comprehensive strategies to address
the root causes of the crisis.
Finally, the effects of climate change on people’s
livelihoods throughout West Africa and the Sahel,
which are especially severe in the Lake Chad Basin,
need to be taken into account. It is important to track
the roots and impacts of climate-related tensions and
support key stakeholders in finding alternatives for
those most affected.
8/18

08/01/2020

Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
First, allow me to extend my warmest congratulations
to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month.
Our thanks also go to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
for his insightful briefing. We express our support
for the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS), which continues to make valuable
contributions to conflict prevention, peacebuilding,
sustainable
development
and
cooperation
in
the subregion.
My country takes this opportunity to commend
some of the positive advances witnessed in the
subregion, particularly the commitment made by
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), along with Chad and Mauritania,
to enhancing their engagement and cooperation in
responding to terrorism. We also welcome the political
dialogues in Liberia and Senegal, the progress made
by Gambia on constitutional reform and transitional
justice, and the successful electoral processes in
Mauritania and Guinea-Bissau. Notwithstanding
this progress, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is
troubled by the terrorist threat, the insecurity and the
humanitarian and development concerns that persist in
the subregion.
In our opinion, UNOWAS is strategically placed to
ensure synergy and complementarity among the security
plans of various countries, thereby guaranteeing that
a comprehensive vision exists to tackle the festering
cells of violent extremism and organized criminal
activities. Additionally, we recognize the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the Economic
and Social Council, which adopted a resolution last
year on the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel. We would like to encourage this coordination
among United Nations organs.
One of the main objectives of pursuing a lasting
and sustainable peace in the subregion is to enhance
people’s lives. Unfortunately, we have learned from the
reports of the Secretary-General, for example, his most
recent report (S/2019/1005), and the briefing by Special
Representative Chambas, that millions of people
continue to be negatively affected by instability in the
region in the form of displacement, food insecurity, the
risk of acute malnutrition and a lack of basic services.
We commend the entities and people who continue to
engage on the humanitarian front despite the challenges
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

and risks involved. We further encourage the support
of the international community to take the necessary
measures to sustain their noble work.
Any solution to the instability that plagues various
areas across West Africa and the Sahel region must
meaningfully recognize and target the root causes
of those conflicts. Strategies must therefore be
comprehensive, incorporating elements of sustainable
development, climate adaptation and resilience
measures, along with human rights protection and
promotion in line with national laws. We welcome the
continued analysis of the link between climate and
security made in the report of the Secretary-General, as
well as any future further collaboration similar to that
being pursued by ECOWAS and various United Nations
offices on this issue of critical importance.
The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2019/1005 makes reference to the adverse
consequences of climate change in the Lake Chad
basin and parts of the Sahel. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines is gravely concerned about the impact
of climate change in West Africa and the Sahel. In
the immediate term, we need to mobilize to support
climate adaptation in the region. Member States must
do all that we can to lessen this threat multiplier by
supporting adaptation measures as a matter of urgency
and by realizing our collective responsibility to reduce
our carbon emissions for the sake of future generations
and a lasting and sustainable peace. In that vein, it is
important to note that young people comprise 65 per
cent of the population of West Africa and the Sahel.
The words of the late Vincentian poet, Daniel
Williams, are apt in this context: “[O]nly the future
is ours to desecrate. The present is the past, and the
past our fathers’ mischief”. These words remind us of
the weight we collectively bear in our quest to secure a
bright and prosperous future for succeeding generations.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is committed to this
goal and looks forward to engaging constructively to
this end.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam to the Security
Council as its new elected members. We appreciate the
work of the United States as President of the Council
in December and congratulate Viet Nam on assuming
the presidency of the Council this month. China will

S/PV. 8698

actively support its efforts. China also thanks Special
Representative Chambas for his briefing.
At present, the region of West Africa and the Sahel is
enjoying overall political stability, sustained economic
growth and notable successes in self-empowerment
through unity. At the same time, some countries are
still being confronted with severe security threats,
including violent extremist and terrorist activities,
transnational organized crime and intercommunal
conflicts. Such security risks have given rise to a grave
humanitarian situation. The international community
needs to increase its support and assistance for countries
in the region.
I wish to share the following thoughts.
First, we must step up cooperation in a joint
response to conflicts and challenges. As we speak,
certain regions and countries in Africa remain in the
grip of unrelenting wars, conflicts and clashes. China
supports African countries in finding African solutions
to African problems and supports regional and
subregional organizations in their good offices. The
Economic Community of West African States, the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
the Multinational Joint Task Force for combating Boko
Haram, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Mano
River Union, among others, have all undertaken robust
endeavours to tackle regional challenges and made
important contributions to international and regional
peace and security. The international community must
support the United Nations in securing the necessary
financial support for relevant regional efforts. Since
its inception, the China-United Nations Peace and
Development Trust Fund has provided financial support
to a growing number of peace and security programmes
in Africa.
Secondly, we must intensify efforts to more
aggressively counter terrorist threats. This requires us
to assist the countries of the region in beefing up their
counter-terrorism and deradicalization capacities, as
well as in tackling more prominent issues such as the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters, the investigation
of terrorist financing and the collusion between
terrorist organizations and organized-crime networks.
China has set up the China-Africa Peace and Security
Fund to support Chinese-African cooperation in peace
and security, peacekeeping and the maintenance of
stability. The first consignment of aid materials, worth
¥200 million, has arrived in Africa to support the

20-005269/18

S/PV.8698

Peace consolidation in West Africa

development of the African Standby Force and Africa’s
capacity for immediate crisis response. In addition, we
have provided ¥300 million in aid to counter-terrorism
operations in the Sahel and the development of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Thirdly, it is essential to accelerate development so
as to eliminate extreme poverty and underdevelopment,
which are the root causes of insecurity and instability.
That entails continuing to fully back regional efforts
towards economic and social development and assisting
countries in the region to build up their governance
capacity with more sufficient resources and means.
It is also important to invest more in Africa, enhance
trade and make an all-out effort to eliminate poverty,
with a particular focus on creating educational and
employment opportunities for youth. China is actively
engaged in assisting countries in the region develop
their infrastructure in order to increase connectivity.
Moreover, efforts such as offering scholarships for
study in China and establishing educational and
training centres are under way to provide educational
opportunities and vocational training to a vast number
of African youth.
China supports greater coordination across all
United Nations agencies with a view to working
in synergy. The country teams, the United Nations
Development Programme and other entities should
put forward their respective strengths and increase
coordination and cooperation with the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel in order to jointly
play a constructive part in regional peace and stability.
China will continue to support the active work of
Special Representative Chambas and his Office.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): May I join others
in welcoming you to the presidency, Mr. President, and
also in welcoming Viet Nam and the other four elected
members to the Security Council. We look forward to
working with them.
In the context of this briefing, we also welcome
particularly the delegation of the Niger. We know
from last month that the Niger has suffered first-hand
the consequences of violence in the region. It has our
condolences for the losses to its armed forces.
It is also very good to see Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Chambas back in the Chamber
to brief us. We welcome the very productive role that
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) has played in the region. In particular, we
10/18

08/01/2020

welcome the role that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General plays through his good offices.
People do not always see the result of that work because
it is, by its very nature, diplomatic and quiet. But we
know it goes on and we know it makes a difference, so
I thank Mr. Chambas and his team for that.
We are also very grateful to the Secretariat and the
Secretary-General for their report on the trends in the
region (S/2019/1005). As others have said, those trends
continue to be of significant concern, particularly
on the security side — but also on the humanitarian
side — because the security situation is so bleak
and is seriously affecting the broader development
opportunities in the region.
We wanted to cover three areas today. The first is
security, which I will talk about in a little more detail.
The second is elections, which we have heard a bit
about already today. The third is the underlying causes
of conflict and what we can do to address those once
the security situation has been addressed.
On the security and humanitarian sides, as I have
said, we remain concerned about the damaging cycles
of violence we are seeing — I think Mr. Chambas called
them unprecedented — and the spike between the year
before last and what we saw last year was exponential.
They are a real cause for concern, particularly the
deterioration in central Mali, an area of which the
Council is separately seized, and in northern Burkina
Faso since the latest report. The increased violence
is exacerbating an already perilous humanitarian
situation, particularly in central Mali and Burkina
Faso. The United Kingdom has just released a further
₤20 million in additional humanitarian funding for the
Sahel, on top of the ₤15 million we are already spending
to help address the situation. We all need to think again
about whether we are doing enough in the region to
look at the humanitarian situation.
As others have said, it is also worth noting that we
and States in the region need to ensure humanitarian
access for those who deliver the humanitarian response.
We need to ensure that they are able to reach the regions
they need to reach and are given the protection they
need, in both legal and security terms. The main point is
that security needs to be the Council’s principal focus.
We cannot help those who urgently need assistance
unless we can help the States that they are in to bring
the security situation there under control. Like many
others in this Chamber, we heard the African Union
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

talk in mid-December, when we last touched on this
issue, about the variety of regional initiatives that we
now have on the security front (see S/PV.8685). One
thing the Council might want to consider is whether we
can help bring some coherence to those initiatives, to
look at how we map them and at whether the current
initiatives are addressing our concerns and whether they
are duplicative or complementary. That is something
we can consider in due course in line with African
Union advice.
Turning now to elections, again, it is useful to
hear that there has been progress in the region and
that there have been some upsides over the past year
on the political and election fronts. We agree with
the emphasis Mr. Chambas is placing on helping
States deliver credible elections over this next period.
From our perspective, the freedoms of assembly and
expression are essential to that; therefore, we hope in
particular that Mr. Chambas will send that message to
States in the region. In the context of the deteriorating
security situation we have already touched on, we have
to help States avoid the elections becoming flashpoints
for violence or enabling abuses of power, as that would
only further exacerbate conflicts and violence. Citizens
must be able to exercise their democratic right to vote
without fear of intimidation or retribution. We stand
ready to do what we can, with Mr. Chambas’s advice,
to support the elections.
In terms of the underlying causes, the immediate
humanitarian and security efforts to support the
elections and the wider region are obviously critical.
But we must also do what we can to address the
root causes of the conflicts and violence. One of the
interesting things that we see in the report is that there
is growing recognition in the countries themselves of
the need to address those underlying issues. However,
it is very difficult to do so in the absence of proper
security. Nevertheless, States can do something. They
can work to address long-term governance issues
by reducing abuses by security forces. We can help
Governments to build their legitimacy by providing
inclusive and accountable basic services where they
are able to do so. That is something I think we should
focus on more, and it is good to see the report looking at
giving UNOWAS the ability to help the United Nations
in the region think about the development assistance
that it can provide and when it can provide it. Those
kinds of interventions will help build the foundations
for the stability the region so desperately needs.

S/PV. 8698

We thank Mr. Chambas and his team. It is an
incredibly important region, and they have a challenging
year ahead, but they also have our full support.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me at the outset join
others in welcoming Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam to the
Security Council. Allow me also to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for the month
of January. I would also like to thank the United States
for successfully presiding over the Council during the
month of December 2019.
My delegation would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mohamed Ibn
Chambas for his comprehensive briefing and his team
for the work that they have been doing in the region.
We welcome some commendable progress in the
region, including political dialogues in several countries
and advances in transitional justice mechanisms and
in security sector reform. We note with concern,
however, the election-related tension in some countries
that has led to violent confrontations, and we would
like to reiterate the importance of peaceful political
processes. Notwithstanding the positive developments,
we remain deeply concerned at the spread of terrorism
and criminal activities and at intercommunal violence
resulting in human and material losses. In that regard, I
would like to highlight three points.
First, the work of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) remains crucial.
We take note of the strategic review of UNOWAS
based on the assessment that stakeholders found the
Office’s activity to be useful and that it has effectively
carried out its mandate in preventive diplomacy in the
subregion. As we consider the renewal of the mandate
of UNOWAS, we view several areas of focus to be
of particular importance. UNOWAS should continue
performing its mediation and good offices roles to
support countries in the region in the context of electoral
and peace processes. Regional analysis, including
with regard to political and security trends, threats to
peace and security, as well as root causes of instability
in the subregion, is also necessary. UNOWAS should
enhance synergy and complementarity with the United
Nations country team and regional and subregional
organizations based on their respective mandates
and capacities.
Secondly, we must combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime. As stated in the

20-0052611/18

S/PV.8698

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/1005) and in his
Special Representative’s briefing, terrorist attacks,
maritime crime and drug trafficking are increasing
in the subregion. Terrorist groups continue to expand
their areas of influence and inflict harm on security
personnel as well as civilians. It therefore remains
crucial to support the countries in West Africa and the
Sahel to combat terrorism and transnational organized
crime. Collective initiatives such as the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the
Multinational Joint Task Force should be continuously
supported. In addition, the limited presence of State
authorities contributes to insecurity in the region. As
a result, strengthening State capacity and institutions
is key to ensuring the security of the population,
the provision of basic services and the building of
community trust.
Thirdly, it is important to address the root causes
of instability. Our security approach must be part of a
wider strategy. Countries in the subregion must intensify
efforts to address poverty, inequality, marginalization
and the lack of basic and social services. International
partners should continue to support the implementation
of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad Basin Region, the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment
Programme, the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel.
In conclusion, building lasting peace and stability
in the subregion requires political will, national and
regional efforts and support from the international
community. Ensuring political stability, combating
terrorism and organized crime and addressing the
underlying causes of instability are key to enabling
peace to take root in the subregion, which will pave the
way to sustainable development.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
At the outset, I would like to join my colleagues
in welcoming you, Mr. President, and the other
incoming members to the Chamber, and to extend our
congratulations on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We look forward to
working closely with all Council members.
I thank Special Representative Chambas for
his remarks. We commend him and his Office for
promoting long-term stability and peace in West Africa
and the Sahel. The United Nations Office for West
12/18

08/01/2020

Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) is the region’s leader
in preventive diplomacy and, as the security situation
deteriorates and political challenges mount, its work is
more important than ever. We hope the ideas and the
focus that emerged from last month’s intercommunal
violence and terrorism briefing (see S/PV.8685), which
we co-hosted with Côte d’Ivoire, will support his efforts
in 2020.
We also note, in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/1005), a long list of the Special Representative’s
tireless travel in the region, as well as the use of good
offices to ease tensions and unify and sustain peace.
As the Security Council considers the mandate renewal
of UNOWAS in the coming weeks, the United States
supports his team and is committed to ensuring that he
can conduct his work as effectively as possible.
Let me now turn to the Secretary-General’s most
recent report on UNOWAS. The United States is deeply
concerned that violence spurred by extremist activity
and criminal networks has spiked in the Lake Chad
basin and border region between Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger. Ambassador Abarry, present today in
the Council, and his country have experienced that
directly. We again extend our condolences to him for
the loss of live that his country has experienced and
condemn those terrorist attacks.
We are troubled by increased displacement and
continued limitations on humanitarian access across
the Sahel, where there are 25 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance. We must all work together
to ensure that they receive it. UNOWAS is essential to
regional stability, but it cannot maintain stability on its
own. We call upon the affected West African nations
to increase efforts to ensure that all their citizens have
access to education, health care and greater employment
opportunities. Improving the scope and quality of
services can turn despair into hope for many, which
will go a long way in countering violent extremism and
criminality in the region. Serious efforts to address basic
needs will also further convey to local populations that
their Governments are responsible democratic actors.
The situation in Mali continues to be especially
concerning for the United States, given its impact
across the Sahel. We hope that all Council members
join us, both bilaterally and multilaterally, in urging
the signatory parties of the Algiers accords to meet
the implementation benchmarks in resolution 2480
(2019). That would substantially bolster efforts to
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

stabilize Mali and the Sahel. Governments must also
continue to align humanitarian, peacebuilding and
development goals, with the assistance of UNOWAS,
to address more effectively the root causes of violent
extremism. Ensuring full and equal participation by
women in decision-making and peace processes is just
one important way to do that. We also encourage the
Security Council to further prioritize adequate and
predictable humanitarian financing, and other donors to
increase contributions to humanitarian response plans.
This year, 2020, is critical for the future stability
of West Africa and the Sahel. Citizens will exercise
their right to choose their leaders as Burkina Faso,
Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, the Niger and Togo hold
presidential and legislative elections. Additionally, the
United States is encouraged by the presidential elections
that took place in Senegal and Guinea-Bissau in 2019,
and by the ongoing work of the Truth, Reconciliation,
and Reparations Commission in the Gambia. However,
we remain concerned about efforts in some West
African countries to restrict fundamental freedoms of
political expression. To that end, the United States urges
Governments to create peaceful and open political
environments, respect the freedom of expression and
assembly and facilitate the full participation of media,
civil society and opposition groups in public life. We
encourage all actors to use dialogue rather than violence
to address their differences.
In conclusion, as the Special Representative said
earlier, the time for action is now. The United States
encourages him to redouble the Office’s efforts with
stakeholders in order to take concrete steps towards
long-term stability in the region. That stability is within
reach and it is what the people of West Africa both need
and deserve. He has our support.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate Viet Nam on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I also wish
to welcome all the new members that have just joined
the Council. I also wish to thank Special Representative
Chambas for his briefing today and would like to take
this opportunity to commend his efforts and those of
his team in efficiently discharging their mandate in
an increasingly challenging environment, as we heard
from his briefing.
South Africa wishes to express its full support for
the role of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) in the West African region

S/PV. 8698

and the Sahel. We support the renewal of the mandate
of that important Office, on which the Council will
deliberate during the course of this month.
We commend the efforts of UNOWAS to strengthen
national and regional capacities for conflict resilience
and to promote an environment conducive to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals in the region. That
is imperative, as continued efforts to improve such
capacities — in tandem with security strategies — pave
the way for peace and stability.
South Africa remains concerned about the continued
terrorist attacks against civilians, security and defence
forces, as well as peacekeepers in Burkina Faso, Mali,
the Niger and countries of the Lake Chad basin, which
have resulted in many fatalities. It is disturbing that the
terrorist attacks are spreading to other countries in the
region that were previously not affected.
We are also deeply concerned by the increase
in intercommunal violence, which is increasingly
becoming a security threat and exacerbating the
security and humanitarian situation in West Africa
and the Sahel. Effective measures need to be devised
to resolve the farmer and herder disputes as well as
intercommunal violence. In that context, we welcome
the collaboration of UNOWAS with the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund in
supporting national and cross-border programmes to
address tensions associated with conflicts related to
transhumance, prevent violent extremism and empower
young people and women in peacebuilding processes
and conflict-prevention mechanisms.
We are encouraged by the initiatives undertaken by
countries in the region to improve the security situation.
The decision taken by the extraordinary summit on
terrorism of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), held in September 2019, is indicative
of the determination and political will of African
leaders to collectively address the security challenges in
the region. The region’s resolute determination should
be equally matched by the intensified support of the
international community so as to assist in successfully
implementing the stabilization strategy for countries
affected by Boko Haram, the priority investment plan
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. We believe
that the implementation of those plans, envisioned in

20-0052613/18

S/PV.8698

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the aforementioned strategies, will contribute towards
addressing the challenges faced by the region.
The partnership between UNOWAS and regional
and subregional bodies, including the African Union,
ECOWAS, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the G-5 Sahel,
as well as the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, to strengthen coordination efforts
towards the implementation of regional strategies is of
paramount importance.
The continuation of consultation processes and
national dialogues to address election-related issues by
countries of the region is commendable in preserving
peace and stability. In that context, we encourage
UNOWAS to continue to pursue collaboration with
ECOWAS, its mediation missions and its good offices,
especially in view of the planned elections in many
countries of the region over the course of 2020.
We welcome the commitment of countries in the
region to implementing the women and peace and
security agenda, in line with resolution 1325 (2000).
We are particularly pleased with the recommendation
emanating from the annual consultations of the
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security in West
Africa and the Sahel held in October 2019 regarding the
organization by UNOWAS of an annual regional forum
for women and young people. That recommendation
resonates with the call made in resolution 2493
(2019) encouraging regional and subregional groups
to consider convening meetings in the lead-up to the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) with the participation of Governments,
relevant stakeholders and civil society to review
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
We also commend the efforts made to improve
gender parity in countries of West Africa through the
adoption of relevant legislation, which will increase the
number of women appointed to senior positions and
improve the involvement and meaningful participation
of women in decision-making processes.
In conclusion, we reiterate our position that a
comprehensive approach that includes addressing
the root causes of insecurity and instability is very
important for the realization of sustainable peace in
West Africa and the Sahel.
14/18

08/01/2020

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me add my voice
to those who have congratulated you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank our United
States friends for their very effective presidency, which
allowed us to have the last 10 days of 2019 without
Council meetings, and I welcome the new members of
the Council.
Allow me to start by congratulating Mr. Mohamed
Chambas, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa, on his briefing and by
expressing appreciation for the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/1005). Germany fully subscribes
to what Mr. Chambas said and to the content of the
Secretary-General’s report. I am very impressed by the
many positive words spoken around the table. For our
part, it was very significant to hear the Ambassador of
the Niger speaking so positively about the work of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and its staff, since his country is one of
the most affected. We also support those, such as my
French colleague, who said that they support UNOWAS
and want to the strengthen it materially and financially
given the fact that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as mentioned in the report, takes an
integrated and holistic approach — a formula that was
first used today by our colleague from the Dominican
Republic, as well as by others. We agree with what
Mr. Chambas said with regard to such an approach
being crucial to conflict-prevention.
By way of a few examples of the Special
Representative’s efforts, I would highlight the
facilitation of national dialogues, assistance regarding
institutional and constitutional reforms, the promotion
of human rights and the inclusion of the gender
perspective in his work.
With regard to the situation in West Africa, it is not
necessary to repeat what has already been said in that
regard. There have been positive developments in some
countries, such as the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Senegal
and Liberia, including with regard to elections and
other issues. However, there has also been a significant
increase in the number of lives lost. The figures given
by the Special Representative, including with regard to
displaced persons, were tragic.
In December we discussed the root causes of
conflicts and violence in Africa (see S/PV.8685). In my
intervention, I would like to highlight the most important
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

points from our perspective. The first factor, which has
been highlighted by many speakers around the table, is
climate change and its security implications. Climate
change leads to an increasing scarcity of resources
and scarce resources lead to conflicts between herders
and farmers, as was highlighted in the report. Scarce
resources create a breeding ground for violence, violent
extremism and terrorism and cause migration.
The second factor is gender inequality. In that
regard, I would like to commend my colleague from
South Africa, who has just made a very passionate
appeal for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Progress has been made in the work on gender
parity. I would also like to highlight the African
Women Leaders Network initiative, which, in my view,
does very important work. Progress has been made in
some countries, including the Niger. Gender equality
and women’s participation are not goals in themselves.
The effective and equal participation of women in
decision-making processes increases the possibilities
for sustainable peace and security, and there are
statistical studies in that regard.
The third issue is human rights violations, which
occur far too often at the hands of terrorists as well
as in the context of counter-terrorism measures. In
that connection, like Mr. Chambas, I too would like
to cite the Secretary-General saying that counterterrorism measures must gain the trust and support
of local populations, which I see as key. In counterterrorism measures disrespect for human rights drives
marginalized peoples to violent extremism.
My fourth point concerns school closures.
Terrorists often target schools in their actions and
schools are closed for security reasons. That is one of
the saddest developments that we have witnessed in the
Sahel region and beyond. Education is key to combating
the root causes of radicalization, violence and poverty.
Depriving children of their right to education is at the
root of future problems.
Let me conclude. We need to take an integrated
approach, as is being done, and we are very much in
favour of strengthening UNOWAS. We also believe,
as my British colleague said, that we have to see how
the efforts of all the United Nations agencies can be
streamlined so that they can work together in the
most effective way. In that context, I see the Resident
Coordinators as having a very important task. We need
collaboration, as is being undertaken, and I would

S/PV. 8698

highlight collaboration with regional partners, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Group of Five for the Sahel and so on. Here I would
point to my South African colleague who just stressed
that issue.
I would also like to take up one point made by my
Belgian colleague, Marc, with regard to the exchange
with the Peacebuilding Commission and support for the
Peacebuilding Fund, which I also see as very important.
Finally, primary responsibility for all development
in the region lies with individual Governments. They
have to build trust in their State and in State institutions;
provide basic social services to their population; ensure
the rule of law and respect for human rights; engage
with civil society; and, in particular, integrate women
and young people.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, which is your first month as a member
of the Council. I would like also to congratulate your
delegation and to express our readiness to work with
you and the other members of the Council with a view
to ensuring the discharge of the tasks entrusted by the
Charter of the United Nations to the members of the
Security Council.
Allow me also, through you, to convey my thanks
to other colleagues and to the Secretariat for facilitating
the work of my delegation here in the Council. I
want also to thank the United States delegation and
Ambassador Kelly Craft for her successful presidency
in December.
I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, for his insightful
briefing on the activities of his Office and his assiduous
efforts to achieve peace and stability in West Africa
and the Sahel, in cooperation with international and
regional partners.
Since I am taking the floor for the first time on
the African issue, I wish to emphasize that, given
the importance of Africa to our identity and policies,
security in the Sahel and West Africa and the
security of Tunisia and the Arab Maghreb region are
inextricably linked.
In my statement I will touch on three points.

20-0052615/18

S/PV.8698

Peace consolidation in West Africa

First, concerning the role played by the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), my country’s delegation appreciates the
Office’s pivotal role and its comprehensive approach to
addressing the growing challenges ravaging the region.
We also commend its approach to communication,
national dialogue and mediation efforts as well as
to prioritizing prevention. All of this contributes to
ensuring an environment conducive to the elections
that are slated for several countries of the region in
2020. That approach has proved effective and important
in preventing conflicts and crises and has enabled
UNOWAS to play a pivotal role in enhancing national
and regional capacity and strengthening democracy
and good governance while empowering women and
achieving greater gender equality through laws that
strengthen women’s presence and participation in
decision-making.
My country supports the strategic review that was
completed on strengthening the mandate of UNOWAS,
and it is our hope that the consultations under way will
conclude in the approval by Security Council members
of expanding and enhancing the tasks that are conducted
by the Office.
Secondly, regarding the security and humanitarian
situations, Tunisia has been following with great
concern developments in West Africa and the Sahel.
We have reviewed with great interest the content
of the report of the Secretary-General on this issue
(S/2019/1005), especially concerning the increase in
the number of terrorist and criminal attacks and the
worsening of organized transnational crime.
The increased capacity of criminal and terrorist
groups to move about and even exercise control over
territory and inhabitants in certain regions and to take
advantage of the public authority vacuum and the lack
of basic services is for us a cause of great concern. The
conflicts and clashes witnessed in this region between
herders and farmers because of natural resources, in
addition to the increase in religious and ethnic conflict,
constitute a serious threat to security and stability
and create a breeding ground for terrorist groups
and extremists.
Terrorist attacks have led to major population
displacement and resulted in many internally displaced
persons moving from one region to another because of
the lack of security and the worsening humanitarian
situation. That has led to the closure of health-care
16/18

08/01/2020

facilities and schools because of the total absence of
national and local authority.
Thirdly, pertaining to the endeavours to achieve
security and peace in the region, we support the efforts
of the countries that participate in the Multinational
Joint Task Force and the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force in addressing existing challenges. We
believe that it is necessary to support the countries of
the region in strengthening their capabilities to deal
with emerging threats, meaning that we must stress
a comprehensive and multidimensional approach that
takes into consideration security and political aspects,
including good governance, the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals and the African Union vision of
silencing the guns on the African continent.
We wish here to underscore the importance of
ensuring support for political and security approaches
in conjunction with development approaches so as
to tackle the root causes of conflict and instability
in West Africa and the Sahel. It is our view that the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is a
key means of assisting the countries of the region to
actually achieve this, given the mechanisms that it
includes to intensify and coordinate international and
regional support for the countries of the region.
In that regard, we commend the regional and
international initiatives undertaken in 2019, including
the Economic Community of West African States
Summit and the Biarritz meeting of the Group of Seven
(G-7) held in August, which focused on the situation
in the region, as well as the July 2019 meeting among
G-7 Ministers for Cooperation and the European Union
Commissioner for International Cooperation and
Development, along with their counterparts from the
five Sahel countries, dealing with the root causes of the
lack of development and the worsening of poverty and
marginalization in the Sahel region. We look forward
to the Summit that will be held in Paris shortly. All
those initiatives attest to an increasing awareness at
the regional and international levels of the need for
a cross-border approach to reinvigorating the broad
international partnership to provide the urgently needed
support for the people of the region.
In conclusion, we renew our full support for
UNOWAS and its Head, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you in the President’s
seat, Sir, and we wish your country a successful
20-00526

08/01/2020

Peace consolidation in West Africa

presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. We also welcome all the colleagues who
have joined us in the new year. We welcome their
participation and stand ready to cooperate closely and
constructively with them. We also thank our American
colleagues, whose presidency in December was very
successful and effective.
I also would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, for his briefing.
We share the concerns voiced by Mr. Chambas
with regard to the further deterioration of the security
situation in that part of the continent. We are especially
concerned that, in the Sahel, the geographical area
of terrorist activity, drug trafficking and organized
crime is expanding. Extremist ideology is, regrettably,
winning over an increasing number of adherents.
Almost weekly, we receive tragic reports about the
deaths of dozens of military personnel and civilians
at the hands of criminal gangs in various countries of
the region.
During the latest reporting period, Mali, Burkina
Faso and the Niger were especially negatively affected.
We reaffirm our full support for those countries in the
fight against terrorism and express our condolences
with regard to the latest terrorist attacks, in particular in
the Niger. At the same time, it is important to remember
that the States of the Gulf of Guinea are also at risk
of destabilization.
Who is to blame for these unfortunate
developments? As we can see from today’s discussion,
opinions differ with regard to that question. Naturally,
we do not dispute the fact that the region faces
fundamental problems, such as weak State governance,
intercommunal and interethnic tensions, inadequate
protection of human rights and climate change. They
all need to be addressed.
However, were we to look back not just one or two
years, but over recent decades, it is clear that those
phenomena are hardly new and that, overall, the local
authorities have been able to mitigate them. We are
convinced that the real trigger that set off the current
unprecedented crisis was the reckless actions of those
who unleashed chaos in Libya through the use of
military force to overthrow the legitimate authorities
there. As many stakeholders of the region have pointed
out, it will hardly be possible to achieve peace and

S/PV. 8698

stability in the Sahel without stabilizing the situation
in that country.
Eradicating terrorism is one of the top priorities for
African countries. In that regard, the efforts of States of
the region to counter increasing threats are extremely
timely. They are particularly important at a time when
terrorist groups are, increasingly, actively coordinating
their actions. We support the pledges made by the States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States at the recent summits in Niamey and Abuja to
raise funds to combat jihadists. We share the view
that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Multinational Joint Task Force established to
counter Boko Haram require additional international
support. For our part, we are providing assistance to
African States through bilateral channels.
At the same time, it is clear that terrorism cannot be
eradicated by military means alone. It is necessary to
effectively counter the expansion of extremist ideology,
begin addressing acute socioeconomic problems and
strengthen State institutions and foster a culture of
respect for human rights. In that regard, we attach
great importance to the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as well as the
activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel.
We hope that the parliamentary and presidential
elections scheduled for 2020 in many countries of
the region will take place in an environment of law
and order. We welcome the successful conclusion of
the second round of presidential elections in GuineaBissau. We hope that they will turn a new page in the
history of the country, thereby making instability and
political turbulence a thing of the past.
In conclusion, we once again assure Mr. Chambas
of Russia’s continued support for his personal efforts
and the activities of his Office in addressing regional
crises and issues involving political mediation, helping
to improve State institutions and finding ways to foster
economic development and counter extremism and
terrorism. The scope and results of his work deserve
the highest praise.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/1005) on the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), and the Special

20-0052617/18

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.8698

Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, for his comprehensive briefing.
My
delegation
following observations.

wishes

to

make

the

First, we commend the unceasing work and efforts
of UNOWAS from 2016 to 2019 in assisting and
sustaining peace and conflict prevention efforts in the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel. We also welcome
the positive developments in the political process, postconflict reconstruction and the peace outcome of the
past several years in the countries in the region.
Secondly, although important progress has been
made over the years, we are of the view that greater
national, regional and international efforts are needed
to consolidate the still fragile peace and to address
paramount development challenges. We are concerned
about the deteriorating security environment in some
countries, especially violent extremism, terrorism
and criminal activity. Such blended threats constitute
a perfect storm, seriously undermining peace and
sustainable development in any country. We strongly
condemn all forms of violence and terrorism, notably
the recent deadly terrorist attacks on civilians and
security forces in the Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali.

18/18

08/01/2020

Thirdly, we welcome the results of the presidential
election in Guinea-Bissau on 29 December 2019. We
also support Togo, Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso,
Ghana and the Niger in ensuring successful elections
in 2020.
Fourthly, we support every initiative and effort to
enhance regional and international cooperation and
partnerships to promote greater social and economic
development and to tackle the root causes and other
security-related threats, including climate change, in
the region.
Finally, we support the role of the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including
Chad, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger,
in fighting transnational terrorism in the region and
hope that the international community will continue
to support the G-5 Sahel Force, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

20-00526
