22

General Assembly-Twentieth Seseion

tained in annex A.IV.8 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, bearing
in mind the provisions of section III of ·General Assembly resolution 1219 (XII) and part C of Assembly
resolution 1240 (XIII);
4. Invites the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the Member States regarding the additional resources which should be obtained through
voluntary contributions with a view to initiating activities of investment proper ;
5. Decides to extend the mandate of the Committee
on a United Nations Capital Development Fund so as
to enable it to carry out the tasks envisaged in General
Assembly resolutions 1826 (XVII) and 1936 (XVIII),
taking into account the results of the work of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, as well as the results of the SecretaryGeneral's consultations with the Member States;
6. Further instructs the Committee to make new
efforts with a view to reaching a large measure of
agreement on the draft legislation (statute) of the
United Nations capital development fund, bearing also
in mind the alternative proposals for starting operations
through a gradual transformation of the United Nations
Development Programme ;
7. Requests the Committee to submit its report to
the Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session, for transmission, together with the Council's comments, to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session for necessary action.
1391st plenary meeting,
8 December 1965.

2043 (XX). World campaign for universal literacy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1677 (XVI) of 18 December 1961 and 1937 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 on
the question of the eradication of illiteracy,
Taking note of:
(a) The resolutions adopted in 1964 by the regional
economic commissions, Economic and Social Council
resolution 1032 (XXXVII) of 14 August 1964 and
resolution 1.271 adopted on 19 November 1964 by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its thirteenth
session,
( b) The report submitted by the Secretary-General
to the General Assembly at its nineteenth session8 and
the note by the Secretary-General on the world campaign for universal literacy submitted to the Assembly
at its twentieth session, 7 as well as the particularly
encouraging report submitted by the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the action taken by that organization,8
Having received with appreciation the noble and
generous message on this question addressed to the
General Assembly by His Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah of Iran,9
6 Jbid.,

agenda item 47, document A/5830.

7 A/6048.
8 A/C.2/L.807.

For summary, see Official Records of the
General Assembly, Twentieth Sl!Ssion, Second Committee, 980th
meeting, paras. 2-8.
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Sesion, Annexes, agenda item 47, document A/6024.

Taking note of:
(a) Recommendation No. 58 to the Ministries of
Education concerning literacy and adult education, 10
approved by the International Conference on Public
Education at its twenty-eighth session, held at Geneva
in July 1%5,
( b) The conclusions and recommendations approved
by the World Congress of Ministers of Education on
the Eradication of Illiteracy, 11 convened by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and held at Teheran from 8 to 19 September 1965,
and in particular the resolutions on the mobilization
of human and material resources,
1. Declares that illiteracy is a world problem which
concerns all mankind ;
2. Affirms that literacy is an essential factor in economic, social and cultural development;
3. Considers that the time has come for all Member
States to make vigorous and systematic efforts, as soon
as possible, to eradicate illiteracy throughout the world ;
4. Invites countries where illiteracy is a major problem to give due priority to literacy in their development
policy and programmes and, in accordance with this
priority, to mobilize the material, financial and human
resources available. whether governmental or nongovernmental :
5. Invites the countries which have achieved the best
results in the campaign against illiteracy in their territory to take adequate account, in their programmes of
bilateral co-operation, of the priority that the countries
receiving these programmes have decided to give to
literacy in their development plans;
6. Invites those States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies which
employ illiterate foreign workers to organize or develop
literacy courses for them with a view to promoting the
vocational training and social advancement of those
workers residing in their territory;
7. Invites Governments to consider the possibility
of increasing, at both the national and the international
level, the resources allocated to literacy programmes by
having recourse to various sources ;
8. Welcomes the literacy programme of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and invites the other competent specialized agencies,
including the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, as well as the Special Fund, the Technical Assistance Board, and governmental and nongovernmental international and regional organizations,
to combine their efforts with those of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in putting into effect literacy programmes closely
integrated with development programmes;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the regional economic commissions to study, within the
framework of the United Nations Development Decade,
the most appropriate measures for promoting the effective integration of literacy in development ;
10 A/6048, annex I. For the printed text, see United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, World Congress of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy,
Teheran, 8 to 19 September 1965, Literacy and Adult Education
(Paris, 1965).
11 A/6048, annex II. For the printed text, see United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, World Congress of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of llliteracy,
Teheran, 8 to 19 September 1965, Final Report (UNESCO/
ED/217).

Resolutions adopted on the repo1·ts of the Second Committee

10. Instructs the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to report
to the General Assembly in due course on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
1391st plenury mcctin_q,
8 December 1965.
2044 (XX). United Nations Institute for Training
and Research
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1827 (XV II) of 18 December 1962 and 1934 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963
relating to the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research,
Noting with i14terest the progress made so far in
establishing the Tnstitute's preliminary activities,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions 1037 (XXXVII) of 15 August 1964 and 1072
( XXXIX) of 26 July 1965. and of the reports submitted by the Secretary-General1 2 and the statement
made hy the Executive Director of the Institute, 13
1. Expresses the hope that the U:nited ~at_ions Institute for Training and Research will begm its regular
operations as soon as possible and not later than the
end of 1965;
2. Renews its appeal to Governments of States
Members of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies and ~>f th~ I~ter~ational. Atomic
Energy Agency and to private 111st1tut1ons. which ru~ve
not yet financially contributed to the lnstltt!te to give
it their generous financial support now that it has been
established ;
3. Requests the Executive Director of the Institute
to report annually to the General Assembly an1, as
appropriate, to the Economic and Social Council on
the activities of the Institute.
1391st plenary meeting,
8 December 1965.
2082 (XX). Science and technology
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction, which was greatly
strengthened by the results of the United Nations Conference on the Application of Science and Technology
for the Benefit of the Less Developed Areas, that
science and technology can make an outstanding contribution to the economic and social development of the
developing countries,
Recalling its resolution 1944 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 concerning international co-operation in the
application of science and technology to economic and
social development,
Noting with appreciation the comprehensive response
made by the Advisory Committee on the Application
of Science and Technology to Development to the
request in resolution 1944 (XVIII) that the Advisory
Committee examine, in keeping with its terms of
reference, the possibility of establishing a programme
of international co-operation in science and technology
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 48, document A/6071; Official
Records of the Economic and Social Council, Thirty-ninth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 24, document E/4049.
13 A/C.2/L.817. For summary, see Official Records of the
General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Second Committee, 987th
meeting, paras. 1-8.

23

for econorn1c and social development, with special reference to the study of the problems of the developing
countries and the exploration of suitable solution,;,
I. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1083 (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, in which the Council
warmly commended the Advisory Committee on the
Application of Science and Technology to Development
for its second report, 14 approved the plans of the Advisory Committee for the next phase of its work and
transmitted to the General Assembly the second report
as an exposition of the steps that must be taken to
achieve the ohjectiws envisaged in Assembly resolution
J<J44 (XVIII);
2. Also endorse.!> the views of the Advis-ory Committee that:
(a) 1t would be not only possible, but highly desirable, to develop a programme of the kind envisaged in
resolution 1944 (XVIII) in order to strengthen existing programn1es and to adcl appropriate new arrangements for rounding out the total effort, and also designed to draw the attention of workl opinion lo the
work of the Adwsory Committee;
( b) The Economic and Social Council itself should
he the appropriate body, under the authority of the
(;eneral Assembly, to initiate ancl guide the programme,
through its links with organizations in the United
:\Jations family, the regional economic commissions and
non-governmental organizations. and through the cooperation of the States iVIembers of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies ancl of the
fnternational Atomic Energy Agency;
3. Commends the comprehensive proposals and suggestions, made by the Advisory Committee in chapter
IV of its second report, to the attention of States
lVIembers of the United Nations and members of the
specialized agencies and of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, all organizations of the United Nations
family concerned with the application of science and
technology to development and to :ill similarly interested non-governmental organizations;
4. Invites the Advisory Committee, as its programme of work evolves and in the light of its second
report, to continue to examine in more detail the needs
and possibilities ,,i1d, where appropriate, the role of
the United Nations family in relation to:
(a) The establishment of national policies for the
application of science and technology to development by
developing countries ;
( b) The establishment or strengthening of institutions for scientific and technological research in the
developing countries, and of co-operative arrangements
among such institutions, especially on a regional basis,
with a view to the widest dissemination of the possibilities of applying scientific and technical knowledge
to development :
( c) The more extensive undertaking, by appropriate
institutions in the highly developed countries, of researth on problems of special concern to the developing
countr~es;
( d) The encouragement of co-operative links between universities, research institutes, laborntories and
similar institutions in the highly developed countries
and those in the developing countries.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
14 Official Hecords of the Fconomic and Social Council,
Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 14 (E/4026 and Corr.I).
