S/2012/576

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 July 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 13 July 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit two letters dated 25 June and 6 July 2012 (see
annexes) from Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African Union Commission. In the
letter dated 25 June 2012, the African Union requested the United Nations to
consider reconfiguring the authorized number and type of helicopters to be
supported through the United Nations logistical support package for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as authorized by Security Council resolution
2036 (2012). In its follow-up letter dated 6 July 2012, the African Union further
requested the Security Council to authorize flexibility in the mix of helicopters in
support of AMISOM operations, within the overall ceiling of 12 helicopters.
The request is in line with the requirements presented in the Strategic Concept
for future operations of AMISOM and reflects its current operational priorities.
Furthermore, greater flexibility would allow for maximizing the effectiveness of
AMISOM through the timely adjustment of the configuration of its air assets based
on operational needs.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-43749 (E) 250712

*1243749*

S/2012/576

Annex I
Letter dated 25 June 2012 from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the strategic Concept paper and Concept
of Operations for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) both underlined
the urgent need for air assets as force enablers to support the expanded military
operations in all sectors of the AMISOM area of operations. A total of 14 rotary and
fixed-wing aircraft were considered appropriate to support the military operations. It
was envisaged that the air assets would be based in Sectors 1 and 2, while providing
multi-sectoral support. The breakdown was as shown below:
Sector 1

Sector 2

Attack helicopters

3

Attack helicopters

4

Utility helicopters

2

Utility helicopters

2

Fixed-wing

2

Fixed-wing

1

Security Council resolution 2036 (2012), however, authorized an aviation
component of up to a maximum of nine utility helicopters and three attack
helicopters. It is observed that the numbers authorized for attack helicopters would
impose limitations on AMISOM operations which would require concurrent air
support to all Sectors. AMISOM would require at least a set of three attack
helicopters in Sectors 1 and 2 to provide adequate support to AMISOM troops. This
is owing to technical operational reasons which require that attack helicopters
operate in pairs, with one attack helicopter on standby, to be able to conduct 24/7
day and night operations.
It should be recalled that the lack of air support during the recent AMISOM
offensive to open the Afgoye corridor presented serious constraints to both the
conduct of the operation and logistics support, particularly in regard to medical
evacuation.
In view of the above observations, the reconfiguration of the number and type
of helicopters authorized should be considered such that AMISOM would be able to
deploy six attack and six utility helicopters. This change will not alter the total
authorized number while at the same time will provide more enabling effect as
envisaged in the Strategic Concept.
It is confirmed that Kenya has already deployed and Uganda is ready to deploy
the following types of helicopters:
Kenya

Uganda

3 – Z9 attack helicopters

3 – MI-24 attack helicopters

1 – MI-17 utility helicopter

2 – MI-17 utility helicopters

1 – Puma utility helicopter

2

12-43749

S/2012/576

It is worthy to note that this concern was raised in my last report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2036 (2012) (S/2012/468). I would
appreciate your consideration of this request taking note of the urgent operational
requirements for the helicopters.
(Signed) Jean Ping

12-43749

3

S/2012/576

Annex II
Letter dated 6 July 2012 from the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that, further to my letter dated 25 June 2012
concerning the mix of rotary-wing capabilities authorized by Security Council
resolution 2036 (2012), and as mentioned in my progress report to the Security
Council dated 1 June 2012, AMISOM needs to urgently deploy and have the ability
to task up to three attack rotary-wing aircraft in support of current operational
requirements.
It should be noted that the lack of air assets is impacting on the operational
tempo, which has now slowed down while awaiting the deployment of essential
attack and utility helicopters in support of operations in Sectors 1, 2 and 3,
specifically in Merka, Kismayo and Baidoa.
It is further noted that AMISOM is planning to conduct these operations
concurrently in order to take advantage of the ongoing offensive in multiple fronts.
Inability to deploy air assets in support of these concurrent operations due to
restrictions imposed by Security Council resolution 2036 (2012) on the
configuration of the attack and utility helicopters will seriously undermine the
success of the operations. Furthermore, air operations imperatives require that attack
helicopters only fly in PAIRS to ensure mutual support, with a minimum of one
helicopter on standby, and hence the requirement for a minimum of three airframes
assigned to either sector, as tasked by the AMISOM Force headquarters at any given
time. This requirement was indicated in my letter dated 25 June 2012.
Initial discussions with the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
(UNSOA) have indicated that it would welcome this flexibility and that the logistics
support package is able to support any mix of 12 helicopters, depending on the
tasking of the Force headquarters.
As such, I request that the Security Council endorse flexibility in the mix of
helicopters in support of AMISOM operations, and I would be grateful if this letter
could be forwarded as a matter of urgency to the Security Council for its
consideration.
Meanwhile, due to the operational exigencies, it is my immediate intent to
deploy three Ugandan MI-24 attack and two MI-17 utility helicopters to Mogadishu
to support the offensive in Sector 1, and at the same time make available the three
Kenyan Z9 attack helicopters and two utility helicopters, one Puma and one MI-17,
in support of ongoing operations in Sector 2. These assets will be also available for
tasking in support of operations in other Sectors. In an effort to remain within the
intent of Security Council resolution 2036 (2012), I want to assure you that only
three attack helicopters will be tasked at any one time and thus flying hours will be
maintained within UNSOA support package limits.
(Signed) Jean Ping

4

12-43749
