28

General Assembly -

necessitated the immediate launching of public information activities on as wide a scale as possible,
Having examined the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the present state of dissemination of information on the United Nations in these Territories, 10
Considering that the dissemination of information in
pursuance of its resolution 1465 (XIV) is still far from
satisfactory,
1. Takes note of the special report of the SecretaryGeneral on the dissemination of information on the
United Nations in the Non-Self-Governing_ Territories;
2. Considers that measures adopted thus far by some
Administering Members for the dissemination of information on the United Nations among the inhabitants
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories do not include
steps to secure the active support and participation of
representative organizations of these inhabitants for
the purpose of spreading such information;
3. Invites the Administering Members to make
further efforts to secure the active support and participation of the aforementioned representative organizations;
4. Further invites the Administering Members to
broaden the scope and accelerate the process of dissemination of. information and to develop public awareness
of, and interest in, the United Nations by making full
use of facilities provided by the United Nations Office
of Public Information for the purpose of disseminating
information;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to review the
quantity, quality and content of the material distributed,
in order. to meet the growing demand for such material
and to assist the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories towards an easy and intelligent understanding of the aims and activities of the United
Nations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to take action
towards the establishment of information centres in
Territories such as those in Eastern and Central Africa,
Papua and the Caribbean Territories;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixteenth session a report on
the progress made in implementing the present resolution.
948th plenary meeting,
15 Dece111ber 1960.

1539 (XV). Participation
of
the Non-Self.
Governing Territories in the work of the
United Nations and of the specialized
agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 566 (VI) of 18 January
1952, 647 (VII) of 10 December 1952, 744 (VIII)
of 27 November 1953 and 1466 (XIV) of 12 December 1959,
Considering that the direct participation of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies is an
effective means of promoting the progress of those Territories and their people towards the attainment of the
objectives set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations,
10 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 37, 39, 40
and 41, documents A/4471 and Add.1.

Fifteenth Session

Recognizing that the part1C1pation of duly qualified
indigenous representatives of the dependent peoples in
the consideration of questions of fundamental concern
to their welfare is not only useful and desirable but also
essential at the present stage of development of the NonSelf-Governing Territories,
Noting that the participation of some Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of certain regional
economic commissions and specialized agencies has
proved a useful means of promoting the progress of the
peoples of those Territories towards complete selfgovernment or independence,
1. Considers that the direct participation of representatives of the indigenous peoples of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the work of the appropriate
organs of the U nite<l Nat ions is in the interest of the
peoples of those Territories and can do much to accelerate the process of their emancipation;
2. invites the Administering Members to arrange
for the participation of such representatives of the NonSelf-Governing Territories in the work of the appropriate
organs of the United Nations;
3. Further invites such Administering Members as
have not already done so to propose to the specialized
agencies and the regional economic commissions that the
_N,m-Self-Coverning Territories participate in the work
of those organs as members :or associate members,
according to the comtitution of each organ, through
such representatives:
4. Decides to include this question as a separate item
on the provisional agenda of its sixteenth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixteenth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.
1540 (XV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral 11 on offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Noting 'With satisfaction the further response to its
resolution 845 (IX) inviting Member States to extend
their offers of facilities for study and training to the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the increasing interest among the inhabitants
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in such offers, as
indicated by the fourfold increase over the previous year
in the number of applications for such facilities in
1959-1960,
Expressing regret that despite this increase a large
number of the scholarships so offered by Member States
remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that in several instances
the students who have been granted scholarships have
not been accorded facilities to leave the Non-SelfGoverning Territories in order to take advantage of
such scholarships,
11 Ibid., documents A/447~ and Ad1j.1-3.
