NATIONS

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 14 AUGUST 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 499) . . . , , . , , , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

1

. . .,,,

,.,.

. . , . +. , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9387) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1499

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-NINTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 14 August 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. J. DE PINIES (Spain).
Present; The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, C.olombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern IrelandUnited States of America and Zambia.

Government of Lebanon to consider the Israeli aggression
against Lebanese territory. The flagrant violation of Lebanon’s sovereignty by Israeli aircraft is part of the daily
military escalation in which the Tel Aviv authorities are
engaging. By their own admission, it is no longer a matter
of reacting to any kind of activity by the Palestinian
resistance, but of really putting into practice a doctrine,
one of reprisals.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/‘l499)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9385).
3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9387).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires
a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9387)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish).’ In accordance with the Council’s previous decision I shall invite the
representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President Mr- E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr. Y. Telcoah (Israel) took places at the Security
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the
question on the agenda.
3. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): The
Security Council is meeting today at the request of the

4. This attitude of Israel can be explained, on one hand,
by the Zionist State’s conviction that it is possible to
impose a solution by force on the countries of the Middle
East and, on the other, by the manifest impotence of the
international organizations, and of the Security Council in
particular.
5. When we realize that the Tel Aviv authorities publicly
announce their intention to effect a pure and simple
annexation of territories belonging to countries which are
sovereign Members of this Organization, and that at the
same time Israel is receiving the most modern weapons to
strengthen its aggressive potential and the funds necessary
for accelerated settlement of the conquered territories from
its great ally, the United States, such an attitude can hardly
surprise us.
6. The so-called objective and impartial policy statements
setting the occupier and the occupied on the same footing
can no longer disguise an active external complicity aimed
at consolidating and perpetuating the Zionist civil and
military occupation.
7. The pretexts invoked by the Tel Aviv authorities in
their aggression against the Arab countries of the region do
not withstand objective analysis. They have already been
put forward in the past, and th.e Council duly rejected
them.
8. The aggression perpetrated against Lebanon last 11
August was expected. The Zionist designs on that region of
Hasbani had been proclaimed, one of the main objectives
being the occupation of that region in order to control all
the tributaries of the Jordan River. Did not Mr. Ben-Gurion
tell Mr. Eric Rouleau, a French journalist for Le Munde on
16 April 1969: “No, the State of Israel we dreamed of has
not yet been born”?
9. The war machine which Israel has been since its origin
has not yet carried out its plans. Other regions are still
threatened, and the southern part of Lebanon is one of the
most coveted. Faithful to a tried and true tactic, the
Zionists are now preparing world public opinion for an

imminent occupation of Lebanese territory
lasting pretext of security needs.

of the Security Council itself answers this question. Thus,
on 31 December 1968, after considering the Israeli aggression against Lebanon, the Security Council adopted resolution 262 (1968). Operative paragraph 3 of that resolution
stated that the Council:

on the ever-

10. Nevertheless, here as elsewhere Israel, before occupying this area, wants to eliminate all economic activity from
this area by generalized destruction, so that when the time
comes it will no longer be necessary to drive out the
inhabitants who, deprived of their means of livelihood, will
already have left the region.

“‘Issues a solemn warning to Israel that if such acts were
to be repeated, the Council would have to consider
further steps to give effect to its decisions”.
18. The situation is clear. The time has now come either
to consider the “further steps” mentioned in the resolution,
or to proclaim clearly that, because of the opposition of
certain Western Powers, the Council is more than ever
unable to achieve the objectives laid down for it at the time
of its establishment, and that it will now be the responsibility of the Palestinian people alone, and the other Arab
peoples, to liberate their own territories.

11. Then, with the region deserted of inhabitants, the
hour of colonization will have rung. Only recently, in
Jordan, Israeli aircraft were destroying the Ghor Canal,
thanks to which 10,000 hectares of land were being
cultivated. This deliberate determination by Israel to
deprive thousands of farmers of their sole means of
livelihood, this destruction of purely economic objectives,
has become the favourite weapon of the Zionists, whose
avowed aim is to block any economic development of the
countries of the region.

19. Mr. ZAKHAROV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): For the second time within
a comparatively short period, the Security Council is
considering the question of Israel’s aggressive acts against
Lebanon. As is known, in December of last year the
Security Council already condemned Israel for its aggressive
attack on the undefended civil airport of Beirut, terming
that act by the armed forces of Israel as a threat to peacein
the Middle East, In the resolution [262(1968/l
unanimously adopted at that time [1#62nd meeting], the
Security Council clearly and definitely stated that it:

12. To keep those countries in a state of permanent
under-development, and therefore of dependence, was and
still is the basis of Israel’s existence.
13. However, the war imposed by Israel on the sovereign
countries of the region, and its occupation of part of their
territory should not conceal from us the underlying cause
of a conflict which derives from the original depredation
inflicted on the Palestinian people with the active support
of the Western world. All the subsequent aggressions,
destructions and repressions are only the immediate or
remote consequences of this denial of justice to the
Palestinian people.

“Condemns Israel for its premeditated military action
in violation of its obligations under the Charter and the
cease-fire resolutions”.
20. The Security Council also warned Israel:

14. After the long night of colonialism, a people conscious
of its destiny is being reborn from its ashes and is making
its entrance on to the international scene, and any attempt
to silence it can only fail. Today, the Palestinian people has
taken its fate into its own hands. Its glorious struggle
against the occupiers is an established fact which no one has
a right to ignore. Several days ago a curfew was imposed by
the Zionist authorities at Gaza; in Jerusalem, at Ramallah,
Haifa and Tel Aviv, heroic men and women have resolved to
fight for Palestine, their homeland. All they want is to be
Palestinians without any discrimination, either racial or
religious.

21. Now Israel has committed a new premeditated and
unprovoked act of aggression against Lebanon, in the form
of an attack by the Israeli air force on civilian villagesin the
southern part of Lebanon. During this air raid against the
civilian population, napalm bombs were used. There were
dead and wounded, including women.

15. The Palestinians are not alone in their noble combat.
All the free peoples of the entire world support their Cause.
The United Nations, which bears a special responsibility in
the tragedy of the Palestinian people, cannot evade its duty. ’

22. In his statement [1498th meeting] Mr. Ghorra gave
the facts concerning this attack by Israel against Lebanon.
These facts speak for themselves and we shall not repeat
them.

16. Because of the refusal of certain Powers to take into
account the realities of the Palestinian situation, the Middle
East crisis has lasted for twenty years, and it threatens to
place international peace and security in grave danger.

23. We cannot fail to note that this new act of aggression
by Israel against Lebanon is not an isolated event. It reflects
Israel’s general aggressive policy against the neighbouring
Arab States, a policy of obstinate rejection of a political
settlement in the Middle East on the basis of the Security
Council resolution (242 (196711 ‘of 22 November 1967, a
policy of undermining international efforts to restore peace
in that area.

“ . . . that if such acts were to be repeated, the Council
would have to consider further steps to give effect to its
decisions”.

17. When, then, will this Organization decide to assume its
responsibilities? For years the Security Council has been
adopting resolutions condemning the doings of the Tel Aviv
authorities; for years it has asked them to abide by the
resolutions already adopted. What has been the practical
result of all those resolutions? Perhaps the present meeting

24. The new air raid by the Israeli air force on Lebanon is
one link in the chain of this policy of the Israeli extremists.
2

This act confirms once more that the entire respollsibility

aggression by maintaining that the air raid on Lebanon was
nothing but an “act of self-defence”,

for the tense situation in the Middle East rests with Israel,
and with Israel alone.

31. But, first of all, the Security Council has already
repeatedly, and in the strongest terms, condemned Israel’s
policy of committing so-called acts of retaliation and has
warned it that, if they were repeated, the Council would
take more effective measures against the aggressor,

25. What were the objectives of this new military action
by Israel against Lebanon? In sending its military jet planes
to bomb defenceless Arab villages, the Israeli adventurers
were trying to intimidate a small Arab country which
firmly maintains its position in favour of peace and a
political settlement, respects its international commitments
and strictly abides by the terms of the Armistice Agreement. They obviously wished to sow confusion among the
Arabs, to weaken their will to fight for a political
settlement.

32. The Israeli representative has complained here that it
seems Arab partisans are carrying out operations against
Israel from Lebanese territory. But it should be recalled
that it was precisely Israel, and not Lebanon, which
violated the Armistice Agreement with Lebanon, and broke
off the work of the Israel-Lebanon Mixed Armistice
Commission set up by that Agreement, It was Israel which,
instead of making use of the machinery created by the
Armistice Agreement, chose to resort to gross acts of
aggression against Lebanon, in violation of the United
Nations ‘Charter and the decisions of the Security Council
on the cease-fire. Israel has never made use of that
machinery nor permitted it to conduct investigations on the
territories it occupies.

26. But that is not all. This action by the Israeli extremists
was also deliberately aimed at a general complication of the
situation in the Middle East. In pursuing a policy aimed at
further inflaming the conflict in the Middle East and
thwarting
a political settlement, the Israeli aggressors
obviously entertain the illusion of impunity, The moral and
political condemnation which has been repeatedly passed
on Israel by the Security Council and world public opinion
makes no impression on them.

33. Secondly, the Israeli representative’s arguments concerning the actions of Arab partisans from Lebanese
territory not only cannot justify Israel’s actions against
Lebanon, but still further unmask the failure of the
adventurist policy of the ruling circles of Tel Aviv which
launched the aggressive war against the Arab countries and
are now reaping the fruits of the legitimate anger and
hatred of the whole Arab world. Indeed, it is not a question
of some sort of allegedly subversive acts against Israel, as
the Israeli representative is trying to represent them here; it
is a question of the legitimate struggle of the peoples of the
Arab countries against Israeli aggression and the occupation
of age-old Arab lands. That struggle is taking place under
the principle of justice, and because of the people’s
conviction of their righteous cause. Only the day before
yesterday, the Security Council in its resolution [269
(196911 on Namibia again reaffirmed the right of peoples
to wage a struggle against foreign invaders and occupiers.

27. Is this by accident? Far from it: the facts of the
political realities in the Middle East and in the surrounding
areas show otherwise. Israel commits a routine act of
aggression against one or another Arab State-and it
receives a certain quantity of weapons, including bombers,
from its wealthy friends abroad. It commits a further act of
aggression-and calls on its friends abroad for a further
quantity of weapons, clearly counting on a favourable
reply. But does not such a situation constitute a direct
encouragement to Israel’s aggressive’ designs?
28. A letter from the representative of another Arab
country, Jordan, dated 12 August 1969 [S/9388/ also
reports the bombing by Israeli military aircraft of vital
irrigation installations in Jordan for the purpose of undermining the agricultural economy of that Arab country.
29. However, the Israeli Government should remember
that in our time aggression cannot go unpunished, no
matter on whose support-direct
or indirect-the aggressor
relies. The Soviet Government has already repeatedly
warned the Israeli Government of that. Israel’s continuing
aggression against the Arab countries constitutes a constantly increasing threat to all the peoples of the Middle
East, including the people of Israel itself. The growing Arab
resistance movement on the lands seized by Israel, the firm
verdict of world public opinion against Israel’s expansionist
course, the broad support of the States of the world for the
just cause of the Arab countries which demand the
elimination of the consequences of the Israeli aggressiondo not all these facts indicate that it is time the
Government of Israel seriously reflected on where its policy
is leading its country and its people? The aggressor will
have to pay for his misdeeds. The experience of history
makes that abundantly clear.

34. Let the Israeli occupiers not calculate that, by military
repressions and terror, they will succeed in bre:&ing the will
of the Arab peoples to resist. It is perfectly obvious that, as
long as Israel continues its occupation of Arab lands, the
liberation struggle of the Arab population will also continue, and not only continue but be intensified. The
aggressor will get neither peace nor rest as long as he treads
on foreign soil.
35. The struggle of the Arab population is a just struggle,
directed against the expansionist pretensions of the ruling
circles of Israel, particularly the pretensions just recently
reaffirmed at the congress of the Israeli ruling party, which
adopted
a programme for territorial seizures based on the
results of the 1967 aggression. The Israeli leaders talk a lot
about peace. However, their desire to reach a peaceful
settlement by annexations has nothing whatever in common with genuine peace in the Middle East. To pursue a
p&y
of annexation is not only to violate the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967, but to undermine
peace in the Near East, and to sow the seeds of a new war
in the future.

30. The Security Council has once again met with a false
device of the aggressor, who is trying to mislead public
opinion and shift the responsibility to the vict,im of
3

36. The Arab stand against the policy of assimilation of
the occupied territories being carried out by Israel, against
the attempts of the Israeli armed forces to build long-term
fortifications on the usurped territories and to dig them
selves in there, is fully justified. The aggressorcan hardly
fail to know that as long as his troops are on the territory
of Arab countries, the flames of the Arab people’s national
war of liberation will continue to spread, and no force on
earth can put them out.

submitted by the Lebanese Government following the
bombing by Israeli aircraft of a number of villages in
Southern Lebanon on Monday, 11 August. According to
the information provided so far by the Beirut authorities,
this attack caused four deaths, and left three seriously
wounded. Napalm bombs were used during this operation.
43. The Israeli authorities try to justify this action by the
presence of fedayeen in this part of Lebanon, which is
located close to the common border.

37. If Israel, asits representative states, wants not war, but
peace in the Middle East, the way is open. That waylies in
the implementation of all the provisions of the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967. Withdrawal of
Israeli troops from the territories occupied during the 1967
conflict is the fundamental condition, the key to a
settlement. But it is precisely this course, the only realistic
one, that Israel does not want to take, and the attack on
Lebanon is still another proof of this.

44. On behalf of my Government, I wish to stress from
the outset of this debate how clearly this affair illustrates
the dangers inherent in the absence of a political settlement
of the conflict: as there is no progressin that direction, we
are witnessing an escalation of violence which today
threatens the peace and security of a country which has
alwaysplayed a moderating role in the conflict.
45. There hardly seems to be any need for me to recall
that acts of reprisal have always been condemned by our
Organization. Such acts are contrary to all the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations.

38. The Israeli leaders often say that they want a
settlement which would ensure Israel’s existence under
conditions of peace. However, their words do not match
their deeds, since they themselves block and reject just such
a solution, preferring to have Israel exist under conditions
of war. But that is a slippery and risky path fraught with
danger for the fate of Israel’s own people.

40. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Cromyko,
stated on 10 July of this year in his speech before the
Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:

46. My Government is all the more concerned by the
consequences which may arise from Israel’s action 011
Monday, inasmuch as it has always taken a special interest
in Lebanon, to which it is bound by very old and closeties
of friendship. It understands that the situation which has
developed on the Lebanon-Israel border is basically the
result of the deterioration of the situation in the region asa
whole. It realizes the efforts which the Lebanese Govemment has made to assertits full sovereignty and to avoid, by
all means within its power, the creation on its part of a new
source of disturbance. My Government therefore fearsthat
the Israeli reprisal action will only aggravate the situation
and hamper the contribution the Lebanese Government can
make to the search for peace which, we are convinced, is
one of its foremost concerns,

“The Soviet Union is in favour of the use of all possible
means for a settlement of the situation in the Middle
East. Delay is dangerous and detrimental to everyone , . .
All countries, both large and small, can only be interested
in the settlement of the situation in the Middle East. The
solution of this problem would also have a positive
influence on the international situation and tip the scales
in favour of peace.”

47. In this patient search for a true and lasting peacein
that region we, as members of the Security Council, must
exert all our energies. We ourselves spare no effort along
those lines, and we are prepared to give our support to all
measures which may be necessary to facilitate success.It is
in this spirit, keeping in mind that the basic objective is the
search for peace, that we cannot fail to deplore &acts of
violence, whatever their nature and source.

41. The Soviet Union fully supports Lebanon and its
appeal to the Security Council in connexion with Israel’s
attack on peaceful populated areas in Lebanon. The Soviet
delegation considers that the Security Council must
strongly condemn Israel for its new act of aggressionagainst
Lebanon, committed in violation of Israel’s obligations
under the United Nations Charter, the Armistice Agreement
with Lebanon, and United Nations decisions on the
cease-fire. The Soviet Union is prepared, in conformity with
the United Nations Charter, to support any effective
measures of the Security Council aimed at curbing the
aggressor.

48. The French delegation is ready to consider any
measures in that direction, and will determine its attitude
to the texts which will be submitted in the light of the
considerations I have just set forth.

39. The positron of the Soviet Union with regard to the
situation in the Middle East has been and remains firm and
consistent. It is steadfastly directed towards support of the
struggle of the Arab peoples for the elimination of the
consequences of the Israeli aggression, and towards the
achievement of a peaceful political settlement in the Middle
East on the basis of Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967.

49. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): As the Security Council is
considering Lebanon’s complaint contained in documents
S/9383 and S/9385 of 11 and 12 August 1969, it is naturaI
that our minds should be filled with thoughts about the
fearful situation in the entire Middle East. This situation
has been cruelly dramatized during the last few days by the
damage done to the East Ghor Canal in Jordan by the
Israeli air force. That the backbone of the agricultural
economy of a small country should be so allowed tc be
destroyed, that thousands of farmers should be robbed of

42. Mr. CHAYET (France) (trunslcztedfrom French): Here
we are once again, meeting to consider the complaint
4

c

their sustenance, that, in another instance, the drinking
water supply of the population of a large area of the United
Arab Republic should be disrupted-these occurrences
demonstrate the horror and the human poignancy of the
conflict in the Middle East. They prove, if proof were still
needed, that Israel admits of no principle of restraint on its
conduct, All it does serves to deepen the sense of outrage,
to perpetuate the indignation of the peoples of the Arab
countries.

of the United Nations? Experts on international law have
proclaimed, and I am sure members of this Council agree,
that the provisions of the Charter pertaining to the
avoidance Of the use of force are, without the shadowof a
doubt, to be regarded as prohibiting reprisals or retaliation
of the kind that the Council is now considering. There is no
question cf Israel having any right whatsoeverunder the
Charter to cross the international border and wantonly
launch an attack against Lebanon,

SO. But while concern with the whole Arab-Israeli situation is natural, it would be a dereliction of the Security
Council’s duty, as much as disregard of the sovereign right
of Lebanon, if we allowed that wider concern to make us
’ lose sight of the precise issue placed before us today, In the
present debate, the Council is confronted not with the
situation between Israel and Jordan or Israel and Syria or
Israel and the United Arab Republic: it is confronted with
the situation resulting .from an. armed attack by Israel on
Lebanese territory, an attack in which napalm was admittedly used and which resulted in civilian casualties. The
facts that are most pertinent to a consideration of this
.evenf’ by the Security Council are: first, Lebanon is a
country which wasnot involved in the hostilities of 1967;
second, an Armistice Agreement which was concluded on
23 March 1949 exists between Lebanon and Israel; third, it
is weI known that the Government of Lebanon, a
defenceless country, has made every endeavour to insulate
its territory from the fighting which is an inevitable
consequence of the continuance of Israeli occupation of
Arab territories.

53. I need hardly recapitulate the occasionson which this
Council has condemned Israel for taking the law into its
own hands. It is simply inconceivable that Israel could have
drawn any right from the decisions of this Council to go
into the territories of Lebanon and rain death and
destruction upon the civilian population. On the contrary,
this Council has explicitly, unequivocally and quite definitely condemned reprisals as incompatible with the purposesand principles of the United Nations.
54. The second consideration is that there is no proof
whatsoever of any truth in the Israeli charge. To say that
Lebanon “harbours concentrations of irregular forces on its
territory” is to allege active assistanceon the part of the
Government of Lebanon to those forces and a furtherance
of their designs. Where do we have the slightest shred of
proof of such assistance?The fact of the matter is no more
than that Lebanon has given refuge to some Palestinians
who have been forcibly evicted from their homes. Wasit
wrong to do so? These Palestinians have the inherent right
to struggle to regain their homeland. Where can they wage
that just struggle? Can they do so in the occupied areas
from where they have been expelled, where large numbers
of innocent people are rounded up every week, where their
houses are demolished, where prisoners are tortured and
where unspeakable brutalities are committed? If they wage
their struggle from whereverthey are, nothing in the law of
the Charter, nothing in the principles of justice and
humanity, requires that the Governments of the Arab
States must suppressthem and thus help Israel to consolidate its illegal possessions.The thesis advanced by Israel is
not only that the Government of Lebanon must embark
upon such suppression but also that its failure to do so
exposes it to dire punishment from Israel. Can we countenance such an argument?

51. With those three facts in mind, and in view of the
additional fact that the attack alleged by Lebanon is
admitted by Israel, my delegation considers it incumbent
on the Security Council to do whatever is possible to ensure
that Israel desist from any attack on the territory of
Lebanon, Let us not forget that the Council, when adopting
resolution 262 (1968), issued a solemn warning to Israel
that if its premeditated acts against Lebanon were to be
repeated the Council would have to consider further steps
to give effect to its decisions. The Council is now
confronted with a repetition of such acts and is, therefore,
morally bound to consider suitable further steps.
52. Of course, we have all heard the usual plea advanced
by Israel that Lebanon-and I quote from the letter of the
representative of Israel to the Security Council: “. . . harbours on its territory . . . considerable concentrations of
irregular forces . . . engaged in . . . terror warfare against
Israel”.[S/9387.] Two considerations arise here. The first is
that if the allegation were true it would, on Israel’s own
valuation, constitute a breach of one of the provisions of
the Armistice Agreement between Israel and Lebanon. If
so, the responsibility would devolve on Israel not to take
the law into its own hands but to report such a violation to
the Security Council. Cert&rly the United Nations Charter
does not allow Israel, any more than it allows any other
Member State, to arrogate to itself the right of making a
charge against another Government, pronouncing on the
validity of that charge and then determining the Sentence
for it. A State’s self-appointment at once as prosecutor,
judge and executor of punishment is anathema to the
Charter. Does the right of reprisal exist under the Charter

55. That is the moral and legal consideration which must
weigh with the Security Council. Independently of it,
however, there is a political consideration of almost equal
importance. When Israel attacked the Beirut International
Airport in December last, the representative of the United
States said at the meeting of the Council on 29 December
1968: “This destructive operation has enlarged the ring of
reprisal and widened the circle of terror to touch areasand
peoples hitherto struggling to keep aloof from these
measures ” [1460th meeting, para. 751.
56. That is equally true of the attack which has brought
about this meeting of the Council. That being so, the
prerequisite for any effort towards the restoration of peace
in the Middle East is that the enlargement by Israel of the
area of belligerence must be checked effectively and
promptly. The Pakistan delegation believes it is that
prerequisite to which the Council resolution must address
itself.
5

attention to the following proclamation of last March by
the Vice-President of the Association of Resistance Fighten
of Belgium, a country which was one of the first victims of
nazi aggression:

57. How do we proceed now? Having determined that
Israel had no right to launch the attack in question and
having condemned Israel for it, the Council should hold
Israel responsible for the damage to civilian life and
property, and proceed to take some action to protect
Lebanon against a recurrence of such attacks. That is the
least that the Council could do at this stage in relation to
the Lebanese complaint.

“I denounce the Security Council before world opinion
for its complicity in the murder of working people in
Qiryat Shemona. By its unjust and partial condemnation,
motivated by certain prejudices, the Security Council has
encouraged and even incited the terrorist bands of
Shoukeiri and of Amin el Husseini, the ex-Mufti of
Jerusalem and a Nazi war criminal, in their murderous
action against peaceful workers. The widows and orphans
of the victims will take these gentlemen of the Security
Council to task for the mourning and suffering they Irave
caused.

58. We know it is said at times: what difference does it
make if Israel is condemned again and again, for it pays no
heed to the solemn pronouncements of this Council?
Nevertheless, we remain convinced that for the discharge of
its own duty and for the protection of the rights of weaker
nations, this Council is required to leave no doubt about its
judgement. The will of the international community must
be clearly expressed. Whether Israel does or does not heed
it at present must be regarded as a matter for Israel itself to
ponder.

“Are they to pay the price of the scraps of Beirut?
According to Mr. Gromyko, the Security Council should
pay no more attention to acts of terrorism perpetrated
during twenty years by these disciples of former nazis,
war criminals against the survivors of the death camps,

59. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I call on
the representative of Israel.

“What is it all about?

60. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It may be superfluous to
restate a basic principle of international law: that Governments are responsible for all acts of aggression committed
from their territories against neighbouring States. That is a
tenet embodied in all definitions of aggression; that is a
precept specifically applied by the Security Council since
1948 to the Israel-Arab conflict. Despite that, however, the
protagonists and supporters of Arab aggression have tried to
shirk their responsibility by various spurious claims. The
most baseless and odious has been the comparison between
the fedayeen, AI-Fatah and similar terror organizations
which have been pursuing terror warfare against Israel’s
civilian population since Israel’s independence long before
the 1967 hostilities, and resistance fighters against occupation. I do not know whether the representative of the
USSR holds sacred anything at all, However, as one whose
family has been among nazi victims, and as representative
of a State which is the refuge of hundreds of thousands of
human beings saved from nazi crematoria, I should like to
protest and reject with contempt the Soviet representative’s
renewed insult to the memory of 6 million of our brethren
victims of nazi barbarity, and of the valiant men who
fought nazi domination, by making a comparison between
those who wage terror warfare against us and resistance
fighters, and declaring as legitimate the murder of Jewish
men, women and children.

“I am talking about the odious attack on the Jerusalem
market-twelve
dead, among them women, old men,
Jewish and Arab children-about plastic bombs plantedat
the Tel Aviv bus station which caused many casualties;
about button-mines, made in China, strewn in schools
with the intention of killing children; about the sky-jacking of an El Al airliner to Algiers with the subsequent
detention of its Israeli passengers and crew, and, finally,
about the bloody attack on a second Israeli airplaneat
the Athens airport which, by a miracle, caused only one
dead and one wounded. Had this operation succeeded,it
could have resulted in the Ioss of hundreds of human lives
and could have destroyed the entire airport installation.
However, when Israel administers a lesson limited in
scope and resulting in material damage only, to an Arab
country which supports terrorist bands, it faces condemnation by the highest international authority which, by
definition, should be objective.
“In truth, Mr. Gromyko succeeded in executing a
masterful sleight of hand, but I am sorry for the countries
which went along with him, for the next time they may
well be the victims of this procedure.
“The emissaries of certain communist countries, as well
as a part of progressive opinion, attempt to reward the
hired killers in the pay of Arab adventurers by endowing
them with the aura of the Resistance against the Nazis.

61. The associations of anti-nazi fighters have repeatedly
repudiated with anger the loathsome comparison between
the resistance movement and the Arab assassins of Jewish
civilians. In proclamations and resolutions adopted in their
international conferences, the anti-nazi fighters have
pointed an accusing finger at these Arab assassins and
decIared them to be the heirs to Hitler’s nefarious crimes.
Similar declarations have been made by personalities of
world renown, among them last year’s Nobel Peace Prize
winner, Rene Cassin, and the former Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, General
Bums.

63. In conclusion, I shall quote certain phrases from a
resolution adopted by the Seventh Conference of the
International Union of Resistance Fighters and Deponed
Persons, held in Brussels in April 1968:

62. In previous debates I have brought before the Council
a number of such documents; today I should like to draw

‘C
. . . No resistance fighter can accept so odious a
perversion of the character and the aim of their straggles

‘<To this, we, the Resistance Fighters say: no. ‘fhe
Resistance Movement in occupied Europe has never been
directed against the lives of women, of innocent men aad
of children.”

:

6

in which, moreover, participated thousands of men and
women who have found a haven in Israel and desire
nothing but to live in peace and tranquillity.
“There is no ground upon which to compare the
Resistance Movement with the action of the terrorists and
with odious, blind crimes, designed to provoke insecurity
and fear, incite to violence, when there is every possibility
open to a loyal and constructive discussion of outstanding
matters. The wish to liken fanatical groups incited by
Arab leaders, who are surrounded by former Nazi
criminals desirous to perpetuate the Hitlerite genocide to
the anti-nazi Resistance, is, therefore, an insult painfully
felt not only by the citizens of Israel who are so
courageously defending their right to live, but by all the
Resistance Fighters loyal to their values.
(Signed) M. A. Deneweth
National Vice-President”
64. The records of the Security Council are replete with
wanton Soviet abuse of Israel, delivered in the spirit of the
anti-Semitic writings of Trofim Kichko, once condemned
and now exalted again in the Soviet Union.
65. I shall not engage the Council in an extensive rebuttal
of the Soviet representative’s malevolent statement. By now
the entire world knows what value can be attached to
Soviet views on aggression, the law of nations and human
rights. I shall say only one thing. The Jewish people’s
millennial history has endowed it with a long memory, and
the day will come when the Jewish people will submit to
the Soviet Union an account for the role which the USSR
continues to play in denying to the remnant of the Jewish
people its rights and in contributing to aggression against
the Jewish State. On the tears of our oppressed brethren in
the Soviet Union, on the blood of the innocent Israelis
murdered with Soviet weapons and Soviet encouragement,
on the support lent by Moscow to those who strive to
ravage Israel, on Soviet opposition to real peace between
the Arab States and Israel, there will be no oblivion and no
silence.
66, Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from FLench): I
think all the members of the Council are familiar with this
type of exercise. But, for the record, I should merely like to
say that we have realized a long time ago that the Zionists,

true to their racist doctrine, challenge the right of nonwhite, non-European peoples to resistance. I should only
like to say that today the Palestinian people no longer await
anybody’s authorization, least of all that of semi-official
Zionist organizations established in Europe or elsewhere.
67. Mr. ZAKHAROV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I asked for
the floor in exercise of my right of reply in connexion with
Mr. Tekoah’s statement.

lics)

68. The Israeli representative has expressed his dissatisfaction with many of the statements made here but, as always,
he has expressed dissatisfaction in particular with the
statement of the Soviet delegation.
69. But his dissatisfaction only serves further to unmask
Israel’s aggressive intentions towards the Arab States. The
Israeli representative has resorted to the usual tactic,
familiar to all of us by now, used when the Israeli
representative runs out of arguments or has no arguments:
he takes the floor and comes out with slander and
fabrications about the Soviet Union. But no justification,
no slanderous twaddle of the Israeli delegate, no diversionary manoeuvres can help Israel to obscure the plain fact,
which is clear to everybody, that the Israeli armed forces
are making aggressive attacks on the Arab States which
respect their international obligations and that it is Israel
which continues to resort to the illegal practice of
repression, thereby defying the United Nations Charter and
the repeated resolutions of the Security Council; that it is
Israel which is impeding a peaceful political settlement in
the Middle East by refusing to withdraw its troops from the
occupied Arab territories, and that Israel therefore bears
the full weight of the responsibility for the continuing tense
situation in the Middle East.
70. That Mr. President, is why the Security Council must
reject the Israeli delegate’s demagogic arguments and in all
seriousness consider and adopt an appropriate decision.
71. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): As no
other representative wishes to speak at present, if I hear no
objections I shall adjourn the meeting and reconvene the
Council for this afternoon at 4 p.m.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publicolions
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLlCATlONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distribulorr
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New
York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
dipositoires
du

des
monde

Nations

Unies,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los publicocioner

Section

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions
entier.

der

Unies
ronf
lnfarmez-vow

venter,

PUBLICACIONES
de las Naciones

en todas
partes
del mundo.
Conrulle
Venlas,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho in United Nations, New York

DES NATIONS

UNIES

en vente
donr
les libroiries
et ICI ogences
auprirr
de votre librairie
ou adrersez-vow
b:

New York pu Gen&ve.

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidas

esttrn

en venla

o IV librero

o dirfjare

UNIDAS
en libreriar
a: Nacioner

y cosos
Unidar,

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

distribuidoras
Secci6n

de

82180-December

1972~2,050
