United Nations

A/RES/64/293

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 August 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 104

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 30 July 2010
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/64/L.64)]

64/293. United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and reaffirming its role under the Charter, including on issues related to
development, peace and security and human rights,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, which constitutes a serious threat to human dignity, human
rights and development,
Recognizing that poverty, unemployment, lack of socio-economic opportunities,
gender-based violence, discrimination and marginalization are some of the
contributing factors that make persons vulnerable to trafficking in persons,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted on 8 September
2000, 1 in which Member States resolved to intensify efforts to fight transnational
crime in all its dimensions, including trafficking in human beings,
0F

Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome adopted by the General
Assembly on 16 September 2005, 2 noting that trafficking in persons continues to
pose a serious challenge to humanity and requires a concerted international
response, and urging all States to devise, enforce and strengthen effective measures
to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in persons in order to counter the
demand for trafficked victims and to protect them,
1F

Reaffirming its resolution 55/25 of 15 November 2000, by which it adopted the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 3 and the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, 4 and recalling other related conventions and instruments, such as
2F

3F

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
4
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
2

09-47941

*0947941*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/293

the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) and the Worst Forms of Child Labour
Convention, 1999 (No. 182) of the International Labour Organization, the
Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and
Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the
Child 6 and the Optional Protocols thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography 7 and on the involvement of children in armed conflict, 8 and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 9
4F

5F

6F

7F

8F

Recognizing the crucial importance of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, which entered into
force on 25 December 2003 and provided for the first time an internationally agreed
definition of the crime of trafficking in persons, aimed at the prevention of
trafficking in persons, protection of its victims and prosecution of its perpetrators,
Recalling all General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate
trafficking in persons, including resolutions 61/180 of 20 December 2006, 63/194 of
18 December 2008 and 64/178 of 18 December 2009 on improving the coordination
of efforts against trafficking in persons, resolution 61/144 of 19 December 2006 on
trafficking in women and girls, and resolution 58/137 of 22 December 2003 on
strengthening international cooperation in preventing and combating trafficking in
persons and protecting victims of such trafficking,
Reaffirming Commission on Human Rights decision 2004/110 of 19 April
2004, 10 by which the Commission appointed the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, to highlight the importance of a
victim-centred, rights-based approach to combating trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, Human Rights Council resolution 6/14 of
28 September 2007, 11 by which the Council appointed the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences,
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1990/68 of 7 March 1990, 12 by which the
Commission appointed the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography, and General Assembly resolution 62/141 of
18 December 2007, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Representative on violence against children, and noting the
appointment of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in conflict,
9F

10F

1F

Recalling that, pursuant to the request of the Economic and Social Council in
resolution 2006/27 of 27 July 2006 on strengthening international cooperation in
preventing and combating trafficking in persons and protecting victims of such
trafficking, reinforced by the General Assembly in resolution 61/180, on improving
the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons, the Inter-Agency
_______________
5

Ibid., vol. 266, No. 3822.
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
9
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
10
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. B.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I,
sect. A.
12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1990, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum
(E/1990/22 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
6

2

A/RES/64/293

Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons was established to foster
coordination and cooperation among relevant United Nations agencies and other
international organizations involved in combating human trafficking,
Recognizing that the launching in March 2007 of the United Nations Global
Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, in partnership with the International Labour Organization, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
International Organization for Migration, and the Vienna Forum to Fight Human
Trafficking, held from 13 to 15 February 2008, provided all anti-trafficking actors,
including the United Nations, Governments and civil society organizations, with a
global forum to share their respective experiences and further highlighted the need
collectively to address human trafficking in a multifaceted and holistic manner,
Recalling the thematic debate on human trafficking held by the General
Assembly on 3 June 2008, which gave Member States a forum for discussion
concentrating on the three Ps, prevention, protection and prosecution, and the
interactive thematic dialogue on the theme “Taking collective action to end human
trafficking”, held by the Assembly on 13 May 2009, which underlined the
importance of strengthening collective action by Member States and other
stakeholders, including regional and international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and the media,
Recognizing the importance of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, which was established
to improve the capacity of States parties to combat transnational organized crime
and to promote and review the implementation of the Convention and the Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children,
Recognizing also decisions 1/5 of 7 July 2004, 2/3 of 20 October 2005, 3/3 of
18 October 2006 and 4/4 of 17 October 2008 concerning the implementation of the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, 13
12F

Recalling relevant subregional, regional and cross-regional mechanisms and
initiatives, such as the Arab Initiative for Building National Capacities to Combat
Human Trafficking: the Doha Founding Forum; the Asia-Europe Meeting Action
Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children; the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Declaration against Trafficking in Persons,
Particularly Women and Children; the Bali Process on People Smuggling,
Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime; the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization Action Plan on Cooperation in Combating Crime, in
particular in Its Organized Forms; the Council of the Baltic Sea States Task Force
against Trafficking in Human Beings; the Commonwealth of Independent States
Agreement on Cooperation in Combating Trafficking in Persons, Human Organs and
Tissues; the Central American Coalition against Trafficking in Persons; the
Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking; the Council of
Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings; the Declaration
on the Fight against Trafficking in Persons of the Economic Community of West
_______________
13
See CTOC/COP/2004/6, chap. I, CTOC/COP/2005/8, chap. I, CTOC/COP/2006/14, chap. I, and
CTOC/COP/2008/19, chap. I.

3

A/RES/64/293

African States; the Joint Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, of the Economic Community of West African
States and the Economic Community of Central African States; the Manama
International Conference on Human Trafficking at the Crossroads: the Private-Public
Partnership to Fight Human Trafficking; the Southern Common Market
(MERCOSUR) Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons; the Organization
of American States Work Plan to Combat Trafficking in Persons in the Western
Hemisphere; the Ouagadougou Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human
Beings, Especially Women and Children; the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings; the
Plan of Action of the Regional Conference on Migration; the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Preventing and Combating
Trafficking in Women and Children for Prostitution; the Stability Pact for
South-Eastern Europe Task Force on Trafficking in Human Beings, of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe; and the Stockholm Programme
for 2010–2014 of the European Union and its Action Plan setting up priorities in the
field of justice and home affairs and establishing an anti-trafficking coordinator,
Recognizing the need to develop a global plan of action against trafficking in
persons that will:
(a) Promote universal ratification of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, as well as other relevant
international instruments that address trafficking in persons, and reinforce the
implementation of existing instruments against trafficking in persons,
(b) Help Member States to reinforce their political commitments and legal
obligations to prevent and combat trafficking in persons,
(c) Promote comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses, at the
national, regional and international levels, to counter trafficking in persons,
(d) Promote a human rights-based, gender- and age-sensitive approach in
addressing all factors that make people vulnerable to trafficking in persons and
strengthening the criminal justice response, which are necessary to prevent
trafficking in persons, protect its victims and prosecute its perpetrators,
(e) Raise awareness within the United Nations system and also among States
and other stakeholders, such as the private sector, civil society and the international
and national mass media, and the public at large,
(f) Foster cooperation and coordination among all relevant stakeholders,
including Member States, international organizations, civil society organizations
and the private sector, and within various entities of the United Nations system,
taking into account existing best practices and lessons learned,
Adopts the present resolution and its annex as the United Nations Global
1.
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons;
2.
Decides to formally launch the Plan of Action at a one-day, high-level
meeting of the General Assembly, and urges Member States, the United Nations and
other international, regional and subregional organizations as well as civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the media, to fully
and effectively implement the relevant provisions of the Plan of Action and the
activities outlined therein;

4

A/RES/64/293

3.
Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to, as a matter of priority, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime3 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,4 taking into
consideration the central role of those instruments in the fight against trafficking in
persons, and also urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully
and effectively;
0H

1H

Decides to establish, in accordance with paragraph 38 of the annex to the
4.
present resolution, the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and requests the Secretary-General to
take all necessary measures for its effective operation, and acknowledges previous
and ongoing contributions to other funding sources that support efforts to combat
trafficking in persons;
Requests the Secretary-General to include a section on the
5.
implementation by the United Nations system of the Plan of Action, within already
existing reporting obligations to the General Assembly under the item on crime
prevention and criminal justice;
Decides to appraise in 2013 the progress achieved in the implementation
6.
of the Plan of Action, and requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
measures in that regard;
Requests the Secretary-General to present proposals to finance the
7.
staffing and programmatic requirements of the Secretariat necessary to strengthen
the capacity of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as described in the
Plan of Action through a reallocation of resources in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013.
109th plenary meeting
30 July 2010

Annex
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons
We, the States Members of the United Nations, reaffirm our commitments to
end the heinous crime of trafficking in persons, especially women and children,
express our determination to prevent and combat trafficking in persons, protect and
assist victims of trafficking in persons, prosecute crimes of trafficking in persons
and promote partnerships to strengthen coordination and cooperation, and resolve to
translate our political will into concrete actions by adopting an action plan to:
1.
Consistently and strongly condemn trafficking in persons, which constitutes a
criminal activity violating human dignity and has negative effects on development,
peace and security and human rights;
2.
Recognize that “trafficking in persons” shall mean the recruitment,
transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or
use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the
abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of
payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another
person, for the purpose of exploitation, which includes, at a minimum, the

5

A/RES/64/293

exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation,
forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the
removal of organs, as set forth in the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (hereinafter referred to
as “the Trafficking Protocol”);4
2H

3.
Ensure that the promotion and protection of the human rights of victims of
trafficking in persons, the prevention of trafficking in persons by addressing the social,
economic, cultural, political and other contributing factors and the strengthening of
the criminal justice response are at the centre of all efforts to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons and to protect, assist and provide redress to victims;
4.
Take urgent action to prevent trafficking in persons, protect its victims and
prosecute its perpetrators and strengthen partnerships to these ends by promoting
and considering, as a priority, ratifying or acceding to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime3 and the Trafficking Protocol, as
well as other relevant international instruments, including the Forced Labour
Convention, 1930 (No. 29) and the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999
(No. 182) of the International Labour Organization, the Supplementary Convention
on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar
to Slavery,5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child6 and the Optional Protocols
thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography7 and on the
involvement of children in armed conflict,8 and the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;9
3H

4H

5H

6H

7H

8H

5.
Recognize that, in accordance with article 32 of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the Conference of the Parties to
the Convention is established to improve the capacity of States parties to promote
and review the implementation of the Convention, including the Trafficking
Protocol, and take note of ongoing initiatives aimed at exploring options regarding
an appropriate and effective mechanism to assist the Conference of the Parties in the
review of the implementation of the Convention;
6.
Take into account the activities and recommendations of the open-ended
interim Working Group on Trafficking in Persons established by the Conference of
the Parties to the Convention;
7.
Support the Human Rights Council and contribute to its work on the question
of the promotion and protection of human rights for all in the fight against
trafficking in persons;
8.
Support the role and mandates of the Special Rapporteurs on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children, on contemporary forms of slavery,
including its causes and consequences, on violence against women, its causes and
consequences, and on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on violence against children
and on sexual violence in conflict, and other relevant special rapporteurs and
representatives. The mandate holders should assist States by offering concrete
advice, liaising with the United Nations and regional organizations and reporting on
these issues;
9.
Reaffirm the central role of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in the global fight against trafficking in persons, particularly in providing
technical assistance to implement the Convention and the Trafficking Protocol, by
making use of existing capacity-building tools, lessons learned and expertise
6

A/RES/64/293

available in international organizations, including the International Framework for
Action to Implement the Trafficking in Persons Protocol; 14
13F

10. Reaffirm the important work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the
International Labour Organization and the International Organization for Migration
in the global fight against trafficking in persons;
11. Strongly urge all responsible United Nations entities to coordinate their efforts
to fight trafficking in persons effectively and to protect the human rights of its
victims, including by means of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons and the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human
Trafficking;
I.

Prevention of trafficking in persons

12. Address the social, economic, cultural, political and other factors that make
people vulnerable to trafficking in persons, such as poverty, unemployment,
inequality, humanitarian emergencies, including armed conflicts and natural
disasters, sexual violence, gender discrimination, social exclusion and
marginalization, as well as a culture of tolerance towards violence against women,
youth and children;
13. Make a commitment to address all forms of trafficking in persons wherever
they occur;
14. Mainstream the issue of trafficking in persons into the broader policies and
programmes of the United Nations aimed at addressing economic and social
development, human rights, the rule of law, good governance, education and natural
disaster and post-conflict reconstruction;
15. Adopt and implement comprehensive policies and programmes at the national
level and, as appropriate, at the subregional and regional levels to prevent all forms
of trafficking in persons that are in line with relevant policies and programmes on
migration, education, employment, gender equality, empowerment of women and
crime prevention, in accordance with relevant international human rights
instruments;
16. Conduct research and collect suitably disaggregated data that would enable
proper analysis of the nature and extent of trafficking in persons;
17. Develop or strengthen processes for the identification of victims, such as those
developed, inter alia, by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other
organizations, including appropriate and non-discriminatory measures that help to
identify victims of trafficking in persons among vulnerable populations;
18. Promote awareness-raising campaigns aimed at persons at risk of being
trafficked and at the general public through education and the effective involvement
of the mass media, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and
community leaders with a view to discouraging the demand that fosters the
exploitation of persons, especially women and children, and that leads to trafficking,
and collect and disseminate best practices on the implementation of those
campaigns;

_______________
14

Available from www.unodc.org/unodc/en/human-trafficking/publications.html.

7

A/RES/64/293

19. Stress the role of education in raising awareness about the prevention of
trafficking in persons, and promote education, in particular human rights education,
and human rights learning as a sustainable way of preventing trafficking in persons;
20. Reinforce efforts regarding the provision of identity documents, such as the
registration of births, in order to lower the risk of being trafficked and to help to
identify victims of trafficking in persons;
21. Increase and support prevention efforts in countries of origin, transit and
destination by focusing on the demand that fosters all forms of trafficking and the
goods and services produced as a result of trafficking in persons;
22. Adopt and implement specific measures at the national level to combat
trafficking for labour exploitation and strive to educate consumers on those measures;
23. Strengthen or continue to strengthen the capacity of law enforcement,
immigration, education, social welfare, labour and other relevant officials in the
prevention of trafficking in persons, taking into account the need to respect human
rights and child- and gender-sensitive issues, and encourage cooperation, where
appropriate, with civil society, non-governmental organizations and other relevant
organizations;
24. Encourage the United Nations to intensify its work with Member States and
relevant international, regional and subregional organizations to identify and share
best practices to prevent trafficking in persons;
II.

Protection of and assistance to victims of trafficking in persons

25. Reaffirm that the promotion and protection of human rights for all and
effective measures to respond to trafficking in persons are complementary and
mutually reinforcing;
26. Stress the need to promote and protect the rights of victims of trafficking in
persons and to reintegrate victims into the community by taking into account the
Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking
developed by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights 15 and the Guidelines on the Protection of Child Victims of Trafficking
developed by the United Nations Children’s Fund; 16
14F

15F

27. Ensure that victims of trafficking in persons are treated as victims of crime and
that national legislation effectively criminalizes all forms of trafficking;
28. Review existing national services available to victims of trafficking in persons,
consistent with the Convention and the Trafficking Protocol, strengthen those
services where needed, and support the establishment or strengthening of
appropriate referral mechanisms;
29. Strengthen or continue to strengthen the capacity of relevant officials likely to
encounter and identify possible victims of trafficking in persons, such as law
enforcement personnel, border control officers, labour inspectors, consular or
embassy officials, judges and prosecutors and peacekeepers, and ensure the
availability of needed resources to the relevant sectors and institutions, including
those of civil society;

_______________
15
16

8

E/2002/68/Add.1.
Available from www.unicef.org/ceecis/0610-Unicef_Victims_Guidelines_en.pdf.

A/RES/64/293

30. Urge Governments to take all appropriate measures to ensure that identified
victims of trafficking in persons are not penalized for having been trafficked and
that they do not suffer from victimization as a result of actions taken by Government
authorities;
31. Protect the privacy and identity and ensure the safety of victims of trafficking
in persons before, during and after criminal proceedings and protect immediate
family members and witnesses, as appropriate, from retaliation by traffickers by
ensuring their safety in accordance with articles 24 and 25 of the Convention;
32. Provide assistance and services for the physical, psychological and social
recovery and rehabilitation of trafficked persons, in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations and other relevant organizations and sectors of civil
society;
33. Urge States parties to consider adopting legislative or other appropriate
measures that permit victims of trafficking in persons to remain in their territory,
temporarily or permanently, in appropriate cases, consistent with the Convention
and the Trafficking Protocol;
34. Ensure that countries of origin accept back their nationals who are victims of
trafficking in persons and guarantee that such return is conducted with due regard
for safety and shall preferably be voluntary, consistent with the Convention and the
Trafficking Protocol;
35. Adopt labour laws in countries of origin, transit and destination which provide
legal rights and protections for workers that would limit their risk of being
trafficked;
36. Provide specialized services to identified victims of trafficking in persons,
consistent with the Convention and the Trafficking Protocol and other relevant
instruments, including access to health services, such as access to prevention,
treatment, care and support services for HIV and AIDS and other blood-borne and
communicable diseases for those victims of trafficking in persons that have been
sexually exploited, taking into account the fact that human trafficking for the
purposes of sexual exploitation has serious, immediate and long-term implications
for health, including sexual and reproductive health;
37. Provide appropriate assistance and protection in the best interest of the child to
child victims of trafficking in persons or to those at risk of being trafficked,
including through appropriate services and measures for the physical and
psychological well-being of child victims of trafficking in persons and for their
education, rehabilitation and reintegration, in coordination with existing child
protection systems;
38. Establish the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, to provide humanitarian, legal and
financial aid to victims of trafficking in persons through established channels of
assistance, such as governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, which shall operate as a subsidiary fund of the United Nations Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund managed by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and shall be administered in accordance with the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations 17 and other relevant provisions, with
16F

_______________
17

ST/SGB/2003/7.

9

A/RES/64/293

the advice of a board of trustees composed of five persons with relevant experience
in the field of trafficking in persons who shall be appointed with due regard to
equitable geographical distribution by the Secretary-General in consultation with
Member States and with the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime;
39. Adopt measures to ensure that victims of trafficking in persons can seek
compensation for the damage suffered, consistent with the Convention and the
Trafficking Protocol;
40. Acknowledge the important role of civil society organizations in providing
assistance and empowerment to victims of trafficking in persons, helping them to
seek redress and facilitating the care of and provision of appropriate services to
victims, including close cooperation and coordination with law enforcement
officials;
41. Ensure that domestic legal or administrative systems include measures to
provide information to victims of trafficking in persons, in a language they
understand, regarding their legal rights and the relevant court and administrative
proceedings and facilitate their access to assistance in order to enable their views
and concerns to be presented and considered at appropriate stages of such
proceedings against offenders in a manner not prejudicial to the rights of the
defence, consistent with the Convention and the Trafficking Protocol;
42. Provide victims of trafficking in persons with an adequate period of time to
recover and the opportunity to consult with appropriate advisers to assist in
decision-making regarding cooperation with law enforcement and their participation
in judicial proceedings;
III. Prosecution of crimes of trafficking in persons
43. Implement all relevant legal instruments that criminalize trafficking in
persons, including by:
(a) Prosecuting crimes of trafficking in persons that encompass all forms of
exploitation and enacting, enforcing and strengthening legislation that criminalizes
all trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
(b) Adopting legislation and other measures, as necessary, to establish as
criminal offences attempting to commit an offence, participating as an accomplice
in an offence and organizing or directing other persons to commit an offence, as set
out in the Trafficking Protocol, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Optional Protocols thereto and other relevant instruments, as applicable;
(c) Combating and prosecuting organized criminal groups engaged in
trafficking in persons;
44. Ensure the liability of all categories of perpetrators of trafficking in persons,
including the liability of legal persons and entities, as appropriate, in line with
relevant international instruments;
45. Enhance efforts to investigate alleged cases of trafficking, strengthen means to
combat trafficking, prosecute perpetrators, including through more systematic use of
freezing assets for the purpose of eventual confiscation, in accordance with the
provisions of article 12 of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and ensure that penalties are proportionate to the gravity of the
crime;
10

A/RES/64/293

46. Make use of the available technical assistance provided to strengthen the
criminal justice response to trafficking in persons, including by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime;
47. Investigate, prosecute and punish corrupt public officials who engage in or
facilitate trafficking in persons and promote a zero-tolerance policy against those
corrupt officials, consistent with the United Nations Convention against
Corruption 18 and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime;
17F

48. Strengthen or continue to strengthen coordination and cooperation among
States in combating crimes that might be connected with trafficking in persons,
including money-laundering, corruption, smuggling of migrants and all forms of
organized crime;
49. Encourage the law enforcement, immigration, border patrol or other relevant
authorities of concerned States to cooperate with one another by exchanging
information with full respect for domestic laws, such as data protection laws, and
continue to promote cooperation among countries of origin, transit and destination
in order to enhance investigations, prosecutions and detection of trafficking
networks;
IV.

Strengthening of partnerships against trafficking in persons

50. Recognize that capacity-building is a very important component in combating
trafficking in persons and encourage and enhance coordination and coherence within
the United Nations system;
51. Encourage effective cooperation and coordination of efforts at the national,
bilateral, subregional, regional and international levels, especially among countries
of origin, transit and destination, and take advantage of the networks provided by
relevant organizations to share best practices in capacity-building for responding to
and combating trafficking in persons, while stressing the importance of mutual legal
assistance efforts and the exchange of information with full respect for domestic
laws, such as data protection laws, including operational information, programmes
and best practices in supplementing the Convention and the work done by the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention;
52. Conclude and implement mutual legal assistance and extradition agreements,
where appropriate, to apprehend and prosecute perpetrators of trafficking in persons,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of national and international law,
including the Convention;
53. Promote cooperation and coordination among governmental institutions, civil
society and the private sector, including the media, as well as workers’ and employers’
organizations, to strengthen prevention and protection policies and programmes;
54. Strengthen cooperation among law enforcement agencies, regionally and
internationally;
55. Intensify international, regional and subregional cooperation to combat
trafficking in persons, as well as technical assistance for countries of origin, transit
and destination aimed at strengthening their ability to prevent all forms of
trafficking in persons;
_______________
18

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

11

A/RES/64/293

56. Strengthen and support the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons in order to improve coordination and cooperation among
relevant United Nations bodies, including the human rights treaty bodies and
mechanisms, and other international organizations;
57. Encourage the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, other agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations system and international and regional
organizations to continue to assist Member States, upon request, to strengthen
policymaking, legislative arrangements, border control and law enforcement
cooperation, public awareness campaigns and capacity-building and to exchange
and build upon best practices in assisting victims of trafficking in persons;
58. Further encourage agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
system to continue to improve the coherence and efficiency of technical assistance
delivery in the field of trafficking in persons, in accordance with the
recommendations of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group of
Governmental Experts on Technical Assistance established by the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention;
59. Urge the Secretary-General to expedite the strengthening of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons under the coordination of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in order to ensure overall organization
and coherence in the efforts of the United Nations system to respond to trafficking
in persons;
60. Request the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority, to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to collect information
and report biennially, starting in 2012, on patterns and flows of trafficking in
persons at the national, regional and international levels in a balanced, reliable and
comprehensive manner, in close cooperation and collaboration with Member States,
and share best practices and lessons learned from various initiatives and
mechanisms;
61. Encourage Member States to consider making voluntary contributions to the
work of the United Nations in combating human trafficking, and to explore
additional sources of funding in this regard, including reaching out to the private
sector for contributions.

12
