VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and Swaziland-as a result of the continued influx of
children from South Africa seeking freedom from repression and also an opportunity to further their studies,
Having examined the reports of the Secretary-Gen·eral45 on the progress achieved in regard to the assistance required by and provided to these refugees in
Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland,
Recognizing that the needs of South African student
refugees are also imposing serious pressures on Zambia,
1. Endorses the measures taken by the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the mobilization of a programme of
assistance to South African student refugees in Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland;
2. Notes with appreciation the generous contributions of the Governments of Botswana, Lesotho and
Swaziland in providing asylum and making available
educational facilities for student refugees;
3. Notes with satisfaction the contributions so far
made by Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies;
4. Expresses concern, however, that the total assistance received to date falls short of the needs;
5. Urges all Governments, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies to contribute generously towards the assistance
programmes for these student refugees, both through
financial support and by offering the necessary opportunities for their care and subsistence, education and
vocational training;
6. Requests all agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system, including in particular the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa and the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa, to assist the High
Commissioner in carrying out the humanitarian task
entrusted to him;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner to strengthen their efforts for the mobilization of emergency financial and other appropriate
forms of assistance for these student refugees in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To undertake a similar programme of assistance for South African student refugees in Zambia;
(b) To arrange for a review of the matter in time
for it to be considered by the Economic and Social
Council at its sixty-fifth session;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/120.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 46 and of the International Convention
41i A/32/65

and Add. l.
217 A (lll).

46 Resolution

143

on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,47
Co!lsidering the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 196 l 4~ and the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations of 1963,rn
Considering also the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975,"0 and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975/• 1
adopted by the General Conference of the International
Labour Organisation,
Recalling its resolutions concerning migrant workers
in particular resolutions 3449 (XXX) of 9 Decem~
ber 1975 and 31/127 of 16 December 1976 and
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1749 (LlV)
?f 16_ May 1973 a~d 1926 (LVlll) of 6 May 1975,
m which the Council affirmed the need for the United
Nation3 to consider the situation of migrant workers in
an interrelated manner and in relation to general fai.:tors which have a bearing on human rights and human
dignity,
Aware that the problem of migrant workers continues
to be of major importance to many countries, that it is
becoming increasingly serious in certain regions and
that the Commission on Human Rights and other relevant organs of the United Nations should take immediate measures to ensure the human rights and dignity of all migrant workers,
Emphasizing its serious concern at the de facto discrimination suffered by alien workers in some countries
despite the legislative and other efforts exerted to
prevent and punish it,
. Believi~g further th~t the problem of migrant workers
beco~1~g more senous in certain regions for transient political and economic reasons and for social and
cultural reasons,
1~

Recalling that the family is the natural and funda~ental gro~p unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State, and that in that context
the families of migrant workers are entitled to the same
protection as the migrant workers themselves,
A ware. of the wo~k . done in t~e field of migrant
workers_ by the specialize~ a~encies, particularly the
lnte_rnational Labour Orgamsat10n, and by some United
Nations organs, such as the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
Appreciating, in particular, the efforts which th;
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization continues to exert in the field of migrant
workers,
Convinced, in particular, that an effort at close co~peration betwe~n the ~nternational Labour Organisat10n and the Umted Nat10ns Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization will contribute to the improvement of the situation of migrant workers,
A w'.1~e of the efforts mad~ by countries of origin
to facilitate the return of migrant workers and their
reintegration into the economic and social life of their
country,
Having regard to Economic and Social Council resolution 2083 (LXII) of 13 May 1977,
H Resolution
48

2106 A (XX), annex.
United Nations, Trealy Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
·l!l /hid., vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
50
Inter!lational Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. LVIII,
1975, Senes A, No. 1, Convention No. 143.
01 Ibid., Recommendation No. 151.

144

General A11embly-Thirty-aecond Seesion

1. Calls upon all States, taking into account the
provisions of the relevant instruments adopted by the
International Labour Organisation and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, to take measures to prevent
and put an end to all discrimination against migrant
workers and to ensure the implementation of such
measures;
2. Invites all States:
(a) To extend to migrant workers having regular
status in their territories treatment equal to that enjoyed by their own nationals with regard to the enjoyment of fundamental human rights, with particular
reference to equality of opportunity and of treatment
in respect of employment and occupation, social security, trade union and cultural rights and individual
and collective freedoms;
( b) To promote and facilitate by all means in their
power the implementation of the relevant international
instruments and the adoption of bilateral agreements
designed, inter alia, to eliminate the illicit traffic in alien
workers;
(c) To take all necessary and appropriate measures
to ensure that the fundamental human rights and acquired social rights of all migrant workers, irrespective
of their immigration status, are fully respected under
their national legislation;
3. Invites Governments of host countries to make
arrangements for adequate information and reception
facilities and to put into effect policies relating to training, health, social services, housing and educational and
cultural development for migrant workers and their
families, and to guarantee the free exercise by them of
activities calculated to preserve their cultural values;
4. Further invites Governments of countries of
origin to give the widest possible dissemination to information designed to provide migrant workers with
the fullest possible knowledge of their rights and obligations and to ensure their effective protection;
5. Invites all States to intensify efforts to enlighten
public opinion in host countries on the importance of
the contribution made by migrant workers to economic
and social development and to raising the level of living
in such countries;
6. Calls upon host countries and countries of origin
which consider it useful to do so to co-operate with a
view to facilitating the reintegration of migrant workers
into their countries of origin, regard being had to socioeconomic conditions in the latter countries;
7. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the International
Labour Organisation to ensure jointly, by appropriate
means, very wide dissemination of information calculated to eliminate the stereotypes and prejudices which
led to the de facto discrimination suffered by migrant
workers;
8. Invites Governments of host countries to give
consideration to adopting definitive measures to promote in their territories the normalization of the family
life of migrant workers through family reunion;
9. Calls upon all States to give consideration to
ratifying the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975, adopted by the General
Conference of the International Labour Organisation;

10. Calls upon the United Nations organs and competent specialized agencies, including the International
Labour Organisation, to continue devoting their attention to this question;
11. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights and the Economic and Social Council should
consider this question fully and in depth at their next
sessions, in collaboration with the International Labour
Organisation, the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and other interested agencies
of the United Nations system, on the basis of the instruments adopted and the documents and studies prepared
by the United Nations and the specialized agencies,
including the study on the exploitation of labour through
illicit and clandestine trafficking~ 2 and the report of the
Seminar on the Human Rights of Migrant Workers,
held at Tunis from 12 to 24 November 1975. 53
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/121.

Protection of the human rights of certain categories of prisoners

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,M in particular its articles 5,
10 and 19,
Recalling article 19 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 65 which guarantees to
everyone the right to hold opinions and to freedom of
expression, subject only to such restrictions as are provided by law and are necessary for the respect of the
rights or reputation of others or for the protection of
national security or of public order, or of public health
or morals,
Recalling also the prohibition against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment which is laid down in article 7 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Noting, in this connexion, further efforts to eliminate
torture which have been made in the United Nations
and which have been reflected in the Declaration on
the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly
in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Further recalling article 14 of the Internation:d
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which provides
that all pe:sons, in the determination of any criminal
charge agamst them, are entitled to a fair hearing by a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law,
Recognizing the importance of full respect for the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons
detained or imprisoned as a result of their struggle
against colonialism, aggression and foreign occupation
and for self-determination, independence, the elimination of apartheid and all forms of racial discrimination
and racism, and the termination of all these violations
of human rights,
52 E/CN .4/Sub.2/L.640.
r,3 ST/TAO/HR/50.

54 Resolution

217 A (Ill).

r. 5 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
