asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6875

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6875th meeting
Thursday, 29 November 2012, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vinay Kumar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Parham
Mr. Cenzer

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
First report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2061 (2012)
(S/2012/848)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-61641 (E)

*1261641*

S/PV.6875

first, the stalemate between Iraq’s political leaders; and
secondly, developments in the region.

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
First report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution 2061 (2012) (S/2012/848)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/848, which contains the first report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2061
(2012).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: I am honoured to present to the
Council today the first report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/848) pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2061
(2012) on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I shall also brief Council
members on the most recent developments in Iraq.
As 2012 draws to a close, it is pertinent to take stock
of the progress Iraq has made during the past 12 months.
During that time, Iraq has made committed efforts to
enforce law and order following the withdrawal of
United States forces. Reclaiming its rightful place at
the diplomatic table, it successfully hosted the twentythird Arab Summit in Baghdad in April. And in May, it
hosted talks between Iran and the permanent members
of the Council plus Germany.
In terms of strengthening State institutions,
the Human Rights Commission was established in
April and a new Board of Commissioners of the
Independent High Electoral Commission was elected in
September. The latter resulted in agreement on a date
for Governorate Council elections in April next year.
This progress, however, is endangered by two factors:

2

I regret to report to the Council that strained
relations between Iraq’s political leaders have endured
throughout the year. One manifestation of this is the
Arab-Kurdish rift. The lack of trust arises from a
number of pending issues of contention, including
power-sharing, security and tense relations between the
Central Government and the region of Kurdistan. The
resulting political deadlock is preventing the progress
and reform necessary to consolidate Iraq’s transition.
Attempts to defuse the stalemate have most recently
focused on a package of political reforms that appears
to be stalled.
The Government of Iraq’s decision to establish
the Tigris operations command responsible for overall
security in Kirkuk, Salahadin and Diyala governorates
was heavily criticized by members of the Kurdistan
Regional Government. A military standoff ensued,
incorporating the armed forces of the respective
Governments. The militarization of the situation has
resulted in the regrettable death of one civilian. I should
like to take this opportunity to call on the parties to
exercise all due restraint at this time of increased
tensions. I count on the political leadership of Iraq to
resolve its differences through political dialogue and in
accordance with the constitution.
In that regard, I welcome the recent efforts of
Parliament Speaker Usama al-Nujaifi. I also welcome
the convening of a meeting between the Iraqi Army
and the Peshmerga at the technical level earlier this
week in Baghdad. It is a step in the right direction. I
encourage both sides to keep the door of dialogue open
and to implement the understandings reached. UNAMI
stands ready to facilitate any possible agreement that
would de-escalate the situation and promote confidence
among the various communities .
Over the past few days, dozens of Iraqi security
personnel and civilians, including worshipers, have
been killed and many other dozens injured in Baghdad,
Kirkuk, Karbala and Fallujah. Extremists use the
political differences of the leaders to ignite either
sectarian or ethnic violance and tensions in Iraq.
Immediate resolution and compromise on the part of
all political leaders should be the response to these
attempts.
The tense political standoff is thus testing Iraq’s
internal fault lines. August and September were the

12-61641

S/PV.6875

deadliest months in the past two years. A particularly
atrocious series of attacks on 27 October targeted
pilgrims during the holy Eid al-Adha observance.
Left unaddressed, the political impasse will leave Iraq
vulnerable to the second threat to its stability — namely,
the spillover from violence in the wider region.
Iraq finds itself in an increasingly unstable
regional environment generated by the Syrian civil
war. The Syrian conflict has exposed a complex web of
interconnected and conflicting interests that threatens
to engulf the region in violent conflict. With no
immediate solution to the crisis in sight, there are real
risks of spillover, violence and destabilization.
At the domestic level, the conflict across Iraq’s
border in Syria has had a significant humanitarian impact
on Iraq. The crisis has also impacts had an impact on
Iraq’s relations with its neighbours. Iraq’s relationship
with Turkey has also grown increasingly tense in recent
months, with an escalation in the rhetoric exchanged on
both sides. The divergent positions between Iraq and
other States in the region on how to address the Syrian
crisis have also further strained their relations.
Within this challenging context, however, it is
possible to identify opportunities for UNAMI to
continue to assist Iraq’s transition process. Indeed,
notwithstanding the lack of progress between Iraq’s
political leaders in resolving their differences, Iraq’s
expectations of UNAMI continue to grow. UNAMI’s
assistance, pursuant to its Council mandate, is focusing
on two priority tracks: advancing national reconciliation
and dialogue, and tackling regional issues.
Since my last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.6747), UNAMI has continued to encourage
political leaders to engage in inclusive dialogue to
resolve their differences, in the spirit and framework of
the Constitution. I have continued to conduct frequent
visits to Erbil and Sulaymaniyah to promote such
dialogue. I have also conducted intensive discussions
both in Baghdad and Kirkuk, focusing on the holding
of the long-overdue governorate council elections in
Kirkuk.
UNAMI’s support to the Council of Representatives,
on the basis of sustained facilitation and technical
advice, contributed to the selection of the new Board
of Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral
Commission in September. A proficient and genuinely
independent Commission Board is essential at this
juncture, as Iraq prepares for nationwide governorate

12-61641

council elections on 20 April next year and legislative
elections in 2014.
During Iraq’s busy electoral calendar ahead, the
stakes will be high, not only for Iraq’s political leaders
competing for electoral support, but also for the
consolidation of Iraq’s transition. The elections must
be conducted credibly. Working with the new Board of
Commissioners, UNAMI will continue to coordinate
United Nations support for the development of a
sustainable, self-reliant and professional Independent
High Electoral Commission.
UNAMI also continues to facilitate political
dialogue between representatives of all components
in the disputed areas. UNAMI is working to facilitate
consensus amongst the components of Kirkuk in view
of the provincial council elections in the governorate.
It has established an informal forum for dialogue with
the political representatives of Kirkuk’s components,
with proposals in each of the following four main
areas: power-sharing, determining the date of elections,
security arrangements, and the review of the voter
registry. So far, there has been no agreement on
conducting the elections for Kirkuk provincial council,
which have not taken place since 2005 due to differences
on the voter registry. Elections in Kirkuk could be a
stabilizing factor throughout the governorate.
Whilst relations between Baghdad and Erbil have
deteriorated in some ways during Iraq’s political
stalemate, as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report, there is also some cause for optimism. In
particular, the agreement reached to resume official
oil exports from the Kurdistan region and the steps to
adopt a hydrocarbons use and management framework
deserve encouragement and support.
Legislation on the management of hydrocarbons
and revenue-sharing has been blocked for a number of
years. It has become a major source of tension between
the central and Kurdistan regional Governments,
and a hindrance to overall socioeconomic progress.
The approval of such legislation would significantly
advance the resolution of the question of the disputed
internal boundaries, since a large number of unexplored
oilfields lie within these areas. It would also contribute
significantly to improving relations between Baghdad
and Erbil.
UNAMI is also strengthening its efforts to
support Iraq’s legislative agenda, as mandated by the
Iraqi Constitution. In addition to the hydrocarbons

3

S/PV.6875

legislation, we are continuing to provide technical
advice and assistance on the establishment of the
Federation Council, the reform of the judicial system,
and the adoption of laws on minority communities and
political parties.

agreement between Kuwait and Iraq on the cancelation
of pending lawsuits against Iraqi Airways and on
navigational rights in the Khor Abdullah waterway
will facilitate improved relations between the two
neighbours.

At the regional level, Iraq continues its
re-emergence onto the international stage. Earlier
this year, Iraq demonstrated renewed commitment to
meeting its remaining obligations under Chapter VII
of the Charter and to improving its bilateral relations
with Kuwait. However, progress will depend upon the
restoration of confidence between both sides. Over
the past few months, I stepped up my engagement
with Iraq and Kuwait to see how the United Nations
could best facilitate the resolution of outstanding
issues in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council. In that context, I recently held
high-level meetings in Iraq and Kuwait in which I was
encouraged by the strong commitment that both Prime
Minister Al-Maliki and the Amir of Kuwait expressed
to normalizing relations between their two countries.
I very much hope that they will now be able to move
quickly. They can count on the United Nations in that
regard.

Iraq is a rich country, in both natural and human
resources. But I am concerned by the investment
climate, the impact of Iraq’s red tape and the role of
the public sector. Iraq’s State apparatus continues
to be affected by corruption and capacity shortfalls,
which undermine governance and limit the delivery of
services. That is exacerbating discontent, in a context
where natural resources are abundant and the public’s
expectations for better standards of living remain partly
unfulfilled.

I am happy to report to the Council today that I spoke
to Foreign Minister Zebari this morning. He informed
me that, first, his Government had today nominated the
names for the technical team of the border maintenance
project and that, secondly, the Government would start
immediately to update the list of farmers entitled to
compensation. A meeting with the farmers will take
place as soon as possible. I welcome those steps and
call on the Government of Iraq to initiate work on the
border maintenance project without further delay.
I also appeal to the Government of Iraq to continue
to demonstrate the goodwill necessary to fulfil Iraq’s
other outstanding obligations, in particular with regard
to missing persons and property. The commitment of
Iraq to fulfil those obligations will be conducive to the
normalization of relations between the two countries.
I also equally call on the Government of Kuwait to
continue to act in a spirit of flexibility and reciprocity,
as reflected earlier this year by the important reciprocal
visits of the Amir to Baghdad and the Prime Minister
to Kuwait.
On a different note, I remain fully committed to
continue to work with both Governments to resolve
bilateral issues, at their request.I am hopeful that

4

In support of Iraq’s efforts to build its institutions
to provide good governance and the rule of law,
UNAMI and its partners in the United Nations country
team intend to increase their efforts to strengthen
the independence and capacity of State institutions,
including the Federal Supreme Court, the Independent
High Commission for Human Rights and the Ministry
of Human Rights.
UNAMI and the country team continue their
efforts to strengthen the High Commission for Human
Rights, which has yet to become fully operational,
as well as the Ministry of Human Rights and civil
society organizations. Those are key partners in
monitoring the implementation of the National Action
Plan on Human Rights — a milestone document that
represents the Government’s commitment to implement
recommendations from the universal periodic review
process under the auspices of the Human Rights
Council.
To date this year, 123 people have been executed
in Iraq, 53 of them since July. The latest executions
were carried out on 11 November, when 11 convicts
were executed, including one Egyptian. I continue to
reiterate the Secretary-General’s call in his report for
the Government of Iraq to consider a moratorium on
all executions, in accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions.
As I indicated to the Council in my last briefing,
UNAMI will continue its close partnership with the
country team, with a particular focus on three key
areas with important political, developmental and
governance implications, namely, youth, women and
the environment.

12-61641

S/PV.6875

Youth is a critical, but neglected, demographic in
Iraq. The National Development Plan and the current
development assistance framework highlight the
importance of investing in youth. Despite that, indicators
point to high education dropout rates, while Iraqi youths
continue to suffer from an unemployment reate of
almost 20 per cent and low levels of civic participation
and engagement. To address those worrying trends, I
have established a youth advisory group and appointed
two young Iraqi youth ambassadors to strengthen
United Nations advocacy, including through social and
media outreach activities.
To generate and mobilize the Government’s
commitment, we are also promoting youth-orientated
initiatives, including a youth parliament and a national
human development report on youth for 2012, led by
the United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Development Programme, which has included
a consultation process with 1,800 youths in all
governorates.
We will also sustain our efforts to promote gender
mainstreaming and the empowerment of women.
For example, we are supporting access to justice for
women, as well as training police officers to provide
legal assistance to women survivors of gender-based
violence.
The exploitation of the environment and natural
resources has far-reaching implications for the future
of Iraq, which encompass political, security and
developmental priorities. In particular, the generation
of harmful dust storms continues to increase, bringing
with them associated health hazards and hampering
economic activity. UNAMI and the country team
continue to work closely together on that important
issue. I have attended several meetings to promote
regional approaches to such transboundary issues, and
I am actively working with the Government of Iraq and
the United Nations Environment Programme to hold
a symposium on dust storms in southern Iraq in early
2013.
Complementary efforts by UNAMI and the country
team have ensured a timely and effective response to the
humanitarian dimension in Iraq of the ongoing conflict
in Syria, including a range of protection and relief
activities. The flow of refugees has already exceeded
projected numbers. As of 26 November, there were
more than 50,000 Syrian refugees in Iraq. In addition,
alsmost 55,000 Iraqis have returned from Syria since

12-61641

18 July. We anticipate that the influx will continue,
thereby swelling the numbers of those displaced.
The United Nations is working closely with the Iraqi
Ministry of Displacement and Migration to respond to
the situation. The humanitarian country team continues
to monitor the situation, and coordinates regularly
with partners and Government authorities to ensure
preparedness and an efficient and timely response.
It has developed contingency plans in-line with the
United Nations Syria regional refugee response
plan, which are continuously updated in response to
emerging developments. Efforts are also taking place
to ensure that camps are fully equipped and prepared
for the coming winter and that necessary equipment is
distributed to refuges and returnees, such as blankets,
kerosene and prefabricated structures instead of tents.
I also call on the Government of Iraq to reopen the
Al-Qaim crossing point so that vulnerable people in
need of protection be able to leave Syria.
Only 30 per cent of the third refugee response plan
is covered, and many refugees continue to pour into
Iraq on a daily basis. I therefore appeal to all Member
States to step up and cover the remaining 70 per cent
of the plan.
Finally, I wish to emphasize that Camp Hurriya
was only meant to be an interim facility. As the process
is now well in progress, I should like to take this
opportunity to reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal
to Member States to offer resettlement opportunities
to former residents of Camp Ashraf. Without such an
undertaking, there can be no sustainable solution for
the residents. Currently, only 100 residents remain in
Camp New Iraq, while more than 3,100 residents have
been peacefully transferred to Camp Hurriya, near
Baghdad. The Government of Iraq insists on closing
Camp Ashraf in the next few days. It has requested that
the last 100 residents to be relocated to Camp Hurriya.
For obvious reasons, UNAMI cannot be directly
involved in negotiations on the Camp Ashraf property.
My colleagues and I, however, have spared no efforts
over the past weeks to facilitate meetings between
various merchants and the Government of Iraq.
Regretably, to date those efforts have been
unsuccessful, leading to a stalemate over the past
weeks. The Government of Iraq considers that stalemate
as an attempt by the residents to delay the relocation of
the remaining 100 persons. The Government of Iraq’s
patience is therefore wearing thin. I call on the residents

5

S/PV.6875

of Camp Ashraf to cooperate with the Government
of Iraq on solving all outstanding questions related
to property. We have already come a long way. I also
call upon the Government of Iraq to continue the
peaceful relocation of the residents, as stipulated in
the memorandum of understanding, to demonstrate
restraint and to be as flexible as possible when it comes
to resolving property-related issues.
The United Nations monitors in Camp Hurriya
monitor the human rights and humanitarian situation
of the residents on a daily basis. However, they are
often denied access to certain areas of the camp by
the residents. That hinders the performance of their
duties. They are working hard in an impartial manner
under very difficult circumstances. They have my full
confidence. I urge the residents to engage constructively
with the Government of Iraq and the United Nations
so that Camp New Iraq can be closed peacefully and
efforts can focus on the residents’ resettlement to third
countries.
In conclusion, in the face of the many challenges
ahead that I outlined earlier in my briefing, it is
imperative that Iraq stay the course to complete its
transition to an inclusive democracy, provide stability
and prosperity for its people and exercise a positive
influence in the region.
With the support of Member States, UNAMI will
continue to assist the people and Government of Iraq in
those truly worthy endeavours. I regret to say that the
substantial cut of $30 million to UNAMI’s budget next
year will require that we do more with less.
I know that I can continue to count on UNAMI’s
dedicated staff to work on members’ behalf towards
those goals. I would particularly thank the Government
of Iraq for its cooperation during this year. I look
forward to another year of good cooperation in 2013.
Last but not least, I thank the Security Council for its
continued support throughout the year.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you and your country, Mr. President, on
India’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to extend my
thanks to the previous Security Council President, the
Permanent Representative of Guatemala, for his efforts
during the month of October. I would also like to thank

6

Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, and his team in Baghdad
and New York for their tireless efforts to assist the
Government and people of Iraq.
Having reviewed the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, contained in document S/2012/848, I
would like to put forward the following comments.
On the political and security situation, Iraq has
made significant progress in its endeavour to establish
a democratic and federal State on solid foundations.
In the past few months, the political parties and blocs
have conducted talks and meetings to achieve political
reform, in line with the requirements for the next
stage in Iraq, and to reach a united national position to
ensure the success of the upcoming national meeting.
Despite the differences in opinion on how to hold that
meeting, all political parties agreed on the need to
solve the political crisis within the framework of the
Constitution.
In that context, the President of Iraq, Mr. Jalal
Talabani, continued his efforts to bring together political
rivals and to bring together the positions of the different
political blocs. In the same context, on 22 October, the
Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Nuri al-Maliki, welcomed a
delegation comprised of representatives of the political
parties in the Kurdistan region and another led by
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional
Government to discuss the elements of the reform paper
presented by the National Alliance.
In the context of efforts to solve the political
stalemate, on Wednesday, 21 November, the Prime
Minister met the Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Oyama
Al-Nujafi. They discussed the internal situation, the
latest developments and the efforts of the Speaker,
who had been commissioned by the heads of the
political blocs to solve the problems with the Kurdistan
Regional Government. The Prime Minister stressed
the importance of avoiding the language of threats and
war because Iraqis have passed that stage and should
not return to it. He also stressed the need to return
to the 2009 agreement regarding the responsibility
of managing security in the ethnically mixed areas.
That agreement calls for establishing joint checkpoints
consisting of the Iraqi army and the Kurdish Peshmerga
forces to reassure all Iraqi citizens and that the
management of those checkpoints should be under the
supervision of the Federal Government.

12-61641

S/PV.6875

With regard to efforts to strengthen relations
between the executive and legislative authorities in
the country, the Prime Minister met the Speaker of
the Council of Representatives on 3 November. They
agreed to promote cooperation between the legislative
and executive authorities to support the Government’s
efforts in accelerating the reconstruction process.
Despite the steady improvement in the security
situation, Iraq still suffers from terrorist attacks
targeting Iraqi citizens. That led the Government to
increase the capabilities of its security forces through
the continuation of its disarmament plans to enhance
the security and sovereignty of Iraq in the face of all
internal and external threats. The Government also
worked on modernizing its security plans to confront
terrorist attempts to disturb peace and stability.
Security forces have arrested several groups that were
involved in committing terrorist attacks, kidnappings
and assassinations using silencers and targeting citizens
and members of the security forces. At the beginning
of this week, the Ministry of Defence announced that
the military intelligence had arrested two groups of
terrorists linked to Al-Qaida. The first is called the
financing group and has been involved in kidnappings
for ransom. The second group consists of assassination
squads using silencers.
After the tensions in the city of Tuz in Kirkuk on
16 November, which resulted in one Iraqi citizen killed
and 11 others injured, a solution was reached within
48 hours with an agreement between the Ministry of
Defence and the Kurdish Peshmerga forces to withdraw
all militants that entered the area in order to avoid
similar incidents.
Furthermore, technical meetings were held in
Baghdad on 26 November to put an end to the tension.
The two parties also discussed possible ways to
de-escalate the recent tension.
After lengthy discussions, the Iraqi Parliament
agreed on the number of new members of the
Independent High Electoral Commission in Iraq. The
voting for nine new members of the Commission took
place between 19 and 27 September, ensuring balanced
representation for the different components of Iraqi
society.
In continuation of the democracy-building process
that has been under way in Iraq since 2003, all
requirements necessary to hold the next elections for
all provincial councils have been met and the date of

12-61641

the elections has been set for 20 April. Iraq is currently
witnessing increased political activities among all
political blocs to prepare the lists, entities and coalitions
that will participate in those elections.
Regarding developments relating to the residents
of Camp New Iraq, formerly Camp Ashraf, more than
3,000 members of the Mujahedin e-Khalq organization
were transferred peacefully to Camp Hurriya.
Approximately 200 residents remain in Camp Ashraf
to deal with logistical issues and the liquidation of
the organization’s possessions in the camp. In that
connection, I would like to express my Government’s
position and the need to find a sustainable solution to
the problem through resettling the camp’s residents
in other countries, as stated in the memorandum of
understanding signed with the United Nations in 2011.
On the social situation, in the framework of efforts
to promote the political and legal awareness of Iraqi
citizens, Iraq signed an agreement with the United States
Agency for International Development on 4 October,
aimed at increasing the level of public awareness
about legal protections available to vulnerable groups,
including the disabled, widows, orphans and children.
The agreement is also aimed at establishing laws and
regulations to protect those vulnerable groups and to
involve non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations and Iraqi citizens in the legislative
process.
In an important step forward in the development
of the Ministries of Education and Higher Education
towards more institutional work and towards advancing
the educational process in Iraq to meet modern
international standards, a strategic national document
for education and higher education in Iraq was adopted
for the period 2012-2022. The document assesses
the situation of the education and higher education
sectors in Iraq and identifies current weaknesses. The
document sets out a policy to face the shortcomings
by creating a healthy environment meeting current
scientific, educational and technological developments
and practices in the world.
On the economic situation, the Government realizes
Iraq’s important and vital role in ensuring the stability
and security of international oil markets, given their
effect on world economic prosperity and the urgency
of ending the recession caused by the international
financial crisis. From that perspective, Iraq is moving
forward to implement its plans to increase oil and gas

7

S/PV.6875

production and to improve its hydrocarbon capabilities.
These steps will generate the revenue necessary
to support reconstruction and social and economic
development, raise the standard of living for citizens,
and promote political stability in Iraq. In addition, it will
promote stability in the energy market and lead Iraq to
play a new international role, assuming responsibilities
commensurate with its actual capabilities.

of the Iraqi Council of Ministers on 10 October. The
ceremony was attended by Mr. Hussain Al-Shahristani,
Deputy Prime Minister for Energy Issues; Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler;
Ms. Fatih Birol, Chief Economist at the International
Energy Agency; a number of Iraq parliamentarians,
the Secretary General of the Council of Ministers, and
representatives of companies.

Based on those initiatives, the positive results of
Iraq’s energy policy of increasing oil production to
the highest level possible to meet the growing global
demand have started to appear. For the first time in years,
in August Iraq became the second-largest exporting
country among the countries of the Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries.

The report affirms that current contracts between
Iraq and international companies call for a steady
increase in oil production close to five times the current
level of 3 million barrels per day. It also mentions that
the 9 million barrels per day production level required
by those contracts will represent the highest sustainable
increase in production in the history of the global oil
industry. With that increase, Iraq will become the
largest contributor to growth in international supply,
producing approximately 45 per cent of global growth.
The Deputy Prime Minister stressed that optimizing
exploitation of oil resources will permit an increase in
Iraq’s general budget to about $500 billion.

In the context of efforts to develop the Iraqi oil
industry, the Ministry of Oil announced on 30 August
the beginning of preparations for the fifth round of
contracts for gas fields to meet the needs of domestic
markets and to operate the power plants. It also has
become mandatory for contracted companies to produce
the natural gas associated with oil production and not to
waste it through flaring, as they had done for the past
80 years, causing billions of dollars in losses.
Iraq is aiming to increase its refining capability
to 750,000 barrels per day by establishing four new
refineries in Karbala, Kirkuk, Maysan and Dhi Qar
provinces. In that context, on 21 October the Ministry
of Oil launched the Nasiriyah Integrated Project to
develop the Nasiriyah field, which has a proven reserve
of more than 4 billion barrels, and to construct and
operate a new refinery with the capacity to refine
300,000 barrels per day.
In the context of the tireless efforts made by the
Iraqi Government to solve our electricity shortages,
two new power plants were inaugurated, in Karbala
and Babil provinces, with a production capacity of
250 megawatts each. On 10 October, the Minister of
Electricity announced that the electricity shortage
problem will be solved by the end of 2013. That will be
an important achievement, with vast implications for all
other service sectors. It is worth mentioning that Iraq is
currently producing more than 8,000 megawatts, which
is around triple the amount produced by the national
electric grid in 2003.
In a unique event, the International Energy Agency
published a special report about the future outlook of
energy in Iraq, during a ceremony under the auspices

8

Relations between Iraq and Kuwait relations have
witnessed positive developments and concrete steps
towards Iraq’s fulfilling its remaining international
obligations and settling unresolved issues related to
resolutions under Chapter VII resulting from Saddam’s
invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Those steps will lay the
foundations for cooperation between the two countries.
In that context, the Iraqi Government has made tireless
efforts to maintain the momentum achieved in repairing
relations between the two countries since the beginning
of this year.
On 27 November, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Hoshyar Zebari met in Baghdad with Ambassador
of the State of Kuwait Ali Al-Momen. During the
meeting, the two discussed mechanisms to implement
the arrangements and bilateral understandings that led
to the meeting between an Iraqi delegation headed by
Iraqi Vice-President Khudair al-Khuzaie and a Kuwaiti
delegation headed by the Prime Minister of Kuwait,
Sheik Jaber Al Mubarak Al Sabah. At the meeting,
the two sides agreed to settle the issue of Kuwaiti
Airlines after reaching an agreement on a financial
settlement. That decision, once implemented, will
lift all restrictions and complications associated with
rebuilding Iraqi Airways and restore its freedom to
purchase new airplanes to re-establish its fleet.
On another note, from 18 to 20 September,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs republished an
12-61641

S/PV.6875

advertisement related to Kuwaiti property and
missing Kuwaitis on the Ministry’s website and in
several Iraqi daily newspapers. The advertisements
called on Iraqi citizens to come forward and provide
information regarding missing Kuwaitis and property
and documents belonging to the State of Kuwait.
In further positive steps, on 1 October a contract
was signed with an engineering and surveying company
to complete the maintenance of border pillars between
the two countries. Also, on 18 October Iraq announced
its agreement with Kuwait on having an international
oil company manage joint oil fields between the two
countries. The Iraqi Cabinet approved on 27 November
a draft law on the ratification of the agreement
establishing a joint commission for cooperation
between the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait.
In addition to those positive developments, the
Prime Minister of Kuwait is expected to visit Iraq in
December. The two sides hope that the visit will result
in resolving all outstanding issues and launch a new era
in Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations based on mutual respect and
common interests.
As Mr. Kobler mentioned, the Iraqi Government took
the necessary steps to name technical representatives to
join the United Nations team in order to start the third
stage of maintenance of the borders pillars between Iraq
and Kuwait. In addition, the competent Iraqi authorities
started the final checking of the list of Iraqi farmers
affected by the demarcation of the borders between Iraq
and Kuwait.
At the regional and international levels, Iraq is still
working to regain its proper position in the international
community. Iraq was elected to the Executive Board of
the World Food Programme in Rome in September, and
to the position of Vice-President of the Executive Office
of the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals
Management, which is a body of the United Nations
Environment Programme in Nairobi.
As part of Iraq’s continuous commitment
to its international obligations, the Council of
Representatives took the following decisions in the past
four months. It joined the Convention on the Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;
ratified the Convention on Cluster Munitions of 2008;
ratified the Arab Anti-Corruption Convention; joined
the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism; ratified the Additional
Protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement

12-61641

of the International Atomic Energy Agency; ratified the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; and issued
Law No.48 of 2012, regarding the establishment of a
national monitoring authority on banning nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons.
Iraq participated in the Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement held in Tehran on 25 August, through a
delegation headed by Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki.
During the summit, Iraq announced its complete
alignment with the uprising of Arab nations since its
first spark in Tunisia to achieve freedom, democracy
and justice and that a State based on citizenship is the
only choice in modern State-building.
Iraq also pointed to the dangerous phenomenon
of taking a stance based on sectarian calculations
in dealing with sensitive issues relating to peoples
and countries of the region. Iraq strongly warned
all concerned parties that if a sectarian war erupted,
the peoples and countries of the region would be at a
dangerous junction and that their interests would be
affected in ways not seen even in the worst situations
that have occurred since the First World War.
Iraq participated in the third Arab-Latin American
summit held in Lima on 2 October, with a delegation
headed by Hoshyar Zebari, Foreign Minister of Iraq.
The Foreign Minister delivered a statement at the
opening meeting, on behalf of the presidency of the
Arab summit, in which he pointed to three regional
issues that had been discussed at the Baghdad Arab
summit, namely, the issue of Palestine, the situation
in Syria and the issue of nuclear disarmament in the
Middle East.
During the work of the Golden Table conference
held at the Russian Foreign Ministry on 9 October,
Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki pointed out that the new
Iraq constitutes a break from the old Iraq and that the
current Iraq is seeking friendship, not enemies, among
all peoples and countries of the world. In harmony with
that principle, we have adopted an open-door policy and
a quest for common interests in our foreign policy. We
have established Iraq’s defence and military strategies
in accordance with that policy. We are determined that
our forces will be defensive forces, and we will strive
to equip them with all necessary weapons for defensive
and deterrence purposes.
Foreign Minister Zebari met on 26 November with
the non-resident Ambassador of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia to Iraq, Mr. Fahd al-Zaid, and they agreed on the

9

S/PV.6875

importance of the complete normalization of relations
between the two countries. The two sides stressed the
importance of ratifying a prisoner exchange agreement
and seeking a common cooperation mechanism.
The Government of Iraq also decided to give Jordan
100,000 barrels of oil as a gift to our neighbourly
country to help solve the fuel shortage crisis that
has caused problems there. This is an indication that
prosperity in Iraq will benefit the Iraqi people and
other friendly nations.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Iraq’s commitment to
its international obligations and my Government’s
appreciation of the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, especially the efforts
of Mr. Martin Kobler and the Mission team, for the
support they are providing at the request of the Iraqi
Government.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

10

12-61641
