Vl.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Third Committee

on Aging in order to reach agreement on all procedural and
organizational matters to be dealt with on the opening day
of the Assembly;
4. Approves, subject to the conditions in paragraph 8
below, the holding of three simultaneous meetings-plenary
meetings and meetings of two Main Committees-for the
whole duration of the World Assembly on Aging;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, subject to the conditions in paragraph 8 below, to convene at Vienna two
sessions of the Advisory Committee for the World Assembly
on Aging, if possible from 1 to 5 February and from 3 to
7 May 1982, in order to finalize the preparations and documentation for the Assembly;
6. Urges those countries in a position to do so to make
generous voluntary contributions to the Fund for the World
Assembly on Aging;
7. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population Activities to continue to provide financial support to the preparatory work for the World Assembly on Aging;
8. Notes that paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 above will be implemented only to the extent that they can be financed by
economies within the direct and apportioned resources requested by the Secretary-General, in section 4 B of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 1982-1983, 54
or by voluntary contributions which may be or may become
available from the Fund for the World Assembly on Aging.
57th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/55.

Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief55

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations is that of the dignity and equality
inherent in all human beings, and that all Member States
have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action
in co-operation with the United Nations to promote and
encourage universal respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 56 and the International Covenants on Human Rights 57
proclaim the principles of non-discrimination and equality
before the law and the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief,
Considering that the disregard and infringement of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular of the right
to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or whatever
belief, have brought, directly or indirectly, wars and great
suffering to mankind, especially where they serve as a means
of foreign interference in the internal affairs of other States
and amount to kindling hatred between peoples and nations,
Considering that religion or belief, for anyone who professes either, is one of the fundamental elements in his
conception of life and that freedom of religion or belief
should be fully respected and guaranteed,
Considering that it is essential to promote understanding,
tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of re-

171

ligion or belief and to ensure that the use of religion or
belief for ends inconsistent with the Charter, other relevant
instruments of the United Nations and the purposes and
principles of the present Declaration is inadmissible,
Convinced that freedom of religion or belief should also
contribute to the attainment of the goals of world peace,
social justice and friendship among peoples and to the elimination of ideologies or practices of colonialism and racial
discrimination,
Noting with satisfaction the adoption of several, and the
coming into force of some, conventions, under the aegis of
the United Nations and of the specialized agencies, for the
elimination of various forms of discrimination,
Concerned by manifestations of intolerance and by the
existence of discrimination in matters of religion or belief
still in evidence in some areas of the world,
Resolved to adopt all necessary measures for the speedy
elimination of such intolerance in all its forms and manifestations and to prevent and combat discrimination on the
grounds of religion or belief,
Proclaims this Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief:
Article 1

Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom
to have a religion or whatever belief of his choice, and
freedom, either individually or in community with others
and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief
in worship, observance, practice and teaching.
2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would
impair his freedom to have a religion or belief of his choice.
3. Freedom to manifest one's religion or belief may be
subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and
are necessary to protect public safety, order, health or morals
or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.
l.

Article 2

No one shall be subject to discrimination by any
State, institution, group of persons or person on the grounds
of religion or belief.
2. For the purposes of the present Declaration, the
expression "intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief'' means any distinction, exclusion, restriction
or preference based on religion or belief and having as its
purpose or as its effect nullification or impairment of the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise of human rights and
fundamental freedoms on an equal basis.
I.

Article 3

Discrimination between human beings on the grounds of
religion or belief constitutes an affront to human dignity
and a disavowal of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and shall be condemned as a violation of the human
rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and enunciated in detail
in the International Covenants on Human Rights, and as an
obstacle to friendly and peaceful relations between nations.
Article 4

54
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 6 (A/36/6 and Corr.I).
55
See also sect. X.8.4, decision 36/412.
56
Resolution 217 A (III).
57
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

I. All States shall take effective measures to prevent
and eliminate discrimination on the grounds of religion or
belief in the recognition, exercise and enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in all fields of civil, economic, political, social and cultural life.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

172

2. All States shall make all efforts to enact or rescind
legislation where necessary to prohibit any such discrimination, and to take all appropriate measures to combat intolerance on the grounds of religion or belief in this matter.
Article 5
I. The parents or, as the case may be, the legal guardians of the child have the right to organize the life within
the family in accordance with their religion or belief and
bearing in mind the moral education in which they believe
the child should be brought up.
2. Every child shall enjoy the right to have access to
education in the matter of religion or belief in accordance
with the wishes of his parents or, as the case may be, legal
guardians, and shall not be compelled to receive teaching
on religion or belief against the wishes of his parents or
legal guardians, the best interests of the child being the
guiding principle.
3. The child shall be protected from any form of discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief. He shall
be brought up in a spirit of understanding, tolerance, friendship among peoples, peace and universal brotherhood, respect for freedom of religion or belief of others, and in full
consciousness that his energy and talents should be devoted
to the service of his fellow men.
4. In the case of a child who is not under the care either
of his parents or of legal guardians, due account shall be
taken of their expressed wishes or of any other proof of
their wishes in the matter of religion or belief, the best
interests of the child being the guiding principle.
5. Practices of a religion or belief in which a child is
brought up must not be injurious to his physical or mental
health or to his full development, taking into account article
I, paragraph 3, of the present Declaration.
Article 6
In accordance with article l of the present Declaration,
and subject to the provisions of article l, paragraph 3, the
right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief
shall include, inter alia, the following freedoms:
(a) To worship or assemble in connection with a religion
or belief, and to establish and maintain places for these
purposes;
(b) To establish and maintain appropriate charitable or
humanitarian institutions;
(c) To make, acquire and use to an adequate extent the
necessary articles and materials related to the rites or customs of a religion or belief;
(d) To write, issue and dtssemmate relevant publications in these areas;
(e) To teach a religion or belief in places suitable for
these purposes;
(j) To solicit and receive voluntary financial and other
contributions from individuals and institutions;
(g) To train, appoint, elect or designate by succession
appropriate leaders called for by the requirements and standards of any religion or belief;
(h) To observe days of rest and to celebrate holidays
and ceremonies in accordance with the precepts of one's
religion or belief;
(i) To establish and maintain communications with individuals and communities in matters of religion or belief
at the national and international levels.

Article 7
The rights and freedoms set forth in the present Declaration shall be accorded in national legislations in such a

manner that everyone shall be able to avail himself of such
rights and freedoms in practice.
Article 8
Nothing in the present Declaration shall be construed as
restricting or derogating from any right defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International
Covenants on Human Rights.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /981

36/56.

Human rights and scientific and technological
developments 58
A

The General Assembly,
Noting that scientific and technological progress is one
of the important factors in the development of human
society,
Reaffirming that scientific and technological progress is
a necessary prerequisite for accelerating social and economic development in all countries,
Noting once again the great importance of the Declaration
on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the
Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind, adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 3384 (XXX) of
10 November 1975,
Considering that implementation of the said Declaration
will contribute to the strengthening of international peace
and the security of peoples, and to their economic and social
development as well as to international co-operation in the
field of human rights.
Seriously concerned that the results of scientific and technological progress could be used for the arms race to the
detriment of international peace and security and social
progress, human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the
dignity of the human person,
Convinced that, in the era of modem scientific and technological progress, the resources of mankind and the activities of scientists should be used for the peaceful economic,
social and cultural development of all countries and for
raising the living standards of peoples,
Recognizing that the establishment of the new international economic order calls in particular for an important
contribution to be made by science and technology to economic and social progress,
Bearing in mind that the exchange and transfer of scientific and technological knowledge is one of the basic ways
to accelerate the social and economic development of the
developing countries,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
human rights and scientific and technological developments, 59
I. Stresses the importance of the implementation by all
States of the provisions and principles contained in the Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress
in the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind in
order to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms
under conditions of scientific and technological progress;
2. Calls upon all States to make every effort to use the
achievements of science and technology in order to promote
peaceful social, economic and cultural development and
progress;

"See also sect. X.B.4, decision 36/413.
9
'
A/36/429 and Add. I and 2.
