S/2004/976

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 December 2004
English
Original: French

Letter dated 16 December 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Accra III Agreement on Côte d’Ivoire
concluded on 30 July 2004 in Accra, to the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 5 August 2004 (S/PRST/2004/29) and to my letters dated
16 August 2004 (S/2004/667), 3 September 2004 (S/2004/716), 20 September 2004
(S/2004/748), 6 October 2004 (S/2004/800), 29 October 2004 (S/2004/878) and
2 December 2004 (S/2004/944) concerning the monitoring of the Agreement.
Please find attached the eighth report of the Tripartite Monitoring Group
established under the Accra III Agreement, covering the period from 16 to
30 November 2004 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-65310 (E) 271204 271204

*0465310*

S/2004/976

Annex
[Original: English]

Implementation of the Accra III Agreement
Eighth report of the Monitoring Group covering the period from
16 to 30 November 2004

I. Introduction
1. The present report is prepared pursuant to the Accra III Agreement of 30 July
2004, which requested the Tripartite Monitoring Group to submit fortnightly reports on
the situation in Cote d’Ivoire and on the progress made towards the implementation of
the Accra III Agreement. This report covers major developments in the peace process
between 16 and 30 November 2004.

II. Overview
2. The aftermath of the events of 4 to 8 November 2004 continued to overshadow
developments in the period under review. The general military and security situation
calmed down with appeals from President Gbagbo to the Nation, from the new military
command of FANCI, France, the European Union, ECOWAS and the African Union,
in particular the intervention of the Mbeki mission of 9 November 2004 and the AU
mini summit of 14 November 2004 in Abuja. The UN Security Council Resolution
1572 (2004) adopted on 15 November 2004 with its arms embargo had sent a clear and
strong message on the threat to peace and international security in Cote d’Ivoire.
3. The changes at the national military hierarchy and the announcement of further
changes continued to feed speculations about the state of the National defence and
security forces and its likely impact on the implementation of the DDR programme and
the restructuring of the Armed Forces, as envisaged under the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. Relations between FANCI and FAFN are at their nadir for obvious
reasons. The mistrust generated in Franco-ivorian relations, in particular the bilateral
defence arrangements, has also cast a long shadow over military cooperation within the
Quadripartite Commission. The state of consultations within that Commission is now
reduced to dialogue between FANCI and ONUCI.

2

S/2004/976

4. The reports of the continuing mediation by President Thabo Mbeki appeared to be
the only hope in the horizon of some way out of the peace process seriously
jeopardized by the military hostilities involving FANCI and LICORNE. Consequently,
in spite of any scepticism, the visit of President Mbeki to Cote d’Ivoire scheduled for
2 to 6 December 2004 on the third segment of his mediation is awaited with some
hope.
Military and security situation
5. The overall military situation astride the Zone of Confidence in both sectors and in
Abidjan had calmed down and remained stable. Although tension still prevailed both in
political and military circles due to the uncertain prospects of peace in the foreseeable
future. However, all sides have displayed reasonable restraint and were adhering to the
cessation of hostilities. In Danane and Touba in the West of the country, Forces
Nouvelles were put on alert following rumours of attacks by mercenaries from Guinea
and Liberia.
6. In Abidjan and on both sides of the Zone of Confidence, the security situation had
gradually returned to normal though remained tense and unpredictable. Offices, banks
and schools had re-opened. Groups of Young Patriots, now in smaller numbers, were
still erecting and manning several checkpoints at various locations in Abidjan around
the National Radio and Television (RTI) and the President’s residence in Cocody.
Hostile demonstrations mounted against French nationals were frizzling out. On
23 November, LICORNE forces, whose presence in Abidjan had been strengthened
since the recent crisis, had pulled back from certain key locations. ONUCI forces
continued to conduct regular patrols in Abidjan.

III.

Developments in the peace process

7. On 20 and 21 November 2004, President Mbeki of South Africa met in Pretoria
with Prime Minister Seydou Diarra and with the Secretary-General of Forces
Nouvelles, Guillaume Soro, to discuss the restoration of political dialogue in Cote
d’Ivoire.
8. On 18 November, the Council of Ministers met for the first time since the outbreak
of hostilities on 4 November. PDCI Ministers were present at the meeting, while RDR
Ministers sent their representatives and FN Ministers did not attend. The meeting

3

S/2004/976

considered some draft legislative reforms envisaged by the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, including those related to the indemnity for the victims of war and the
creation of a National Commission for Identification. President Gbagbo reiterated his
intention to find interim replacements for Ministers who boycotted meetings of the
Council of Ministers. In a statement read by his spokesman on the National Radio and
Television network (RTI) following the adoption of Security Council Resolution 1572
(2004) of 15 November 2004, President Gbagbo assured the United Nations that he
would do nothing to hinder the peace process and invited the organisation to apply the
Resolution on sanctions with “the same rigour” to the rebels.
9. The eight (8) Ministers from the Forces Nouvelles (except MPIGO) continued
to boycott the meetings of the Council of Ministers presided over by President
Laurent Gbagbo. The Forces Nouvelles had reiterated their demand for the
resignation of President Gbagbo to enable the peace process to progress. They
also cited security reasons for their inability to participate in those meetings. As
an interim arrangement, the portfolios of the Ministers were assigned to other
Ministers.
10. It was against this background that the National Assembly opened the
deliberations of its second ordinary session on Monday 29 November 2004. The
proceedings were devoted to draft legislative texts envisaged in the LinasMarcoussis Agreement. On Tuesday 30 November 2004, the Commission on
Institutions and General Affairs of the National Assembly adopted the draft
legislation on the Independent Electoral Commission by a close vote of 19 for and
17 against. The voted text was expected to be submitted to the plenary session of
the National Assembly for final approval by 17 December 2004. The text
allocated three seats to the Forces Nouvelles as against two seats demanded by
each of the three constituent movements signatory to the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. It also expands membership of the Bureau of the Commission from
five to eight. Participation of FN representatives is limited to the work of the
Commission at the national level.
11. In a major development, the Democratic Party of Cote d’Ivoire (PDCI)
announced its agreement for the amendment to Article 35 to be submitted to a
referendum. The lack of consensus on procedures to be adopted in the amendment
of that constitutional provision constitutes a major obstacle in the peace process.

4

S/2004/976

The Second Ordinary Session of the National Assembly is scheduled to close on
17 December 2004.
12. Following a crisis meeting held on 22 November, as a result of widespread
destruction and looting of businesses, the President of the Commerce Chamber, JeanLouis Billon estimated the losses at some 14 billion FCFA, and stated that 30,000
people would become jobless. He said that 125 of the 500 businesses representing 25%
of foreign and domestic investment, as well as 50% of CDI tax income had closed
shop. The Ivorian Minister of Finance and Economy announced that businesses would
be exempted from paying taxes until further notice. This came against the background
of an economy that has been showing growing signs of weaknesses. According to
recent statistics, 85% of job seekers are persons between the ages of 15 and 35 years
old.
13. From 26 to 27 November 2004, the Tenth Summit of Francophonie took place in
Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso). On the crisis in Cote d’Ivoire, the Summit adopted a
final declaration reaffirming its concern over the severe deterioration of the situation
and called for the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements.
Reaction of the International Community and UN Security Council
Resolution 1572
14. An emergency mini summit of the African Union held in Abuja on
14 November 2004, condemned the violation of the cease-fire by the FANCI. It
recommended an immediate arms embargo by the Security Council in its
impending resolution on Cote d’Ivoire. In that Resolution 1572 (2004), the
Security Council decided that all States shall, for a period of thirteen months from
the date of adoption of this resolution, take necessary measures to prevent the
direct or indirect supply, sale, or transfer to Cote d’Ivoire, from their territories or
by their nationals, or using their flags vessels or aircraft, of arms or any related
material, in particular military aircraft and equipment, whether or not originating
in their territories, as well as the provision of any assistance, advice or training
related to military activities.
15. The resolution also decided that all States shall, for the period of twelve
months, prevent entry into or transit through their territories of all persons
designated as constituting a threat to the peace and national reconciliation process

5

S/2004/976

in Cote d’Ivoire, in particular those who block the implementation of the LinasMarcoussis and Accra III Agreements. Furthermore, all States shall, for the period
of twelve months, freeze immediately the funds, other financial assets and
economic resources which are on their territories owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by persons so designated.
16. The Tenth Summit meeting of La Francophonie (26-27 November 2004) held
in Ouagadougou strongly endorsed UN Resolution 1572.
The European Parliament
17. The European Parliament was seized of the question of the Ivorian crisis. In
its decision of 18 November 2004, the Parliament, inter alia, noted the unanimous
adoption of Resolution 1572 by the UN Security Council and considering that the
Government of Cote d’Ivoire violated the cease fire agreements on 4 November
2004, called on all parties to put an immediate end to all military action and other
hostilities, to cease all attacks on civilians, particularly those working for
humanitarian agencies irrespective of their nationality, ethnicity or religion,
demanded an end to all appeals to hatred and violence and to renew dialogue and
negotiations and for all parties to respect commitments undertaken. The European
Parliament called for enhanced support of its member states for the United
Nations peace mission in Cote d’Ivoire. It called on the European Council to look
at the root causes of the Ivorian crisis, especially in the social and economic
spheres and to support the deployment of peace troops by the African Union
within the framework of its support for peace facility in the European Fund for
Development.
The African Union Mediation
18. Since the adoption of Security Council Resolution 1572 (2004), the African
Union, under the auspices of President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, has
continued to explore avenues to break the impasse over the implementation of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. Since his last visit to Abidjan on 9 November 2004,
the South African President had received key representatives of the Ivorian
political parties in Pretoria for consultations. Further, he dispatched his Minister
of Defence, Lekato Mosioua, to Abidjan to continue consultations with
protagonists in the Ivorian crisis to explore the way forward. President Mbeki was

6

S/2004/976

due in Abidjan early in December to engage in a comprehensive round of
mediation among Ivorian leaders and political actors.
Impact on neighbouring countries
19. The immediate consequences of current developments have been the
deterioration of the security situation in the immediate sub-region and the
escalation of humanitarian problems, particularly the increase in the flow of
refugees across international frontiers. The refugee flow is mainly of displaced
Ivorians into Liberia.
20. The resumption of armed hostilities immediately triggered the reserves of
para-military forces and militias into battle mode. Many of these militias in the
west of Cote d’Ivoire, who are based in Danane, Man and Guiglo and their
environs, are composed of armed elements from Liberia and Sierra Leone. They
are found across the spectrum of militia movements in Cote d’Ivoire who are
motivated by different political goals and agenda. These include the Ivorian Front
for the Liberation of the Great West (FLGO), which is pro Government and has
the sympathy of their ethnic cousins in the Kran and Krou dominated Movement
for Democracy in Liberia (MODEL), an offshoot of the Madingo dominated
LURD. Armed elements of the Liberia LURD movement are reported to have
teamed up with the remnants of the forces of Sierra Leonean Sam Bockarie’s
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), to boost the military operations of the
Patriotic Movement of Cote d’Ivoire (MPCI), led by Guillaume Soro. These
armed elements are based in Bouake and as far north of Cote d’Ivoire as the
influence of the Forces Nouvelles permit. The Liberian elements in the Forces
Nouvelles have been implicated in the leadership dissensions and skirmishes in
the Movement. The implications of political developments in Cote d’Ivoire have
thus been to trigger off the real threat of destabilization in the sub-region,
particularly along the borders between Liberia and Sierra Leone and the borders
between Cote d’Ivoire and Mali and Burkina Faso respectively.

IV. Humanitarian and Human rights developments
21. The aerial attacks by Ivorian forces, the reprisal attacks by LICORNE forces and
the violent street demonstrations led to deaths, injuries and physical damage. The
situation led to destitution among the international community who fled their homes

7

S/2004/976

and were in some cases given immediate help by their various consular missions in
Abidjan or, in many instances, by the LICORNE force and ONUCI. Many were
eventually repatriated abroad. There were nationals who fled the immediate
environment near military targets or for perceived lack of security, including
uncertainties as to the immediate cause of the renewed fighting. Among them,
significant numbers were known to have crossed into neighbouring states, particularly
Liberia. A more worrisome dimension has been the displacement of old refugees from
their camps which were close to the new theatres of the new conflict. The presence of
many of these displaced refugees within the premises of ONUCI created a sense of
urgency on how to manage the new humanitarian crisis that was developing around
recent events in Cote d’Ivoire. In the face of the deteriorating security situation in their
camps, many of the refugees expressed the wish to be repatriated back to Liberia.
22. There have been reports of massive violations of human rights in areas under
the control of the Forces Nouvelles in what appears to be a general crackdown on
those suspected to be sympathetic to the armed mission of FANCI. There were
reported cases of systematic extortion of entire communities by the Forces
Nouvelles. Several cases of human rights abuses throughout the country were
reported with cases of arbitrary arrests, detention and forced disappearances of
people accused of supporting President Gbagbo in the North.
23. Civil servants in the North have also been the target of harassment by the
Forces Nouvelles and have been accused of bringing in arms or sharing sensitive
information to support the FANCI attack. The security of civil servants is now a
matter of serious concern. Civil servants stuck in the North are afraid to go to
Abidjan to collect their salaries because of the numerous checkpoints and
harassment. The further deployment of civil servants has been put on hold by the
Government.
24. The Ivorian media has reported that 64 people were killed while over 1,000 had
been wounded in the standoff between French Licorne and the Jeunes Patriotes in front
of Hotel Ivoire. ICRC reported that they had assisted close to 3,000 people between 5
and 11 November in Abidjan, including 1,221 people in Cocody on 9 November alone.
During the events of 9 November 2004, the Ivorian Red Cross Society reported having
brought a total of 92 severely wounded people to hospitals in Abidjan. They further
reported having encountered some difficulty in reaching the wounded and were, in
some instances, attacked and threatened.

8

S/2004/976

25. Water and electricity supplies were cut off to the Northern towns of Bouake,
Korhogo and Man and the Western town of Guiglo from 4 to 12 November.
International pressure was successfully applied to restore the supplies. The
consequences of the electrical power outage in the North were of a major
humanitarian concern. The lack of electricity and clean water increased the risk of
epidemics and restricted the full operation of hospitals and health centres.
26. During the bombardments in Bouake, UNICEF continued to ensure the protection
of former child soldiers under their charge at a demobilisation centre in Bouake.
27. The growing insecurity caused by the recent events and the open anti-foreigner
sentiment has caused over 8000 western expatriates to leave Cote d’Ivoire for their
home countries or to other West African countries.
28. An estimated 19,000 Ivorian refugees have fled to Liberia since the hostilities
began. UNHCR has reported that the refugees have fled from areas within the West of
Cote d’Ivoire including Bin Houye, Zouan Hounien, and Danane. The humanitarian
community in Liberia has expressed deep concern over the influx of refugees in
Liberia, as Liberia’s own population was recovering from a protracted crisis. The
international NGO, International Rescue Committee (IRC), reported that the eastern
part of Liberia was particularly vulnerable; access was difficult due to bad
infrastructure and less than 10% of the population had access to clean drinking water.
UNHCR has said that if the situation deteriorated the refugees might have to be
transported further into Liberia where humanitarian agencies might be in a better
position to offer assistance.

V. Conclusion
29. The confusion and uncertainties in the overall political and social situation have
scuttled any local initiatives to restoring dialogue among the Ivorian political actors.
The only glimmer of cautious hope lies in the outcome of the on-going consultations by

9

S/2004/976

President Thabo Mbeki and, in particular, his impending mission to Cote d’Ivoire in
early December. In the prevailing circumstances, it becomes crucial that the concern
and interest of the international community be fully invested in this important African
Union initiative.

Signed on behalf of the Group

Ambassador Raph Uwechue
Chairman
1 December 2004

10
