United Nations

S/PV.6697

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6697th meeting
Wednesday, 21 December 2011, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Eick
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Sangqu
Ms. Sheard
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-64673 (E)

*1164673*

S/PV.6697

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to introduce to the Security Council the
twentieth 90-day report on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 18 (h) of the resolution. The report covers
the period from 1 September and 18 December 2011,
during which the Committee held informal
consultations on 7 December and considered additional
matters in accordance with its agreed rules of
procedure.
On 7 December, the members of the Committee
heard an oral briefing provided by the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts. The presentation summarized the
essential points contained in Panel’s midterm report of
1 November 2011, submitted to the Committee in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011).
In its report, the Panel of Experts outlined the activities
undertaken since the renewal of the Panel’s mandate on
9 June. During that time, among other things, the Panel
held a series of consultations in Brussels, Minsk and
Yerevan, with a view to consider its programme of
work and receive information relevant to its mandate.
The Panel also investigated a complaint of a violation
of the provisions of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007), which prohibits the export of all types of
weapons and associated materials from Iran. It also
began an investigation on the alleged violation by Iran
of the provisions of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929

2

(2010), and it presented its third quarterly assessment
of reports by Member States on their implementation
of resolutions in accordance with paragraph 31 of
resolution 1929 (2010).
During the debate that took place following the
oral briefing, the members of the Committee welcomed
the midterm report of the Panel of Experts, referring to
it as factual and informative. The Committee
considered the Panel’s efforts to raise awareness as part
of its visits, inspections and participation in seminars.
The members of the Committee also considered the
publication of the Panel’s final report presented in May
2011 and committed themselves to continue
negotiations. With regard to the guidelines notes
drafted by the Panel on the implementation of
resolutions at the request of the Committee, some
members of the Committee expressed the hope that an
agreement could be reached to make the notes
available in the coming weeks.
Acknowledging the importance of the disclosure
activities vis-à-vis Member States, the Committee
considered the possibility of holding an open
informational meeting in the near future, presided by
the Chair and with the participation of the Panel of
Experts. The purpose of the meeting would be to
inform Member States as to the mandate and activities
of the Committee and its Panel of Experts. Some
members of the Committee also expressed a desire to
meet again soon to consider two reports presented by
the Panel with regard to two alleged cases of noncompliance submitted by States.
In the period under review, the Committee
received four notifications — three from one Member
State under paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and
paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007), concerning the
unfreezing of assets in order to settle a debt related to a
contract entered into prior an entity’s inclusion on the
list; as well as one submitted by a Member States under
paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006), concerning the
delivery of items for use at the nuclear power plant at
Bushehr, Iran.
The Committee answered a query from a Member
State seeking information on whether an Iranian entity
indicated in the letter was the same as an entity listed
in annex III to resolution 1803 (2008). Based on the
information provided by one of its members, the
Committee concluded that the two entities were one
and the same. The Committee is currently considering

11-64673

S/PV.6697

its answer to a query sent by another Member State
seeking additional information on the reasons for the
designation of an entity as subject to the assets freeze.
With regard to an incident reported to the
Committee by a Member State in November 2010, the
Committee received a letter from a Member State
concerning extensive internal compliance measures
taken by the shipping company CMA CGM to prevent
the unwitting shipment by its vessels of items
prohibited under Security Council resolutions. CMA
CGM has cooperated fully with the Panel of Experts in
its investigation of the case.
That concludes my briefing to the Security
Council today.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
give the floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his report.
We meet at a critical moment in the Council’s
ongoing effort to address the threat posed by Iran’s
illicit nuclear activities. Since our last meeting, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) recently released a damning report on
the status of Iran’s implementation of its Safeguards
Agreement under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and on its response to Security
Council resolutions on Iran (see S/2011/695).
That IAEA report, issued in November,
concluded that Iran remains in non-compliance with its
international nuclear obligations. The report adds to the
mountain of evidence that Iran is misleading the
international community about its nuclear activities
and its nuclear intentions. Of even greater concern, that
report addressed the question at the heart of the
international community’s concerns, namely, whether
Iran has carried out, and whether it is still carrying out,
activities related to the development of a nuclear
weapon. The report is clear: the IAEA’s information
indicates that Iran has carried out activities that are
“relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive
device”. The report further states that “prior to the end
of 2003, these activities took place under a structured
programme, and that some activities may still be
ongoing”.
I want to draw the Council’s attention to yet
another alarming development, namely, Iran’s selfproclaimed intention to start enrichment at the

11-64673

underground Qom facility, perhaps as soon as this
month. That is the same facility that Iran hid from the
international community until it was discovered two
years ago. At Qom, Iran now intends to consolidate its
provocative production of uranium enriched to a level
near 20 per cent. That is of concern because it brings
Iran significantly closer to the capability to produce
highly enriched uranium. To date, Iran has yet to
provide a credible rationale for the production of near
20 per cent-enriched uranium. It has already produced
sufficient fuel to power the Tehran Research Reactor
for another five years, at a minimum, and Iranian
leaders have already described that production as
uneconomical. The start of enrichment at Qom will
serve as yet another illustration of Iran’s flagrant
disregard for the Council’s very clear position on Iran’s
enrichment activities.
Iran’s behaviour plainly belies the purported
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. No one, after
reading the November IAEA report, can reasonably
believe Iran’s contention that its continuing uranium
enrichment programme is for peaceful purposes only.
The decision by the IAEA Board of Governors last
month to censure Iran demonstrated yet again the
overwhelming view of the international community
that Iran’s illicit nuclear activities are unacceptable.
The Council must, therefore, redouble its efforts to
implement the sanctions that have already been
imposed. Full implementation of those measures will
show Iran that there is a price to be paid for its
deception. Full implementation can also slow down
Iran’s nuclear progress, buying us more time to resolve
this crisis through diplomatic means. The Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution 1737
(2006) and the Panel of Experts are key to that effort.
Those bodies must continue to implement their
mandates and programmes of work effectively and
robustly. The Committee must reinvigorate its efforts
to implement the Panel’s recommendations, including
the publishing of further detailed implementation
assistance notices to help Member States meet their
obligations. The Panel must continue to investigate
sanctions violations and must promote international
awareness of the measures we have imposed.
The United States would like to express
appreciation for the Panel’s recent work, including its
midterm report and its recent report on Iran’s space
launch activity, which involved both projects related to
ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear

3

S/PV.6697

weapons and launches using ballistic missile
technology, in violation of resolution 1929 (2010). The
Committee should review those reports carefully and
take action in response. The Committee must also do
more to respond to sanctions violations and sanctions
violators, such as by designating violators for the
imposition of targeted sanctions. Resolution 1929
(2010) directed the Committee to respond effectively
to those violations. Resolutions 1803 (2008) and 1929
(2010) also decided that the Committee may designate
additional individuals and entities that have assisted in
the evasion of sanctions or violations of Security
Council resolutions. New designations of such
individuals and entities would send a powerful signal
of the Committee’s commitment to enforcing Security
Council resolutions.
My Government remains seriously concerned that
the Panel’s final report has not yet been released to the
wider United Nations membership owing to the
continued objections of a couple of members of this
Council. That is an appalling failure of transparency.
As I have stated before, we strongly believe that the
report must be made available to all Member States as
soon as possible, because it highlights information and
best practises that can help States carry out their
obligations. The time has come for a prompt solution to
that impasse in order to allow the release of that report.
Sanctions are only a means to an end. Our
ultimate goal is to ensure that Iran enters into full
compliance with all of its international nuclear
obligations and that it takes the necessary steps to
resolve outstanding questions. In the face of Iran’s
deception and intransigence, the international
community must speak with one voice, making clear
that Iranian actions jeopardize international peace and
security, and that they will only further isolate the
regime.
President Obama has been unequivocal with
respect to our policy towards the Iranian nuclear
programme. As he has said,
“There should be no doubt. The United
States and the international community are
determined to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear
weapons. Iran’s illicit nuclear activity and the
threat it poses to regional stability and the rules
underpinning the nuclear non-proliferation
regime is one of the greatest global challenges we
face”.

4

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to say that we owe
a great debt to Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his
concise briefing on the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution 1737
(2006). We deeply appreciate his precision, his
outreach and his inspiring leadership of the Committee.
In the past three months, the 1737 Committee and
its Panel of Experts have enhanced the implementation
of the Security Council’s resolutions on Iran. The
outreach activities of the Committee, conducted
through visits, inspections and participation in
seminars, have improved the understanding not only of
the Committee’s work but also of the role of States in
the implementation of the resolutions. We believe that
these activities should be sustained. Indeed, more
intensive outreach activities are required in developing
countries to underpin these improvements.
In the same vein, accelerated action in the
Implementation Assistance Notices and the publication
of the Panel’s final report is needed to improve the
information available to the wider United Nations
membership on the Committee’s activities. Let me use
this opportunity to reiterate Nigeria’s continued
cooperation and support in the work of the Committee.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has once again voiced serious concerns on the possible
military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme. Its
recent report indicates that Iran has carried out
activities relevant to the development of a nuclear
device. Concerns have also been raised by the IAEA on
Iran’s failure to fully cooperate with the body and on
the lack of sufficient clarification on the direction of its
nuclear programme. These are worrying developments,
and they underline the need for intensified interaction
between Iran and the Agency.
We believe it is incumbent on Iran, as a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, to dispel the doubts surrounding its nuclear
programme and reassure the international community
of the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. Iran should engage substantively with the
IAEA without delay to provide necessary clarification
and information on all pending issues, especially those
relating to possible military aspects of its nuclear
programme. It must grant access to all sites,
equipment, persons and documents requested by the
Agency. In addition, it should take steps to implement
its safeguards agreement and other obligations.

11-64673

S/PV.6697

In spite of the limited progress of the previous
talks with the E3+3, we believe that diplomatic
negotiation is vital to resolve all outstanding issues
relating to Iran’s nuclear activities. We therefore call
for redoubled efforts by all actors, including the E3+3,
for a negotiated solution to the problem. Iran should
also take steps to improve its interaction with the IAEA
and the E3+3 as a demonstration of its commitment to
its obligations under the international instruments, and
particularly to a peaceful nuclear programme.
These disturbing developments on Iran’s nuclear
programme and proliferation activities will require
close and sustained monitoring by the 1737 Committee
and its Panel of Experts. The international community
must maintain the highest level of vigilance and stand
ready to address, in a pacific manner, proliferation
risks wherever they occur.
Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): I too wish to join
others in thanking Ambassador Néstor Osorio for
presenting the twentieth 90-day report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We commend the professionalism with
which the Committee has been implementing its
mandate under his stewardship.
I also wish to thank the Panel of Experts for its
hard work since its mandate was extended for one year
by resolution 1984 (2011) in June this year. We have
taken note of the Panel’s midterm report and its
recommendations. We are carefully studying the report
and the views expressed by Member States. We support
the continued work of the Panel in accordance with its
mandate and the preparation of its reports in
consultation with Member States and by including
inputs they provide.
India has consistently supported the right of all
States to the peaceful uses nuclear energy consistent
with their respective obligations. Iran, as a
non-nuclear-weapon State signatory to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, has all the
rights and obligations that go with its membership with
regard to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. We underline the importance of the full and
effective implementation of all obligations undertaken
by States. We also emphasize the need for international
focus on clandestine proliferation activities.
India has consistently underlined the critical
importance of continuing dialogue between the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran.

11-64673

We support intensification of dialogue between Iran
and the Agency aimed at urgent resolution of all
outstanding substantive issues, including providing
clarification regarding those issues that have been
highlighted in the reports of the IAEA.
India would also like to reiterate its support for a
diplomatic solution. We believe it is necessary to
expand the diplomatic space to address all outstanding
issues in reassuring international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. It is therefore essential to keep the door
open for dialogue and to avoid confrontation.
We support full implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1929 (2010) by
all States. At the same time, all efforts should be made
to ensure that legitimate trade and economic activities
do not suffer.
We support open briefings by the Committee’s
Chair and the Coordinator of the Panel for interested
Member States on implementation procedures. We
believe that all Member States should provide their
support, as appropriate, to the discharge of the mandate
of the 1737 Committee.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), for his briefing today.
South Africa has maintained its commitment to
the
mutually
reinforcing
relationship
among
disarmament, non-proliferation and the right of States
to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. We
acknowledge that the important work of this
Committee lies within the larger context of the
commitments made by States to adhere to the grand
bargain of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT): the promise to develop
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes only by
working towards the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons.
South Africa’s approach to the implementation of
safeguards is informed by our principled position on
the total elimination of all nuclear weapons and, in
reaching this goal, on ensuring their non-proliferation,
both horizontal and vertical. Furthermore, the
inalienable right to use aspects of the atom for peaceful
purposes requires from us to build confidence with the

5

S/PV.6697

international community in the peaceful nature of such
activities.
We note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has transmitted the report by the
Director General on the implementation of its
safeguards agreement and the relevant Council
resolutions to the President of the Security Council
(see S/2011/695).
Being seized with this issue from 2003, the Board
of Governors of the IAEA has emphasized its resolve
to work for a diplomatic solution and the importance of
Iran extending to the Agency the necessary and
required cooperation to resolve the questions
surrounding its nuclear programme. These relate in
particular to the Agency’s efforts to provide credible
assurances about the absence of undeclared nuclear
material and activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
While in the past such cooperation has indeed resolved
many of these questions, a renewed dedication by Iran
to intensify its cooperation with the Agency, without
preconditions, is of utmost importance.
The sanctions regime against the Islamic
Republic of Iran is broad, encompassing areas such as
export control, customs, transportation and financing.
Cooperation between the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the IAEA is indispensable in contributing to building
the required confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme and thereby
assisting the Agency to clarify nuclear activities having
a possible military dimension.
In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
commitments expressed by Iran in a letter dated
30 October 2011, in which it extended to the Deputy
Director General for Safeguards an invitation to visit
Iran and to remove ambiguities, if any, regarding its
nuclear programme. South Africa considers it vital for
the Islamic Republic of Iran to follow through on this
commitment and for the Agency to seize this
opportunity and enhance its engagement with Iran.
Iran’s implementation of the provisions of the
relevant Council resolutions would also be a step in the
right direction. The suspension of all enrichmentrelated and processing activities, a legally binding
requirement in terms of resolution 1737 (2006), would
be crucial in building confidence.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its vision
of a world free of nuclear weapons, as well as our

6

respect for the right of all States to use the atom for
peaceful purposes only. In that regard, we remain ready
to work tirelessly with the IAEA until full confidence
has been re-established in the peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I join previous speakers in
thanking the Permanent Representative of Colombia,
Ambassador Néstor Osorio, for his briefing and for his
leadership of the activities the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
Brazil appreciates the work of the Panel of
Experts, as summarized in its midterm report, released
last month. The Panel was created by resolution 1929
(2010) to carry out a number of tasks under the
direction of the Committee. It is important that the
Committee continue to provide its guidance and
direction in an active manner. The mandate of the
Panel was clearly defined in paragraph 29 of the
resolution, which remains the sole reference for the
Committee to follow up the various activities
undertaken by the Panel, including outreach efforts.
For the sake of transparency, we support the
proposal of holding an open briefing by the Chair of
the Committee for non-members. Apart from providing
information
and
assistance
concerning
the
implementation of Security Council resolutions, that
initiative would give further access and insight to
Member States on the activities carried out by the
Committee.
The situation regarding the Iranian nuclear issue,
from a broader political perspective, is not
encouraging. There is still no progress on the
negotiations. Much to the contrary, the current
confrontational course is a matter of great concern. The
lack of trust, combined with worrisome recent
developments, could give rise to dangerous scenarios
that we must strive to avoid.
It appears that we now face a self-defeating circle
of estrangement. Aborted negotiations lead to
miscommunication. Mutual mistrust leads to increasing
animosity; in the end, the lack of direct contact may
lead to serious misunderstandings. To prevent the
situation from deteriorating further, we should seek
credible alternatives to create an environment
conducive to dialogue and genuine engagement. More
efforts are needed to strengthen the building blocks of
a negotiated solution.

11-64673

S/PV.6697

After such a long period of absence from the
negotiating table, a comprehensive agreement might be
difficult to achieve in the short term. A gradual
approach in which confidence is built step-by-step
would be advisable. In any case, the parties that are
more directly concerned must show that they are
willing to seriously pursue the diplomatic track and,
most important, to persevere on such a course of
action.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his briefing on the
90-day report on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We commend the role of the Committee under
his leadership and reaffirm our continued cooperation
with it. I should like to make the following comments.
First, Lebanon was one of the first countries to
join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), and is a signatory to all the main
international instruments and conventions related to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Lebanon fully abides by its responsibilities in that area.
In that context, Lebanon reaffirms the importance of
the balanced implementation of the three main pillars
of the NPT: non-proliferation, disarmament and the
peaceful use of nuclear technology. The latter of course
includes the right of all States parties to the NPT to
develop, research, produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.
Secondly, Lebanon calls for the reactivation of
the negotiation process and the resumption of dialogue
as the optimal solution to achieve a final and
comprehensive resolution of the issue that answers all
questions related to the peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme, pursuant to the comprehensive
safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). That would facilitate efforts aimed at
fruitful relations of cooperation with the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Thirdly, my country calls for addressing the issue
of non-proliferation in the Middle East within the
framework of a comprehensive and integrated regional
vision free of selectivity or double standards and aimed
at creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East. However, the obstacle to achieving that objective
is a single country in the entire the Middle East, Israel,
which has neither joined the NPT nor subjected its
nuclear installations to the IAEA comprehensive

11-64673

safeguards system of inspections. We therefore
welcome the appointment of a facilitator to prepare for
the 2012 conference on creating a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East in implementation of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference action plan.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
quarterly report and for his efficient and dedicated
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
The Security Council has been seized of an
unprecedented report from the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). The report (S/2011/695,
annex), which was published on 8 November, has only
deepened France’s concern about the Iranian nuclear
programme. It contains a remarkably detailed summary
of all of the information made available to the Agency
over the past decade on the possible military aspect of
the Iranian nuclear programme.
As the Agency has noted, its information derives
from many sources, including more than 10 of its
member States and information provided by Iran itself.
The IAEA notes its serious concern and details Iranian
activities that are “specific to nuclear weapons”
(S/2011/695, annex, para. 44). Those activities cover
all areas necessary for nuclear-weapon production,
including the production of fissile material, work on
uranium metal components, explosives, hydrodynamic
experiments, modelling and calculations, neutron
triggers, preparations for nuclear testing and
integration into a ballistic missile.
Those activities occurred before the end of 2003
under the framework of a structured programme.
However, the Agency emphasizes that some of those
activities may still be ongoing. The Agency also recalls
that Iran has never really cooperated in responding to
its concerns and that, in 2008, it broke off all dialogue
with the Agency on that issue.
Other Iranian announcements reported by the
IAEA have only worsened our concerns: the
announcement, in June, of the threefold increase in
enrichment capacity to 20 per cent and the installation,
in August, of the first centrifuge in the Qom plant —
an instillation now intended to produce enriched
uranium at the level of 20 per cent U-235, rather than
the 3.5 per cent Iran announced in 2009. In October,
there was a transfer of the first fissile material at that

7

S/PV.6697

same Qom facility — an installation that, I would
recall, was built in secret and includes bunkers adapted
for military use. It is a plant that could easily and
swiftly be reconfigured to produce uranium at a rate
higher than 20 per cent. In that context, we are also
concerned by the Agency’s reports that several
kilograms of natural uranium metal have inexplicably
disappeared.
All of those activities, together with Iran’s
intensive pursuit of a ballistic programme, paint an
overall picture that leaves very little doubt as to its
intentions. As emphasized by Mr. Alain Juppé, Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs, all of that
information shows that Iran has sought, and is very
likely pursuing its efforts, to develop a nuclear weapon
under the guise of a supposedly peaceful civilian
nuclear programme. The IAEA member States, the
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and, beyond that, the entire
international community must take action in response
to the seriousness of the facts reported by the Agency.
In Vienna, on 18 November, the IAEA Board of
Governors adopted, with an unprecedented majority, a
resolution (GOV/2011/69) expressing its deep and
increasing concern and urging Iran to shed light, as
soon as possible, on all of its activities relative to a
military programme by cooperating unreservedly with
the IAEA. The Board requested the Director General of
the Agency to report on the implementation of that
resolution at its next meeting, in March 2012.
In that context, I welcome the fact that all
members of the Council who are also present in Vienna
voted in favour of the Board of Governors’ resolution.
Once again, that action shows that the international
community is united and determined not to tolerate
abuse of the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
as recognized under the NPT.

that the final report of the Panel be published in
accordance with the ongoing practice of Sanctions
Committees. Should Iran persist in its refusal to
comply with its international obligations and to
cooperate seriously, we are prepared, together with all
countries that agree to do so, to adopt sanctions of an
unprecedented scope.
The Iranian regime is locking itself into a
dangerous spiral from which there is no way out — one
of isolation, of repression and of violating international
law. Apart from nuclear issues, the several serious
events that have occurred in recent weeks, which have
been denounced by the international community, only
heighten our concerns. In particular, I am thinking of
the Iranian plot to carry out an attack on United States
soil, revealed in October, and the unacceptable attack
on 29 November against the British Embassy in
Tehran, in violation of the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations.
The seriousness of the situation and the Iranian
regime’s deaf ear to the many negotiation offers made
by the E3+3 obliges the international community to
show unprecedented resolve and to mobilize as never
before. Faced with that challenge, we have no choice
but to remain united and firm. We urge Iran to heed the
message of the IAEA and the international community
and to at last concretely demonstrate its willingness to
sincerely negotiate and as quickly as possible clarify
all issues raised by the IAEA.
Ms. Sheard (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Ambassador Osorio for his briefing to the
Council today and for his report on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and its Panel of Experts.

Moreover, we must continue to rigorously
implement the sanctions adopted by the Security
Council. In doing so we must first issue a firm
response to the numerous reported violations. We must
also enhance the implementation of sanctions when
necessary, pursuant to the mandate given by the
Council.

Five years have passed since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1737 (2006), in December 2006.
Despite the sanctions imposed since 2006, however,
the Iranian nuclear programme has continued to
develop in direct contravention of the Council’s
resolutions and Iran’s obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. No one
following those issues can be in any doubt that Iran’s
clear objective is to develop the technology required
for a nuclear weapon.

The Panel of Experts has issued several
recommendations. The Committee must follow up on
them and, in particular, designate the individuals and
entities involved in any violations. Once again, we ask

The November report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) provides detailed and
unambiguous evidence to support that assertion. The
evidence is compelling in its description of both the

8

11-64673

S/PV.6697

possible military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear
programme and Iran’s evasion of IAEA scrutiny. In
particular, it is worth highlighting the report’s findings
that Iran has carried out “activities that are relevant to
the development of a nuclear explosive device”
(S/2011/695, annex, para. 43), that “While some of the
activities identified in the Annex have civilian as well
as military applications, others are specific to nuclear
weapons” (ibid., para. 44), and that some of those
activities “may still be ongoing” (ibid., para. 45).
Some argue that sanctions are a hindrance to
further negotiations. That is not the case. Iran has been
presented with a series of offers over the years. Indeed,
there remains on the table a generous offer from the
E3+3, with which Iran has decided not to engage
meaningfully.
In January, the Istanbul offer made it clear that if
Iran verifiably suspended its enrichment and
reprocessing activities and heeded the relevant Security
Council resolutions and IAEA obligations, it would be
able to pursue peaceful civilian nuclear activity. In
addition, Iran would enjoy increased political,
economic and energy cooperation. That is just the
latest in a series of serious offers made to, and rejected
by, the Iranian Government since June 2008.
In October 2009, the original offer was enhanced
by a confidence-building proposal to provide fuel for
the Tehran Research Reactor in exchange for Iran’s
enriched uranium. It is difficult to understand why an
Iran pursuing only civilian nuclear power would have
rejected those offers. The E3+3 has made those serious,
good-faith attempts to present Iran with an alternative
to sanctions and isolation. It is Iran’s intransigence and
its rejection of such offers that has resulted in the
intensification of sanctions agreed upon by the
Council.
Iran says that it wants a peaceful nuclear
programme, but the facts do not bear that out. The
rejection of the deal designed to provide Iran with
reliable civilian nuclear fuel and other incentives,
combined with IAEA evidence, can lead us to only one
conclusion: Iran is determined to develop nuclear
weapons capability. Now more than ever, the dualtrack strategy of pressure and engagement is necessary.
Sanctions are a key tool to convince Iran to engage
seriously in response to the offers on the table. The
Council needs to engage constructively to ensure that

11-64673

the sanctions in place are effective in changing the
calculus of the Iranian regime.
The Iran Sanctions Committee needs to act more
constructively to ensure that sanctions play an effective
part in that dual-track strategy. It should start by
agreeing to the publication of the Panel of Experts’
independent report. Withholding that report is to deny
the wider membership comprehensive insight into
Iran’s activity to circumvent sanctions. It is a report
that every United Nations Member has paid for and has
a right to see. They should be allowed to form their
own judgments on its value.
In parallel, the Committee needs to act on the
recommendations in the report. It should focus on
designating individuals and entities that have violated
sanctions and it should clarify what Member States
need to be doing to implement sanctions by publishing
advisory implementation assistance notes.
It is also important that Member States be
equipped with the knowledge and expertise to identify
and act upon suspected violations. We therefore
welcome the efforts by the Panel of Experts to raise
awareness of those steps, which all Member States are
required to take in order to implement sanctions and
foster greater general knowledge-sharing and
collaboration among States.
We remain committed to engaging Iran and to
addressing the international community’s genuine
concern regarding its nuclear programme. For the time
being, however, Iran has given us no reason to believe
that our engagement in negotiations on their nuclear
programme will be reciprocated in a meaningful way. It
has not even responded to Baroness Ashton’s latest
letter on the subject.
Iran must know that unless it returns to
meaningful negotiations without preconditions, it faces
further and deeper isolation.
Mr. Eick (Germany): I also wish to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today.
The latest International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Director General’s report (S/2011/695, annex)
on the implementation of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
Safeguards Agreement in Iran is alarming. It gives rise
to increasing concerns about a possible military
dimension to Iran’s nuclear programme. We are deeply
concerned about the report’s findings that Iran has

9

S/PV.6697

carried out activities relevant to the development of a
nuclear explosive device. The annex to the report
describes in detail that Iran has conducted activities in
all key areas relevant to a nuclear weapon.
The report paints a very disturbing picture. It
remains a matter of the utmost concern that the IAEA
continues to be unable to provide assurances about the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities in
Iran. The Agency has carefully checked the consistency
of the information available to it. Overall, the IAEA
finds the information, which comes from a variety of
independent sources, credible. The onus is therefore on
Iran, which must provide access to information,
documentation, sites, material and personnel. It is
disturbing that Iran has recently taken decisions and
actions that add to our previous doubts about the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
The decision to increase its capacity to enrich uranium
up to 20 per cent U-235 and bury it deep under a
mountain is of particular concern against a background
of indications of weaponization activities and the
development of a ballistic missile programme.
In a first reaction to the IAEA report, the E3+3
co-sponsored a resolution at the Board of Governors in
Vienna that supports the Agency’s efforts to implement
the Safeguards Agreement in Iran and to resolve the
outstanding issues. The resolution calls on Iran to
comply fully and without delay with its legally binding
obligations.
On 21 October, the European Union High
Representative addressed a letter to the Secretary of the
Supreme National Security Council of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. In her letter, Catherine Ashton called
on Iran to engage seriously in meaningful discussions
on concrete steps aimed at restoring confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. As of today, Iran has failed to respond. In
addition, the report of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) points out that Iran is in continued violation of
its legally binding international obligations. More
sanctions violations have been reported. We reiterate
our concern about the many cases of weapons exports
from Iran to other countries, and repeatedly to Syria.
All Member States should carefully implement the
weapons embargo as contained in resolution 1747
(2007).

10

Against that background, we remain committed to
our dual-track approach. We continue to be ready to
engage Iran in meaningful negotiations about its
nuclear programme. That continues to be our preferred
choice. However, as long as Iran does not cooperate
and is not even ready to talk about its nuclear
programme, we see no option but to pursue the
pressure track.
Germany attaches great importance to the proper
implementation of sanctions. We believe that this
remains vital in order to keep up the pressure on Iran
and make the Iranians return to the negotiation table.
The 1737 Committee plays a vital role in that regard.
We want to thank the Panel of Experts for its valuable
work.
We
particularly
welcome
the
five
implementation assistance notices that are currently
under consideration by the Committee. We hope they
can be finalized soon, as we expect them to provide
guidance to Member States in implementing the United
Nations sanctions regime.
On 7 May the Panel of Experts presented its final
report. We deeply regret that this important report has
yet to be published. We reiterate our call for it to be
finally released. In that context, we welcome the
proposal to inform the broader membership in an open
briefing about how to implement the Iran resolutions.
Let me reiterate that, together with our partners in
the international community, particularly in the
framework of the E3+3, we remain committed to
finding a long-lasting and peaceful solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue. We call on Iran to respond in a
positive and constructive spirit to our offers of
engagement.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Colombia for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) during the past 90 days, and to voice my
appreciation for the large amount of work
accomplished by the Committee under his leadership. I
hope that the Committee will continue to push for the
implementation of the resolution in a pragmatic,
appropriate and balanced matter. China has always
attached great importance to the Committee and will
continue to support it in its work.
China has also taken note of the interim report
submitted by the Panel of Experts. We hope the Panel
can continue to comply strictly with the resolution’s

11-64673

S/PV.6697

provisions and, under the Committee’s leadership, to
abide firmly by the principles of impartiality and
objectivity, working in a serious, rigorous, appropriate
and orderly manner in order to play its dual role in
assisting the Council and the Committee in fulfilling
their respective mandates, and in promoting a
comprehensive, balanced and effective implementation
of the relevant resolution.
China believes that all parties are duty-bound to
accurately carry out the provisions of the resolution in
good faith. However, sanctions are not the ultimate
objective of the Council’s resolution. The Iranian
nuclear issue can only be finally resolved through
dialogue and cooperation. The situation in the region is
now undergoing profound changes. Against that
background, having all parties commit firmly to
seeking an appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue through dialogue and negotiation will be of
greater and more meaningful significance for the
maintenance of peace and stability in the Middle East
and avoiding further turbulence in the situation in the
region.
The Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency recently adopted a resolution
on the Iranian nuclear issue, aimed at promoting
cooperation between the Agency and Iran and at
supporting the efforts of the E3+3 countries to resolve
the Iranian issue through dialogue. We hope that all
parties can seize this opportunity and act in the best
interests of peace and stability in the Middle East and
of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime,
by making greater efforts diplomatically and promoting
substantive progress in dialogue between the E3+3 and
Iran, as well as in cooperation between Iran and the
Agency. That is what the international community
hopes for and that is in keeping with the fundamental
interests of all sides.
Iran, as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is entitled to its
right to the peaceful uses of nuclear power, and at the
same time must comply with its international
obligations. China hopes that, through dialogue and
cooperation, Iran and the Agency can seek an
appropriate solution to the outstanding issues in order
to strengthen the confidence of the international
community in the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. China hopes that all sides can, with
strategic vision, act in a spirit of pragmatism and
flexibility to fully mobilize the positive factors present

11-64673

and take appropriate measures to promote progress in
dialogue and negotiations.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank
Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his informative 90-day
report on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), as well as for his able leadership of the
Committee. I would also like to kindly ask the
Ambassador to convey Portugal’s appreciation to the
Panel of Experts for the comprehensive midterm report
submitted to the Council on 8 December.
At the outset, let me reiterate that we share, with
a number of other delegations, a sense of urgency
regarding the publication of the Panel’s final report,
submitted in May. We are convinced of the usefulness
of making the report available to all States Members of
the United Nations, including by posting it on the
Committee’s website, which should be done as
measure of transparency on the work carried out so far,
but also to raise awareness among Member States of
the need to fully and adequately implement resolution
1929 (2010).
The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(S/2011/695, annex) has raised significant concern over
the nature of the Iranian nuclear programme, in
particular the continuation of uranium enrichment
activities to near 20 per cent with no plausible civilian
use, which constitutes a clear violation of Security
Council resolutions. Furthermore, according to the
Director General’s report, there are indications that
some nuclear activities in which Iran is engaged relate
directly to the development, manufacture, testing and
delivery of a nuclear explosive device.
The information provided paints a compelling
and disturbing picture of the nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme, which demands full and thorough
clarification. There is no true possibility for Iran to
regain the confidence of the international community
unless the IAEA is provided with exhaustive responses
with respect to all pending issues regarding Iran’s
nuclear activities, as requested by the Agency, and
unless unlimited access to all its nuclear sites,
materials, equipment and personnel is granted without
delay.
While reaffirming our commitment to a
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue in
accordance with the dual-track approach that has been

11

S/PV.6697

pursued in a consistent manner, we understand that it is
now up to Iran to show genuine willingness to
cooperate with the Agency. The Agency is the only
international body capable of ascertaining the true
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Portugal again calls on Iran to urgently and fully
engage in meaningful talks on concrete confidencebuilding measures, paving the way to a comprehensive
and long-lasting settlement that would restore
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
first would like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
quarterly report and the outstanding work he has done
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the work of the
Committee, which continues to play a critical role in
monitoring and improving the enforcement of Security
Council resolutions on Iran. We welcome the very
useful and informative midterm report and we look
forward to having the final report of the Panel of
Experts published and made available to all States
Members of the United Nations. We also express our
support for the Committee’s intention to hold an open
briefing by the Chair in the near future aimed at
assisting Member States in their efforts to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has consistently
believed that only the full implementation of the
safeguards agreements under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) can
ensure that nuclear energy is used in a safe and
responsible manner. The role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as an implementing
agency remains the most reliable instrument for
verifying compliance with the Treaty’s stipulations. We
strongly believe that all States without exception must
submit their nuclear facilities to the International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards regime and must be
transparent in fulfilling their commitments.
In that context, we remain concerned about
Iranian nuclear activities. The most recent report of the
Director General of the IAEA (S/2011/695, annex),
published on 8 November, indicates that Iran has not
suspended its enrichment-related activities or heavy
water-related projects, as required by the resolutions of
the Security Council and as requested by the IAEA

12

Board of Governors. We therefore call upon Iran to
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and implement the Additional Protocol and all
measures requested by the IAEA. We hope that Iran
will finally engage with the IAEA in order to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding its nuclear programme.
Bosnia and Herzegovina still believes that it is
possible to reach a comprehensive, negotiated and
long-term solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We
therefore reiterate our call upon all parties concerned
to redouble diplomatic efforts and engage in
constructive discussion aimed at restoring international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Let me, for my part, thank Ambassador
Néstor Osorio for the presentation of the twentieth
quarterly report of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
commend him on how he has steered the work of the
Committee over which he presides. We also commend
the midterm report prepared by the Panel of Experts
and submitted to the Committee in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011). We support the
work of the Panel of Experts in support of the 1737
Committee in implementation of resolution 1929
(2010). We urge members of the 1737 Committee to
continue their negotiations on the report in order to
have it placed on the website.
My delegation would like to reiterate that Gabon
is committed to the international non-proliferation
regime, of which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its three pillars continue
to be the cornerstone. Our commitment to the relevant
Security Council resolutions and their implementation
is unambiguous.
My delegation would again like to express its
deep concern with regard to the reports, including the
latest report of the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
(S/2011/695, annex), which sets forth violations by
Iran of the non-proliferation regime and the sanctions
adopted by the Security Council. Iran must therefore
cooperate with the IAEA and meet a number, if not all,
of its commitments, such as the implementation of the
provisions of its Additional Protocol, the suspension of
its activities relating to heavy water, and the showing
of respect for the concerns of the International Atomic

11-64673

S/PV.6697

Energy Agency with regard to the potential
militarization of the Iranian nuclear programme.
The Council has called on Iran a number of times
to fully meet its obligations under the NPT in order to
rebuild international trust and provide assurances to the
international community with respect to the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
The fact that Iran is continuing with its work with
respect to ballistic missiles and related activities is also
of concern for my country. The Iranian authorities must
therefore return to the negotiating table without
conditions.
Finally, I would like once to again to express our
full appreciation for the work done by the 1737
Committee and renew our full support for it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Permanent Representative of Colombia Osorio,
for his briefing on the work of the Committee. The
Committee has worked actively during the reporting
period, staying strictly within its mandate. The
Committee needs to continue to work specifically in
that vein, as does its Panel of Experts, which provides
the Committee with practical assistance. The activities
of the experts must be structured on an impartial and
independent basis, and they must use only reliable
sources and accurate information.
Russia fully complies with all requirements of the
sanctions regime with respect to Iran. We believe that
all members of the international community must
strictly comply with the requirements of the Security
Council sanctions resolutions and not go outside of
their framework.
Russia views the 18 November resolution
(GOV/2011/69) of the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the
situation with respect to the Iranian nuclear programme
as a new type of instrument, which, we hope, lays a
solid basis for addressing the issues related to the
programme. It is important to remember that that
resolution is aimed not at condemning anyone but,
instead, at continuing dialogue and easing the tensions
that have recently been heightened with respect to the
activities of Iran in the nuclear area. We do not deny

11-64673

the serious nature of the problems that exist with
respect to restoring confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian programme, and we
share the concerns of the international community in
that regard.
At the same time, we oppose attempts to
artificially worsen the atmosphere with regard to this
issue, which could have a negative impact on the
Agency’s cooperation with Iran and undermine
prospects for a continued dialogue between the six
international mediators and the Iranians. Russia has
consistently favoured resuming that dialogue without
preconditions.
We are committed the principles of reciprocity
and a phased approach with regard to making progress
in addressing issues related to Iran’s nuclear
programme. It is important that the resolution of the
IAEA Board of Governors refers to those principles
and reaffirms the intention of the international
community to seek a comprehensive, negotiated
settlement. Russia continues to do its utmost to bring
about a prompt resumption of the negotiations between
Iran and the six parties.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.
I once again call on Ambassador Osorio to
respond to the questions and comments that have been
made.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the members of the Security
Council for their kind words, as well as to express my
gratitude to mission experts who participated in the
work of the Committee for their devotion and the
seriousness with which they approached the issues
under the purview of the sanctions Committee.
It is clear that concerns abound, such as the
difficulties in making available and publishing reports
of the Panel of Experts. I hope to be able to find a way
reach an understanding so that this aspect of
transparency can be guaranteed, for not only the
members of the Council but also other Members of the
United Nations expect such transparency and
information about the work of committees.
There are still some very serious concerns, which
I interpret as a need to step up the Committee’s work
and to continue to guide the Panel of Experts in order
that it carries out its tasks — as you, Mr. President,

13

S/PV.6697

have said — in accordance with the mandate it has
been given.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for the clarifications he has
provided.

14

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

11-64673
