MEETING:
NEW

25 MAY 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agc11da/2008)
Adoption of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

Page

1

..,..,,.......... .. ... ................

1

Complaint of the Govcrnme~~t of Botswana against the illegal rkgime iq Southern
Rhodesia co~~ccrning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contamed, m the
letter dated 22 I&ember
1976 from the Permanent Iiepresentatlve of
Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council:
Note by the Secretary-General
(S/l 2307) . - - - . . - - * - - - - . - - . a - - . - . . *

1

SIPV.2008

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

Held in New York on Wednesday, 25 May 1944, at .PO.30 a.m.
F?esz’dent: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

3. I should also like to express our thanks and appreciation to Ambassador Consalvi for the skill and patience, the
tact and agreeable good humour with which he conducted
the business of the Council last month.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Ben& Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

4. A~w
me ~SO to take this opportunity to express to
Ambassador Chen Chu the welcome of the lJ&d
Kingdom
delegation on his return to the United Nations, and to the
Security Council, this time as the Pemlanent Representative
of his great country.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/20083
1. Adoption

5. Yesterday [ibid.] we listened with great interest and
respect to the statement made by the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana, Mr. Mogwe, whose very presence here
is a sign of the seriousness of the problem that we are
discussing. He has confirmed the accuracy and the thoroughness of the report by the Secretary-General’s Mission
to Botswana, circulated as document S/12307. Mr. Far&
and his team are to be congratulated on their work.
Mr. Mogwe has brought’ us up to date and has drawn our
attention to the fact that refugees from Southern Rhodesia
continue to arrive in Botswana in ever increasing numbers.
We recognize the gravity and urgency of this situation.
Botswana has a tradition of hospitality, but simply does not
have the capacity to tackle a refugee problem on the scale
of the present one. We believe that the report of the visiting
Mission is extremely useful in identifying waysin which the
international community can help Botswana to overcome
these problems as well as to fortify its economy.

of the agenda

2. Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the
illegal rsS,@mein Sou.them Rhodsia concerning violations
of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the letter
dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council:
Note by the Setiretary-General (S/12307)
The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint
of the Government of Botswana against the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations
of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the letter
dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/12307)

6. In his statement to the Council on 14 January (1985th
Ambassador Murray made it clear that the
United Kingdom had traditionally been a major aid donor
to Botswana. We are already providing substantial assistance
to Botswana and we will continue to assist. In this
connexion, I draw the Council’s attention to the announcement made on 21 April that the United Kingdom Govemment was offering &200,000 to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to provide assistance for
Rhodesian refugees, particularly children, who IIOW find
themselves in countries adjacent to Southern Rhodesia and,
particularly,
in Botswana. This contribution is in addition
to the United Kin$om’s regular contribution to the budget
of the High Commissioner. My Government is studying the
report of the Secretary-General’s Mission to Botswana to
determine what responseit may be able to make.
meeting],

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken yesterday morning
1’2006th meeting], I invite the representatives of Botswana
and Sierra Leone to participate in the debate, without the
right to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, A. M. Mogwe
(Botswana)
took a place at the Council table and Mr. S.
R iVicol (Sierra Leone) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.

7. Mr. Mogwe also referred to recent inCurSiOnS into
Botswana by military forces of the illegal @me in
Southern Rhodesia and, particularly, to the serious attack
on 16 May. The United Kingdom Government wasshocked
by that attack on Botswana’s territory. We deplore such
attacks, and we have communicated to Mr. Smith our
condemnation of the illegal rbgime’s action. In his speech at

2. Mr. BYATT (United Kingdom): I first wish to express,
on behalf of the United Kingdom delegation, our welcome
to you, Sir, in the office of President of the Security
Council and to assure you that we look forward to
co-operating with you during the days which remain Of
your month of office.
1

the recent Conference at Maputo, Mr. Rowlands, Minister
of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, made it
clear that the United Kingdom believes that ways must be
found to resolve the Rhodesian problem by negotiation. TO
that end, we are engaged in an initiative to bring about
independence on the basis of majority rule by the end of
1978. Incidents such as that which took place recently on
the Botswana border cannot but make the process of
achieving a negotiated settlement more difficult.

13. Our active policy which aims at independence under
democratic majority rule in Namibia and Zimbabwe and at
the eradication of racial discrimination in South Africa
implies necessarily a decisive interest in a stable and
prosperous Botswana in the very heart of that region. Not
only do we want countries like Botswana to be able to
defend themselves against any violation of their territorial
integrity, but we also want their economies to develop in
such a way as to prove how well countries in the region can
prosper in the absence of colonial rule or apartheid.

8. The United Kingdom delegation approves of the report
and endoreses the appeal made by the Secretary-General.
We shall therefore be ready to join our fellow members of
the Council in a consensus to adopt the draft resolution
circulated as document S/l 2334.

14. We thus took the initiative of starting bilateral
programmes of economic co-operation with Botswana
several years ago and, up to 1976, had financed develop
ment aid projects totalling more than 3.5 million Deutschmarks. In the current year my Government has pledged no
less than 23 million Deutschmarks, which represents an
increase of 200 per cent over our contribution in 1976.
When negotiations on this increase of financial and technical co-operation took place in Gaborone, both Govemments described the atmosphere as cordial and the relations
between our two countries as excellent. They agreed that
co-operation had generally been running smoothly and
successfully and had proved beneficial to both States. Our
new pledge consists of financial assistance amounting to 19
million Deutschmarks, which will be provided on the
following terms: 50 years maturity Including a lo-year
grace period and less than 1 per cent interest per annum. In
addition to that, 4 million Deutschmarks are offered for the
purpose of continuing technical. assistance. The programme
envisaged includes among other projects the construction of
a refugee camp at Selebi-Pikwe. In response to an urgent
call from the Botswana Government for humanitarian aid in
order to assist refugees from Zimbabwe, the Federal
Government provided an additional amount of 100,000
Deutschmarks on 14 February this year.

9. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Allow me to convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s sincere
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council. We are pleased to be able to work again
under the direction of a representative of one of the three
African members of the Council. I am certain that you will
carry out the duties of this high office in the same spirit of
understanding and sagacity which you have already
demonstrated in the context of the debate on the question
of South Africa during our common search for new and
constructive approaches, which, we hope, will continue and
finally lead to success.
10. My felicitations extend also to the outgoing President
of the Council, Ambassador Consalvi, for the efficient and
successful way in which he presided over the Council’s
work last month.
11. I should also like to associate myself with the
congratulations extended to Ambassador Chen Chu, the
new Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations. We appreciate the chance to work in close contact
with a man of such wide-ranging knowledge and experience
in the field of international politics. Relations between our
two countries are developing favourably; I take pride in
having been able to assist in the establishment of diplomatic
relations between Peking and Bonn, which gave me the
opportunity to travel to the great country of Mr. Chen Chu,

15. Most of the projects are based on the long-term
planning of the Government of Botswana, taking into
consideration the promising resources of that country and
the most effective ways of making them available to the
economy of Botswana. Co-operation thus concentrates
mainly on industrialization and improvement of the existing infrastructure.

12. My delegation followed with great attention the
statement made by the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana [2006th meeting], in which he gave an impressive account of the precarious situation facing his country. I
had the honour to present our assessment concerning the
responsibilities for that situation in the January debate of
the Security Council /1985th meeting] on the same
subject. On that occasion, I expressed the deep sympathy
of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
with the people and the Government of Botswana for the
severe loss their country had suffered, Instead of reiterating
the stand taken by the Federal Republic of Germany
against those who disregard the integrity of sovereign
neighbouring countries and the right of peoples to selfdetermination
and independence, I wish to concentrate
today on some practical measures we have taken to assist
Botswana in solving its problems in the most effective way
so as to ensure rapid progress in the development of its
economy. We would hope that more and more Member
States will undertake similar commitments.

16. The Federal Republic of Germany ranks among the
most important
contributors to multilateral
aid programmes for Botswana. In this context I should like to
mention in particular the assistancewe have been providing
through the European Community since Botswana adhered
to the Lome agreements.
17. We view these activities as a decisive contribution to
the solution of the pressing problems in the whole of
southern Africa. Going beyond mere declarations and
solemn gestures, we have translated our awareness of these
problems into practical politics, thus assisting our African
partners on their way to genuine independence. With that
political guideline in mind, our Federal Minister for
Economic Co-operation visited Botswana only some weeks
ago. After her return to Bonn, she stated:
“The Federal Republic of Germany is prepared to make
its contribution towards solving the whole complex of
problems in southern Africa. We have committed our2

selves to this aim in several ways: We are substantially
increasing this year’s development aid contributions to
the five States of Malawi, Lesotho, Botswana, Zambia and
Swaziland. We are consciously supporing Botswana in
projects that are of special importance for this country’s
efforts to achieve greater economic autonomy and
independence. We are promoting German private investment in Botswana, Zambia and other African States on
the periphery of the conflict.”

25. In order to meet effectively the challenge of the Smith
regime and to resist aggression, Botswana has had to divert
as much as 70 per cent of the resources reserved for
development to expenditure on defence and also to provide
asylum for and sustain a large number of refugees who have
been forced to flee from their homes in Southern Rhodesia
and South Africa. In short, Botswana’s economy is being
undermined by the policies of its racist and aggressive
neighbours. The statement of the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana has put into sharp focus the dimensions of the problems which his country is now facing.
Quite clearly, they call for an urgent and adequate programme of support, both moral and material, to Botswana.

18. My Government is in full agreement with our African
partners that this constitutes a most constructive way of
helping them build their own independent future. All
industrialized States alike-West and East-are called upon
to co-operate peacefully to that end with African countries.

26. The delegation of Pakistan endorses the assessment
and recommendations of the Mission, particularly the
recommendation that Botswana should be assisted by the
international community to carry out its normal development projects by the means suggested in paragraph 129 of
the report.

19. Solidarity with all Africans who fight for their rights
as granted by the Charter of the United Nations is
important, but it is not enough. Let us marshal our efforts
to achieve everywhere, and particularly in the front-line
countries of southern Africa, the sound material basis on
which alone genuine independence can exist and grow.

27. We welcome the prompt action taken by the Secretary-General, pursuant to the submission of the Mission’s
report, in designating Assistant Secretary-General Farah to
be responsible at Headquarters for co-ordinating action by
the United Nations system, in opening a speciaf account to
receive donations and in the appeal he has launched to all
States to provide Botswana with the financial and material
help which it so urgently needs [S/12326/.

20. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): I have great pleasure in
extending to you, Sir, my delegation’s warm felicitations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. We recall the qualities of patience
and diligence with which you guided our deliberations
during your presidency of the Council last year and are
confident that the important matters which are on the
Council’s agenda this month will be deal with effectively.

28. The delegation of Pakistan has co-sponsored a draft
resolution [S/12334] on the subject, which was introduced
yesterday by the representative of Mauritius and which is in
conformity with the recommendations of the Mission and
the appeal of the Secretary-General. It is our hope that the
draft resolution, after its unanimous adoption, will lead to
prompt and generous contributions of the required assistance to enable Botswana to meet its needs.

21. I should also like to convey, through you, to Ambassador Consalvi of Venezuela our warm appreciation for the
devotion and sagacity with which he guided the Council’s
deliberations last month.
22. I take ,th.is opportunity to extend a very warm
welcome to Ambassador Chen Chu on his appointment as
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of
China, a country with which my own has the very best
relations.

29. Finally, it remains our view that the basic cause of the
present unsettled and worsening situation in southern
Africa, of which Botswana is one of the victims, is the
persistence there of the doctrine and practice of colonialist
and racist domination. Certain positive and encouraging
developments have taken place recently with regard to
those problems. They should be followed by such concrete
action as would have a decisive and positive influence on
the situation and bring Iiberty, equality and prosperity to
the peoples of southern Africa.

23. My delegation has studied the report [see S/12307] of
the Mission sent to Botswana in pursuance of the Council’s
resolution of last January. We should like to express our
appreciation for the valuable task performed by the Mission
and in particular by its head, Mr. Abdulrahim Abby Farah,
Assistant Secretary-General for Special Political Questions.
The Mission’s report is concise as well as comprehensive and
shows the meticulous care with which the Mission discharged its assignment.

30. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, I extend to you
my delegation’s felicitations and good wishes on your
assumption of the heavy responsibilities of President of the
Council for this month. We have every confidence in your
judgement and capacity to guide our deliberations to
fruitful results.

24. The report confirms the fact that the illegal Smith
regime of Southern Rhodesia, in violation of the law of
nations, precepts of the Charter of the United Nations and
United Nations resolutions, is continuing and even increasing its acts of intervention and border violations against
Botswana. Indeed, as the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana-whose presence here I welcome on my delegation’s behalf-and the Secretary-General have informed us
[2006th meeting/, incidents of this kind have multiplied
since the submission of the report, the most recent act Of
intervention having occurred only last week.

31. I should like to take this opportunity also to place on
record our appreciation and high esteem for the work of
your predecessor, the representative of Venezuela, who
presided over the Council last month with his usual quiet
competence and dignity.
32, My delegation is happy to join other members in
welcoming the new Ambassador of the People’s Republic of
3

‘..

\

China and in wishing him much success in his work at the
United Nations.

pragmatic and successful. We are also pleased to see that it
is Benin, a country with which Canada entertains the best
of relations, particularly in the field of economic development, which is called upon to preside over our discussions
on two important African issues.

33. My delegation is glad to see the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana once again among us in the Council. He
has placed before us (2006th meeting] with characteristic
understatement the extremely difficult situation facing his
country-a situation which is solely the unfortunate consequence of the fact that Botswana has on its borders two
racist minority regimes.

40. I should like to convey to the delegation of Venezuela
the sincere appreciation of my delegation for the truly
excellent services rendered to the Council by Ambassador
Consalvi during the month of April.
41. Finally, I should like to welcome my new neighbour
on my left-no political connotations intended-and to say
that we are glad to have Ambassador Chen Chu here and
look forward to working with him.

34. We also have\ before us the comprehensive report of
the Fiarah mission (see S/12307/, which provides us with
all the details of the assistance needed by Botswana. It is
deplorable indeed that border violations by the illegal
Smith regime should have increased recently, causing the
death, kidnapping and detention of citizens of Botswana as
well as much destruction of property.

42. When we discussed the complaint of Botswana in
January last, we expressed the view /198&h weed&j
which, I am sure, is shared by everyone here, that it was
first and foremost our collective duty to seek an early
transfer of power in Southern Rhodesia to the majority of
its people. As long as the illegal regime of Salisbury
continues to exist, peace in the region will be threatened, as
recent events have unfortunately again demonstrated. And
as long as such a situation persists, neighbouring countries
such as Botswana will not only continue to suffer serious
human and material losses but will also see their courageous
efforts towards their long-term development undermined
and jeopardized. We therefore have a responsibility to
rededicate ourselves to providing the kind of assistance and
support which is necessary to the renewed attempts by the
United Kingdom to break the present deadlock among the
main parties concerned, so that an internationally acceptable solution can be developed and implemented in the
near future in Southern Rhodesia. It seems to us that the
success of those impending negotiations is the principal
element in a long-term guarantee of Botswana’s territorial
integrity and economic well-being.

35. What should be the answer of the Security Council to
a small and weak Member State like Botswana when it
comes to, us and complains about violations of and
continued threats to its sovereignty by a regime that is
regarded by all of us as illegal? In a different but
qualitatively similar situation, the Council might even have
dispatched a United Nations peace-keeping force at our
collective expense, But in the case of Botswana we have
sent only a fact-finding mission to assess the degree of
assistance that is needed. Actually, Botswana has been
defending its own sovereignty by expanding its small police
force and coping with a refugee influx of the order of 400
persons a week, resulting in an expense of about $20
million per annum. That unexpected expenditure should be
clearly regarded as a legitimate charge on the United
Nations, and I say so because it is in fact in lieu of
peace-keeping expenditure.
36. We are informed by the report that, in addition, the
present emergency situation has created certain inescapable
items of project expenditure which have a direct bearing on
the economy of Botswana and the well-being of its
inhabitants. Four different ways of rendering assistance to
Botswana have been indicated in the report: programme
assistance, project assistance, assistance to emergency
projects and financial assistance.

43. That being said, we are equally conscious of
Botswana’s immediate needs, and we welcome the Secrem
tary-General’s report [see S/12307/ as a most enlightening
document which should enable us to decide how best we
can respond to that country’s urgent requirements.
44. Canadian assistance to Botswana has been discussed
with that Government in the light of recent political events
in the region and the impact of those events on Botswana’s
development programme. For the period 1978.1983,
Canadian assistance to Botswana wM total $22 million, and
will be focused on strengthening the country’s key economic sectors, including mining, transportation, education
and agriculture. The goals of our programme are to
strengthen the economy’s productive base, to expand the
country’s pool of skilled managers, administrators and
technicians in key industries and government services, and
to increase national control of Botswana’s transportation
system.

37. My Government stands ready to offer its assistance
directly to the Government of Botswana, and we also
support the Secretary-General in his appeal to all Member
States to offer their assistance to Botswana.
38. It goes without saying that some Member States are
under a greater sense of obligation to assist Botswana than
others, and we hope that they will come forward to
shoulder the larger part of Botswana’s burden of diverting
its domestic resources to the considerable extent of 70 per
cent to meet its emergency requirements.
39, Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, may I first of
all congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of
the Council. As your neighbour at the Council table, we
have already become aware of your diplomatic skills and
your open-mindedness, and we have no doubt that you will
direct our debates in a manner which will
be both

45. The critical importance to Botswana’s economy of
maintaining the continued operations of the railway-which
is, of course, owned and operated by Rhodesia Railwayshas been recognized, and we have already funded a
consultancy team to develop national transport contin4

gency studies in the event of a breakdown in the railway
services.

Political Questions, forhis very cogent. report stemming from
his mission to Botswana (JZZ S/12307!. We welcome
the letter of the Secretary-General dated 18 April on this
subject (S/12326] and we join in urging other Member
States to make financial contributions to assist Botswana.

46. We are also providing significant financial and technical assistance to the Central Transport Organization,
which manages the Government’s fleet of road transport
and maintenance equipment. Other projects include the
Francistown-Nata section of the BotZam Road, technological assistance to the Department of Mines, an
airborne geological survey of the country’s mineral resources, technical assistance to the Institute of Development Management and assistance to the University of
Botswana and Swaziland.

56. For its part, on the basis of its assessment of the
prevailing situation, my Government is already discussing
with the Government of Botswana financing for educational assistance, such as funds for the University of
Botswana and Swaziland. We are also taking steps, subject
to the successful completion of the congressional appropriations process, to make additional funds available to
Botswana to help in easing the fmancial impact of the
influx of refugees fleeing from oppression in Rhodesia and
to assist it in its development projects.

47. We will, therefore, be pleased to support the draft
resolution introduced by the representative of Mauritius
[S/.2.2334] and, in pursuing our efforts to assist Botswana’s
development, we shall bear in mind all the factors which
have been put before us, both by the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana and by the Secretary-General[2006th
meeting]. We hope, in this fashion, to demonstrate anew
our total solidarity with the people of Botswana.

57. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Re.
publics) (interpretation from Russian):Mr. President, allow
me first of all warmly to congratulate you on the successful
way in which you are discharging the responsible tasks
incumbent upon you as President of the Security Council
this month. We have already had an opportunity to see that
you are fully in command of unusual diplomatic and
organizational skills. We are particularly glad that the
discussion of the important and complex questions which
are now on the Council’s agenda and which concern the
fate of the African peoples and their situation in the world
of today is taking place under the presidency of the
representative of a country which is in the forefront of the
struggle for social progress. You may rest assured that the
delegation of the Soviet Union will accord you all necessary
support and co-operation in all your undertakings.

48. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
People’s Republic of Benin is glad of the excellent relations
it has with Canada.
49. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): First, Sir,
we should like to welcome you to your functions as
President of the Council. We are confident that you will
continue to carry out your duties with the skill and wisdom
you have displayed in the many Council negotiations in
which you have participated in the last few months.
50. We should also like to thank and salute Ambassador
Consalvi of Venezuela for the admirable work he did as
Council President for the month of April. ’

58. We should also like to express sincere gratitude to
your predecessor, the representative of Venezuela, a country friendly to us, who very skilfully and effectively guided
the work of the Council last month. We greatly value the
experience, accumulated during the course of those discussions, of constructive co-operation with the delegation of
Venezuela, and we look forward to the further development of mutual understanding with regard to many
international issues.

51. In addition, my delegation wishes to extend a warm
welcome to Ambassador Chen Chu, the new representative
of the People’s Republic of China to the Council. My
delegation looks forward to a fruitful association with him
and with his delegation.
52. We also welcome the participation in this debate of
the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Archibald Mogwe. We listened with great care to
his restrained and very useful statement [ibid.].

59. We should also like to avail ourselves of this opportunity to express our satisfaction at the fact that the,
Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, Mr. Mogwe, has
been able to be present at the meetings of the.Council and
participate in its work in the quest for a constructive
solution of the matters under discussion.

53. My Government is prepared to join in the consensus
which we foresee on the draft resolution in support of
Botswana /S/12334/.
We shall do this because of our
strong support for the principle of territorial integrity and
the inviolability of international borders. We believe that
Botswana, as a sovereign State in the front line of the
struggle for equality on the African continent, is entitled to
develop free from incursions sponsored by the illegal
minority regime in Rhodesia.

60. There is present among us a new representative of the
People’s Republic of China. The appearance of a new
representative of the People’s Republic of China in the
Security Council, let us believe and hope, will. make it
possible to ensure constructive co-operation in the working
out of effective decisions directed towards the strengthening of peace and world security.

54. Botswana is to be commended for its courageous and
principled stand, and those who harass Botswana militarily
or otherwise are ‘to be condemned.

61. The fact that the situation in southern Africa is
constantly the focus of public opinion in almost all
countries is entirely right and proper. The racist regimes in
southern Africa not only remain instruments of oppression
but represent more and more a serious threat to the peace

55. The United States wishes to congratulate Mr. Abdulrahim Abby Farah, Assistant Secretary-General for Special
5

and security of the peoples of Africa and, indeed, not only
of Africa. The complex situation in the region has arisen as
a result of the inhumane policies pursued by the racist
minority regimes of South Africa and of Southern Rhodesia
and their refusal to take steps to satisfy the lawful demands
of the African peoples and of the indigenous population
that is striving for freedom and independence. The frontier,
therefore, between the free African countries and the
countries where colonial oppression in Africa still continues
is a place of tension and struggle. It is no accident that the
African States that are in the immediate vicinitv of South
Africa and Southern Rhodesia should be described as the
front-line States, They include, among others, independent
Botswana, which has been the object of attacks and threats
by the Southern Rhodesian regime.
62. Aggressiveness and hostility are characterisfic of and,
indeed, inherent in the system of racism and apnrtheid
because of its very nature. Both the theory and the practice
of racist regimes proceed from the hateful principle of
racial supremacy. In this sense,the acts of provocation and
violence perpetrated by the Southern Rhodesian regime
against the neighbouring African States are the direct
consequence of its policy and practice.
63. When we discuss this question and the other that is
before us, we cannot be indifferent to the problems for
which it is incumbent on us to find a constructive solution.
We must share the concern of world public opinion. So long
as the cynical policy of racial oppression by minorities
continues in southern Africa, and so long as the majority is
deprived of its natural right to freedom, independence and
equality, there can be no strengthening or preservation of
peace in the region. Peace and security can be achieved only
through the elimination of the racist regimes and as a result
of the full implementation of the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the historic and world
famous Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

foremost, by those regimes themselves and by those that
support them. Such a solution of the problem would, in our
view, be the only correct and just one.
67. While fully supporting the principle that international
and bilateral assistance should be extended, on a voluntary
basis, to the African States that have suffered in this
situation, we also realize that a definitive elimination of the
threat to the independent African States can be resolved
only by putting an end to the racist regimes responsible. In
that regard also we believe that effective measures should
be adopted by the Security Council concerning support for
independent African States. It is only such measures that
can bring closer the day when freedom and independence
will be won by the struggling peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa. That is the only way in which
the security of all the front-line States and other independent States of Africa can be ensured.
68. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
from
French): My delegation would like to express its gratitude
to our former President, Ambassador Consalvi of Irenezuela, for the very wise and skilful way in which he carried
out his duties in the month of April in circumstances that
were at times difficult.
69. I should also like to express to Ambassador Boya my
sincere contratulations on his assumption of the presidency
of the Council. My delegation is very pleased to see the
representative of a State with which France has relations of
co-operation based on long-standing, reciprocal and sincere
esteem acting as President of the Council. I should like to
pledge to Ambassador Boya the full co-operation of my
delegation.
70. I should also like to extend a welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of China, Ambassador Chen Chu.
I should like to congratulate him on his appointment to
that exalted position and to wish him every successin his
mission.

64. The Soviet position on this question remains consistent and unchanging. Our State, our country and our
people have stood and will continue to stand on the side of
those who fight for freedom and independence for the
peoples of southern Africa, and we consider the complete
liquidation of all hotbeds of colonialism and racism-in this
region, in particular-to be one of the most important
international tasks. It is on that position that we shall base
our approach to the particular problem now under discussion in the Security Council.

71. Finally I should like to great the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Mogwe.

65. The Soviet Union, as is known, was one of the States
that voted in favour of resolution 403 (1977) calling for a
special mission of the Secretary-General to be dispatched to
Botswana. The report of that Mission [see S/12307] and
the appeal issued by the Secretary-General on 18 April to
the Governments of all Member States [s/12326] leave no
doubt that Botswana has really suffered serious material
losses and faces the contrinuation of grave threats from its
racist neighbour.

73. So it was with great interest that we studied the report
of the Mission sent by the Secretary-General /see
S/12307]. We should like to extend to Mr. Farah, who was
the Chairman of that Mission, and to his assistants our very
sincere congratulations on the quality of their work. The
part of the report containing the “conclusions and recommended projects” was the subject of a special study on our
part. My delegation is well aware of the fact that political
circumstances have placed Botswana in an especially diffcult situation. That country deserves our support Particularly because it deliberately decided to devo,te its
resources to development rather than to military exPendb
ture .

66. For our part, we have repeatedly pointed out that
responsibility for the damage inflicted in independent
African States by the racist regimes must be borne, first and

72. The French delegation voted in favour of Council
resolution 403 (1977) on 14 January last. We supported the
appeal to all States
‘&to respond positively in providing assistance to
Botswana, in the light of the report of the Mission of the
Secretary-General, in order to enable Botswana to carry
out its planned development projects”.

74. As a member ‘of the European Community, my
country will naturally contribute to the effoti that Community plans to make on behalf of Botswana. By the end of
the five-year period 19751980, nearly $23 million will
have been given to that country from the European
Development Fund. That sum has been allocated to specific
development projects relating to cattle raising, economic
and social infrastructure, communications, technical assistance and training, and assistanceto small businesses.
75. However, that assistance is only a palliative. It cannot
solve the basic problem, which requires a just settlement of
ihe Rhodesian question. The border incidents and the
difficult situation in which Botswana finds itself are, as
others around this table have said, only the consequences of
the existence of the illegal rhgime at Salisbury. As I stated
on 14 January [1985th meeting/-and my appeal is all the
more valid today-, the international community has an
obligation to join those who wish to put an end to the
present situation in Rhodesia and promote through peaceful means the speedy establishment of a majority rbgime.
76. We are in favour of the adoption by consensus of the
draft resolution that is now before us [S/12334/.
77. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I wish
to assure the representative of France that my delegation
attaches great importance to relations between France and
Benin.
78. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, allow me to express our great pleasure at
seeing you conducting the proceedings of the Security
Council once again, wlth your well-known efficiency. As in
the past, you may count on the sincere and frigndly
co-operation of the Romanian delegation. I would also note
that the spirit in which we work together here at the United
Nations is but a reflection of the close relations of
friendship and solidarity which are continuously developing
between Romania and Benin.
79. Before dealing with the question on our agenda, I
should like to thank the retiring President, Ambassador
Simtin Albert0 Con&vi of Venezuela, who c.onducted our
proceedings last month in a discreet, courteois and
effective manner that calls for our admiration and gratitude.
80. I should like also to take this opportunity to bid a
warm welcome to Ambassador Chen Chu, the new Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of China to
the United Nations. I should like to extend to him our
wishes for success in his new office and to express the
sincere wish of the Romanian delegation to co-operate with
his delegation in the spirit of the excellent relations that
obtain between our two peoples and Governments.
81. The question now under consideration by the Council,
as indicated by the report of the Secretary-General [see
S/12307], is only one aspect of a broader and more
important problem, that of Southern Rhodesia. The heart
of the problem is the existence of the illegal racist regime in
Southern Rhodesia which is striving to maintain its rule
over the people of Zimbabwe. The acts of aggression and

intimidation perpetrated by the Ian Smith rhgime against
Botswana and other independent States of southern Africa
are now being added to the misdeeds perpetrated against
the people of Zimbabwe and their political organizations
that are struggling to liberate their country.
82. The Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, His
Excellency Mr. Archibald Mogwe, whom we welcome here
in the Council, presented us at yesterday’s meeting [2006th
meeting] with information and instructive statistics concerning the scope and gravity of the problems his country
must confront. It is, of course, important that the Council
should resolutely condemn the acts of aggression against
Botswana and take adequate measures to assist that country
to overcome the consequences of those acts. At the same
time, we must not lose sight of the cause of those
disturbances and tensions, +n wit, the existence of the racist
regime at Salisbury.
83. According to the report of the Mission sent to
Botswana by the Secretary-General, in order for Botswana
to carry out the development of its resources in the present
circumstance‘s that country will need 11 new development
projects. However, the efforts and the sacrifices of the
people of Botswana for their economic and social development could be rendered useless by further acts of aggression
by the Salisbury rkgime. For this reason we are convinced
that the Council must act to eliminate the actual causesof
the ordeal through which Botswana is now passing. The
necessary measures must be taken, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, to
end the rscist rule in Southern Rhodesia.
84. My country, Romania, is resolved, in so far as it is
able, to continue lending its support to Zimbabwe and the
other peoples of southern Africa that are struggling to
recover that freedom and national independence that are
essential prerequisites for their economic development and
social progress. It is in this spirit that we support the
measures proposed for assistance to Botswana, so that it
may be able to overcome its difficulties arising from the
acts of aggression of the illegal rBgime in Southern
Rhodesia. The adoption of the draft resolution (S/12334/
submitted by eight delegations, including my own, would
unquestionably be a manifestation of international solidarity with an African country that is with dignity and
courage resisting the acts of intimidation committed against
it by the racist regime of Ian Smith and is resolved actively
to co-operate with the United Nations so as to carry out its
duties towards the peoples of southern Africa.
85. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of Romania and assure him that
the deleggtion of Benin sincerely hopes that the relations of
friendship and solidarity that exist between Romania and
Benin will develop and be strengthened more and more
with each passing day.
86. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation is particularly pleased that
you, a brother from the third world, are conducting the
proceedings of the Security Council this month. Now that
we are coming to the end of the month of May, the quality
of your work in the performance of this delicate task

96, After listening to the stat:ment of the Minister for
External Affairs of Botswana yesterday [2006th meeting],
we are particularly convinced that we must support that
country and the measures proposed in the Council.

obliges me to praise further your personal qualities and
your diplomatic tact.
87. We should like to express our appreciation for the
splendid job done by Ambassador Cons&i of Venezuela as
President of the Council last month, Our congratulations go
likewise to the members of his illustrious delegation to the
United Nations.

97. In this brief statement we should like also to confirm
our position: we condemn the minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia which is responsible for the present state of
affairs in southern Africa. We take note of the report and
resolution 403 (1977) and are pleased to join the sponsors
of the draft resolution in document S/12334. We appeal to
the international community to express its solidarity with
Botswana by giving it the necessary assistance.

88. I am also pleased to bid welcome to Ambassador Chen
Chu, the new Permanent Representative of the People’s
Republic of China to the United Nations. We hope to have
the same fruitful and cordial relations with him that we had
with his predecessor, Ambassador Huang Hua, who is now
Foreign Minister of his country, We extend to him our best
wishes and an expression of our friendship.

98. The delegation of Venezuela would like to express to
the Secretary-General our appreciation for having so ably
made the necessary arrangements for the dispatch of the
Mission to Botswana.

89. The delegation of Panama once again wishes to state
that it repudiates the racist minority regimes which oppress
the national majorities in southern Africa. In our words and
deeds we have always stood by the peoples of Africa which,
resolutely and tirelessly, have increasingly opposed those
who try to make them victims of racial discrimination, with
all the tragic consequences that that entails.

99. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (translation from Chinese):
This is the first time that I have participated in the
deliberations of the Security Council since being appointed
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of
China to the United Nations and representative of the
People’s Republic of China on the Security Council. First
of all, allow me to take this opportunity to extend my
cordial greetings to Ambassador Boya, President of the
Council for the current month, and to the representatives
of other States members of the Council,’ as well as my
sincere thanks for the friendly sentiments they have
expressed to me. My colleagues of the Chinese delegation
and I are ready to develop further the close relations of
co-operation with the representatives of friendly countries
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

90. The presence in this chamber of the Minister for
External Affairs of Botswana and the dramatic statement
he made before the Council /2006th meeting,? are proof of
the fact that the international community must, without
delay, adopt a plan of actionto enable Botswana to deal
with the problem of the refugees who are fleeing from the
racists and the problems created by this stubborn neighbour
who frequently violates its borders.
91. We should like also to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his efficient assistants for the very
precise and clear report that they have submitted [see
S/1230/ on the situation in Botswana which has arisen as a
result of its determined position with respect to those who
constantly violate human rights in southern Africa.
Botswana needs assistance as a matter of urgency, and we
have an obligation to provide that assistance. The draft
resolution in document S/12334 reflects that sentiment. We
hope that the draft resolution will be adopted unanimously.

100. More than half a year ago, under the leadership of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China,
headed by Chairman Hua Kuo-feng, the Chinese people,
carrying out our great leader and teacher Chairman Mao’s
behest, smashed at one blow the anti-Party “gang of four”,
thus winning a great historic victory. At present, both the
situation in China and the international situation are
excellent. Under the leadership of the Central Committee
of the Chinese Communist Party, headed by the wise leader
Chairman Hua, the Chinese people will, as always, continue
to implement firmly and steadfastly the revolutionary line
and policies in foreign affairs formulated by Chairman Mao
personally and, together with the peoples of the world,
carry the great struggle against imperialism, colonialism and
hegemony through to the end.

92. Miss

LOPEZ
(Venezuela)
(interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, I should like to extend to you the

best wishes of the delegation of Venezuela and to congratulate you on the very fine job you have been doing in
conducting our proceedings.
93. On behalf of Ambassador Con&i,
I should like to
express thanks for all the kind things that have been said
about his work in the Council during the month of April.
94. We wish also to bid a warm welcome to.&nbassador
Chen Chu, Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations.

101. We have listened carefilly to the statements made by
His Excellency Mr. Mogwe, Minister for External Affarrs of
Botswana [ibid.], and by the representatives of other
African States,

95. The delegation of Venezuela has read very carefully
the report of the Mission to Botswana in document
S/12307. We believe that that document has been very well
prepared and reflects the present situation in that country,
which has to deal with serious economic problems owing to
its geographical position and its desire to abide strictly by
the resolutions of the Organization.

102. With regard to the question under consideration,
namely the aggression committed by the Southern Rhodesian racist regime against Botswana, the Chinese delegation expounded its position in our statement at the
Security Council meeting held on 13 January 1977 (1984th
meeting] .

8

103. It should be pointed out that+ since the adoption of
resolution 4Q3 (1977), the Southern Rhodesian racist regime has not shown the slightest restraint in its aggressive
arrogance. On 16 May of this year, the Smith regime once
again undertook a flagrant invasion of Botswana-and during
the. same period it has also carried out incessant military
threats and armed provocations against Zambia and other
independent African States. It should also be pointed out
that the Southern Rhodesian racist regime has dared to act
so truculently because it has the strong backing of
imperialism and the South African racist regime.

110. All the speakers who have preceded me have recognized that the cause of Botswana is a profoundly just cause
and, as such, deserves the closest attention of the international community. Botswana’s cause is part of the overall
noble cause of the oppressed peoples of southern Africa
that are struggling to free themselves from the chains of
domination
by the white, racist, illegitimate
minority
regimes-the r&imes of Smith and Vorster.
111. The struggle of the intrepid fraternal people of
Botswana against all the combined forces of evil is a
legitimate struggle. Any attempt to hinder that struggle and
subject the people of -Botswana to a new form of
domination must therefore be regarded as a crime.

104. Recently, while carrying out, in collusion with the
Smith regime, intensified repression of the national liberation movement of the southern African people, the most
reactionary South African racist regime has been resorting
to a clumsy political intrigue by impudently declaring that
it “wants to establish ties with China”, in an attempt to
confuse the public, thereby deceiving the people at home,
altering its ugly image abroad and extricating itself from
international isolation. On the other hand, social-imperialism, working hand in glove with the Vorster rkgime, has
set in motion its propaganda machine and spared no efforts
to help the South African racist regime spread rumours to
slander and malign China in an attempt to sow discord in
the relations between China and the African countries and
people.

112. Militant support for the freedom fighters of Zimbabwe, in conformity with the line laid down by the
Organization of African Unity and to attain the noble ideals
of our Charter, cannot be regarded as a casus belli.
113. Ian Smith and his racist, colonialist and criminal
clique, which enjoys the support of the reactionary forces
of Western imperialism, must now reahze, despite their
political blindness, that their days are numbered and that
their game is going bad on them, The ever increasing
determination
of the oppressed people of Zimbabwe in
their victorious struggle against their oppressors is an
invincible weapon. My delegation takes pleasure in hailing
that determination.

105. Here we deem it necessary to point out solemnly that
no force on earth can undermine the militant friendship
between the Chinese people and the great African peoplk
and that the above-mentioned wicked tactics, far from
deceiving anyone, only reveal the deplorable position of
their authors and their increasing decline and helplessness.

114. The report on Botswana [ibid.] that the SecretaryGeneral submitted to us yesterday is a document which
provides objective coverage of the main aspects of the
multifarious assistance to which the people of Botswana is
entitled, within the framework of the United Nations, to
deal more effectively and courageously with the difficult
conditions of temporary cohabitation with the racist
oppressors of the heroic people of Zimbabwe.

106. The Chinese delegation once again solemnly declares
that the Chinese Government has not entered into, and will
never enter into, any direct or indirect political, economic,
trade and other contacts with the South African racist
regime. The Chinese Government and people will, as
always, firmly support the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia
and Azania in their just struggle against racism and for
national liberation until they win complete victory.

115. The States Members of the United Nations must
work sincerely to raise the necessary funds for assistance to
Botswana. My delegation warmly welcomes the proposal of
the Secretary-General that a meeting of possible donors be
convened on 6 June 1977 [2006th meeting, paru. 161. My
delegation would like to state here that the generous
participation of Member States in raising these necessary
funds will contribute to the attainment of the ideals of
peace, justice and sovereignty proclaimed in the Charter.

107. The Chinese delegation considers that the Security
Council should strongly condemn the racist regimes of
Southern Rhodesia and South Africa for their criminal acts
of aggression against the independent African States and
give firm support to Botswana, Zambia and other independent States of southern Africa and their peoples in their
just struggle against colonialism and racism.

116. I shall now revert to my capacity as PRESIDENT of
the Council. If no representative wishes to speak at this
stage, may I take it that the Council is prepared’ to take a
decision on the draft resolution in document S/12334,
submitted by Benin, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama, Romania and Venezuela? It
seems that members of the Council can take a decision
without a vote. If that is the case, and if there are no
objections, I shall take it that the draft resolution is
adopted unanimously, without a vote.

108. The Chinese delegation has studied the report on
assistance to Botswana [see S/12307] submitted by the
Secretary-General in pursuance of the relevant Security
Council resolution, and we hold that the United Nations
should give energetic support and assistance to the just
struggle of the people of Botswana by every possible means.
Based on the above-mentioned position, the Chinese delegation has decided to support the draft resolution sponsored by Benin and seven other countries, as contained in
document S/12334.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 1

109. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): As
there are no other names on the list of speakers, I should
now like to speak as representative of BENIN.

1 Seeresolution 406 (1977).
9

117. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Minister for External Affairs of Botswana has expressed a
desire to address the Council at this stage. I now call on
him.
118. Mr. MOGWE (Botswana): Once again I thank you,
Mr. President, and the Security Council collectively for
welcoming us here and allowing us to participate in the
consideration of the question which has just been concluded. We thank members individually for their profound

appreciation of my country’s economic circumstances and
its immediate security problems as well as the future
uncertainties resulting from the acts of aggression carried
out against my country. We are encouraged by the
expressed readiness of various delegations to study the
report before the Council with a view to seeing how best to
assist Botswana. With those few words, I repeat my thanks
to the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.
