S/2003/1188

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 December 2003
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 18 December 2003 from the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa addressed to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the report on
the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group.

03-67090 (E)

291203

*
0
3
6
7
0
9
0
*

S/2003/1188

Letter dated 18 December 2003 from the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
addressed to the President of the Security Council
On behalf of the Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, I have the honour to submit herewith the report
on the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group (see annex).
I would appreciate it if the present letter and its annex could be circulated
among the members of the Security Council and issued as a document of the
Council.
(Signed) Ismael A. Gaspar Martins
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group

2

S/2003/1188

Annex to the letter dated 18 December 2003 from the Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa addressed to the President of the Security Council
Report on the activities of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa
Introduction
The programme of work of the Ad Hoc Working Group, as established by the
Angolan chairmanship for the period under review, was based on the following:
(a) Recommendations emanating from the public meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in Africa held on 29 January 2002;
(b) Proposals made by the Ad Hoc Working Group under the chairmanship
of Mauritius, contained in documents S/2002/979 and S/2002/1352;
(c) The terms of reference for the Ad Hoc Working Group, contained in
document S/2002/207.

Mandate
Council members may recall the following mandate entrusted to the Ad Hoc
Working Group under the terms of reference contained in document S/2002/207:
(a) To monitor the implementation of recommendations contained in
S/PRST/2002/2 and previous presidential statements and resolutions regarding
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa;
(b) To propose recommendations on the enhancement of cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council, as well as with
other United Nations agencies dealing with conflicts;
(c) To examine, in particular, regional and cross-conflict issues that affect
the Council’s work on African conflict prevention and resolution;
(d) To propose recommendations to the Security Council to enhance
cooperation in conflict prevention and resolution between the United Nations and
the African Union and subregional organizations.

Main activities carried out by the Ad Hoc Working Group
In conformity with the timetable for action established in April 2003, the
activities set out by the Ad Hoc Working Group focused on achieving the following
broad objectives:
(a) Enhancing cooperation between the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council;
(b) Promoting confidence-building in the regions of Africa affected by
conflicts;

3

S/2003/1188

(c) Enhancing the role of the Security Council in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in Africa;
(d) Enhancing cooperation with the African Union as well as with
subregional organizations in Africa.
Cooperation between the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
In the framework of the cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, the Ad Hoc Working Group ensured that the question
of Guinea-Bissau was kept under active review on both the agenda of the Working
Group and that of the Security Council, in implementation of the recommendations
of the Working Group contained in document S/2002/979.
In that connection, the Ad Hoc Working Group enhanced its working
relationship and coordination with the Economic and Social Council Advisory
Group on Guinea-Bissau, under the chairmanship of South Africa. In the same vein,
the Working Group also established a relationship and coordinated efforts with the
newly established Economic and Social Council Advisory Group on Burundi,
chaired by South Africa.
Accordingly, the Ad Hoc Working Group held two joint meetings with the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau and the group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau
(chaired by the Gambia), prior to two Security Council meetings held on GuineaBissau. David Stephen, Representative of the Secretary-General and Chief of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, and Alberic Kacou,
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Guinea-Bissau, participated in those
meetings.
The Ad Hoc Working Group’s consistent position on the question of GuineaBissau was the need for that country to restore constitutional order through the
organization of legislative elections and the need at the same time for the
international community to take urgent steps to invest in the electoral process in
Guinea-Bissau.
This position was a reaffirmation of the Economic and Social Councilendorsed partnership approach, as set out by its Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau,
on the basis of which the international community was expected to provide
emergency assistance to the country, and in return the authorities would take
measures to promote the rule of law and ensure political stability.
The Permanent Representative of Angola, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Working Group, or his designated representative, participated in meetings
and videoconferences with representatives of the Bretton Woods institutions
organized by the Economic and Social Council Advisory Group;
Under the Angolan presidency of the Security Council for November, the Ad
Hoc Working Group was instrumental in the convening of a private meeting of the
Council on Guinea-Bissau on 18 November 2003. An important delegation led by
the President of Guinea-Bissau, Henrique Pereira Rosa, addressed the Council as
João Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for External Relations of Angola, presided.
The above-mentioned efforts of the Ad Hoc Working Group found expression
in the following statement by the Secretary-General in his recent report on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations Peace-

4

S/2003/1188

building Support Office “I am encouraged by the work undertaken by the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa of the Security
Council, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau of the Economic and Social
Council and the group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau” (S/2003/1157, para. 30).
The Ad Hoc Working Group has consistently advocated that current
experiences in cooperation in the case of Guinea-Bissau between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council should be extended to other postconflict situations. In this connection, the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group
was invited by the President of the Economic and Social Council to participate in a
mission to Burundi from 18 to 25 November 2003. The Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Working Group designated a representative to take part in the mission.
Security Council missions to Africa
In accordance with the Ad Hoc Working Group’s proposals for regular
interaction between the Security Council and countries and subregions of Africa,
aimed at exploring approaches to finding durable solutions to conflict situations, as
well as promoting peace-building and addressing the post-conflict reconstruction
and rehabilitation needs of those countries and regions, the Ad Hoc Working Group
contributed to the decisions of the Security Council to undertake missions and was
actively involved in the preparations for the Security Council mission undertaken
during the period under review to the Central African region, in June 2003, as well
as the joint mission of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council to
Guinea-Bissau from 26 to 28 June 2003.
Conflict prevention and resolution
The agenda of the Ad Hoc Working Group for the period under review
continued to stress the need for the Security Council and the wider international
community to give further impetus to the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by enhancing the role of the United Nations and encouraging the
parties to comply with their commitments.
In that regard, the Ad Hoc Working Group held a meeting in April 2003 to
consider the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The meeting
stressed the need for a firm and constant commitment of the Security Council to
prevent the events in the Ituri region from having an adverse impact on the progress
already made in the peace process. The meeting also observed that the international
community could also play an enhanced and constructive role through the follow-up
Committee of the Sun City Agreement. The Council should therefore be prepared, if
the need arises, to assist the follow-up Committee, composed of the resident
ambassadors to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and representatives of the
permanent members of the Council, as well as those of Angola, Zambia, South
Africa, Mozambique, Canada and Belgium.
On 30 May 2003, under the Pakistani presidency, the Security Council held a
wrap-up meeting on the subject “Conflicts in Africa: Security Council missions and
United Nations mechanisms to promote peace and security”. The Permanent
Representative of Angola addressed the meeting in his capacity as Chairman of the
Ad Hoc Working Group. Speaking on behalf of the Group, he underscored that the
ad hoc working groups, if properly used, could be important tools in promoting
peace and addressing the crises that afflict the African continent. This could be

5

S/2003/1188

made possible only if the work of the working groups were further enhanced by
rendering their recommendations more pertinent to the work of the Security
Council. He further indicated that working groups should consider establishing
mechanisms for cooperation and coordination with sanctions committees, because
experiences in Angola had shown that the imposition of sanctions had been an
important tool in guaranteeing compliance with internationally accepted norms and
resolving conflicts. The working groups should also make their recommendations
more action-friendly for the United Nations system. Their effectiveness would
depend on their capacity to focus on concrete situations, mobilize international
support and provide advice and support for a timely response.
As reflected in the timetable for action, the matter of an international
conference on peace, security, democracy and development in the African Great
Lakes region was given due attention by the Security Council through the
convening, on 20 November 2003, of a public briefing on the preparations for the
international conference. Following that public meeting, the Ad Hoc Working Group
convened a meeting with a cross-section of representatives of non-members of the
Security Council. The participants had an interactive debate with Ibrahima Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region and Keli
Walubita, Special Envoy of the African Union Commission for the same region.
Final remarks were made by Francisco Madeira, Minister of the Presidency for
Parliamentary and Diplomatic Issues of Mozambique, representing the Presidency of
the African Union.
The meeting was aimed at exchanging views and seeking clarification on
various aspects of the preparatory processes for the conference, as well as
mobilizing the international community for assistance for the conference. There was
broad agreement that the assistance of the international community was pivotal for
the overall success of the conference.
Cooperation between the United Nations and African Union and
subregional organizations
In conformity with its mandate, the Ad Hoc Working Group undertook actions
to enhance cooperation in conflict prevention and resolution between the United
Nations and the African Union and subregional organizations.
In that connection, the Permanent Observer Mission of the African Union in
New York was consulted on and participated in the meetings of the Group. The
chairmanship undertook contacts in February with the Political Department of the
African Union Commission and the Central Organ of the African Union Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, in Addis Ababa.
During those contacts, the chairmanship held meetings with Sam Ibok, African
Union Director for Peace and Security, and Ki-Doulaye, acting Head of the African
Union Conflict Management Centre. Both expressed the readiness of the African
Union to work closely with the Group and the Security Council on all African
issues. The indicative work programme on peace and security issues in Africa
established for the Central Organ and the Commission of the African Union for the
period 2002-2003 was circulated among the members of the Group.

6

S/2003/1188

With respect to the Ad Hoc Working Group’s interaction with subregional
organizations, the Group intends to organize a Security Council meeting on the
importance of the cooperation between the United Nations and existing peace and
security mechanisms of African subregional organization, with a view to developing
integrated approaches to conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building. The
Group also intends to give greater attention to the issue of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or resettlement, which remains
pending as part of the Group’s timetable for action.

7
