UVITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

‘,

MEETING:

NEW

,

I:

th
17 NOVEMBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l557)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I...

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . , . . . , . . . . . , , , . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . , , . . . 1
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 6 November 1970 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the Permanent Representatives of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra
Leone, Syria and Zambia to the United Nations (S/9975/Rev. 1);
(b) Third report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/9844 and Corr. 1 and 2 and Add. 1 and Corr. 1 and
Add.2 and Corr. 1, 2 and 3 and Add.3). . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

S/PV. 1557

-.._-,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with$gures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTY-SEVENTH

Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 November
President : Mr. George J. TOMEH

(Syria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l557)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.
concerning the situation

Question
in Southern
Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 6 November 1970 addressed to
the President of the Security Council by the
Permanent
Representatives
of Burundi,
Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia to the
United Nations (S/9975/Rev. 1);
(b) Third report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253
(1968) (S/9844 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1
and Corr.1 and Add.2 and Corr.1, 2 and 3
and Add.3).

Adoption of the agenda
The ngenda

MUZSadopted.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 November 1970 addressed to
the President of the Security Council by the
Permanent Representatives of Burundi, Nepal,
Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia to the United
Nations @/9975/Rev.l);
Third report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253
(1968) (S/9844 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1
and Corr.1 and Add.2 and Corr.1, 2 and 3
and Add.3)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jbm French):
During

the consultations which have been taking place
the last meeting of the Security Council a draft
resoiution has been prepared; it is contained in document S/9980. This text appears to have the support
Of all members of the Council. However, during the
consultations
which I have held with members of the
Council concerning this draft resolution, the French
delegation
repeated the reservations it expressed at
the 1556th meeting, when the Council discussed the
same question. That delegation has nevertheless
since

MEETING
1970, at 3 p.m.

associated itself with the consensus which has emerged
in favour of the adoption of the draft resolution.
2.

The text of the draft resolution reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Having

considered the question

of Southern

Rhodesia,
“Reaf$rming its resolutions 216 (1965) of 12
November 1965, 217 (1965) of 20 November 1965,
221 (1966) of 9 April 1966,232 (1966) of 16 December
1966, 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968 and 277 (1970) of
18 March 1970,

“Grllvely concerned that certain States have not
complied with the provisions of resolutions 232
(1966), 253 (1968) and 277 (1970), contrary to their
obligations under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations,
‘LReaffirming the primary responsibility
of the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to enable the people of Southern Rhodesia to achieve self-determination
and
independence, and in particular their responsibility
of bringing the illegal declaration of independence
to an end,
“Taking into account the report of the Committee
established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968),

in accordance with previous decisions of
the Security Council on Southern Rhodesia, taken
under Chapter VII of the Charter,
“Acting

“I.

Reaffirnzs its condemnation

declaration

of the illegal
of independence in Southern Rhodesia;

“2. Calls upon the United ‘Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering
Power in the discharge of its responsibility, to take
urgent and effective measures to bring to an end
the illegal rebellion in Southern Rhodesia and enable
the people to exercise their right to selfdetermination, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and in conformity with the objectives
of. General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960;
“3. Decides that the present sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia shall remain in force;

.-

“4. Urges all States to fully implement all Security Council resolutions pertaining
to Southern
Rhodesia, in accordance with their obligations under
Article 2.5 of the Charter, and deplores the attitude
of those States which have persisted in giving moral,
political
and economic assistance to the illegal
rCgime;

to do. In a new operative paragraph it affirms the con.
demnation of the Security Council of the illegal dec]ma.
tion of independence in Southern Rhodesia, In para.
graph 2 the Security Council:
“Calls upon the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland as the administering power
in discharge of its responsibility to take urgent and
effective measures to bring to an end the illegal
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia and enable the people
to exercise their right to self-determination
in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and in conformity with the objedtives of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960.”

“5. Further urges all States, in furtherance of
the objectives of the Security Council, not to grant
any form of recognition to the illegal rhgime in Southern Rhodesia;
“6. Decides to remain
matter.”

actively

seized of the

3. As no representative has asked for the floor, we
shall proceed immediately to the vote on the draft
resolution S/9980.

9. My delegation is not entirely satisfied with the last
preambular paragraph, which contains vacillating and
tendentious wording. We would have preferred a
direct, simple paragraph such as the one contained
in document S/9976 and in every resolution adopted
by the Security Council since 16 December 1966.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
I ~

~

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.’

10. By resolution 232 (1966) the Security Council
determined that the situation in Southern Rhodesia
constituted a threat to international peace and security,
and took certain measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter. Since that time the situation has not improved;
on the contrary, it has visibly worsened. In so far as
the Security Council has seen fit to take those
measures, the question of Southern Rhodesia becomes
a matter of world concern and, above all, a matter
of shared responsibility-the
United Kingdom, as the
administering Power, naturally sharing a substantial
measure of that responsibility. In that light my delegation does not see any contradiction in saying that the
administering Power bears primary responsibility in
the matter and at the same time urging that Power
to take certain measures to meet that responsibility.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I shall now give the floor to delegations wishing to
explain their vote.
5. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): We voted in favour
.of the draft resolution contained in document S/9980
because it basically reaffirms all the previous Security
Council resolutions on this question. We must of course
register our bitter disappointment
that the Secirrity
Council has not been able to pronounce itself on the
question of no independence before majority rule.

1

6. It is a matter for regret that the Government of
the United Kingdom saw fit to veto the resolution
which would have met this important objective, despite
the positive votes of twelve other delegations. The
use of the veto on matters concerning .white minority
rCgimes in southern Africa only serves to encourage
those repressive rCgimes to continue defying world
opinion. The Western countries must surely decide
who their fi-iends are and who their enemies are. It
will only hurt their economic and political interest in
Africa in the future if they continue to pay lip service
to freedom and independence by such cheap and painless demonstrations of sympathy through the reckless
use of the veto.

11. My delegation further considers that, in so far
as the Security Council is acting in this case in discharge
of its supreme responsibility in terms of Chapter VII
of the Charter, it is hardly proper to say that the manner
in which the settlement is to be made will be determined
solely.at the apsolute discretion of a particular national
authority. In the light of the Council’s consideration
of the matter sin’ce November 1965, and in particular
since the adoption of resolution 232 (1966), it is SO
patently a matter of world concern that the Security
Council is under an obligation to take or prescribe
measures, as appropriate and necessary, for the resolution of the problem. The Security Council is dutybound, furthermore, to see that the settlement of the
problem does in fact conform to the objectives it has
itself laid down. And what are those objectives? The
immediate concern is, of course, the overthrow of the
illegal racist rCgime. But this is only a means to a*
end. Our aim is the full and effective application Of
the principles of self-determination
of peoples in
accordance with the Charter and, more specifically,
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV). In every substantive resolution adopted hy the
Security Council subsequent to the illegal declaration
of independence we find this objective stated and re-

7. Above all, the resolution we have just adopted
will-in our opinion merely serve to supplement the
armed struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, and it is
on this understanding that we have just cast our vote
in favour of this draft resolution.
8. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepal): My,delegation
has cast its
vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in document S/9980. Following useful suggestions made at: our
last meeting, this resolution takes note of the third
report of the Sanctions Committee in its fifth preambular paragraph, something the earlier draft had failed
’ See resolution 288 (1970).

2

stated. There is no dispute as to this overriding concern
of the Security Council, In that sense I still feel that
the draft resolution defeated last Tuesday [1556th
meelirzg] should have given rise to no controversy.

question of negotiating with an armed rebellion, a
course of action which has, moreover, failed before.
Secondly, we fail to see how the British position of
principle represented in these words “democratic government, majority rule, self-determination and racial
equality” could conceivably be reconciled with the
position of ‘principle adopted by the illegal regime
whose leader vows that he will not sink to the degeneracy of the democratic principle of counting heads,
and that he will retain Western civilization in Southern
Rhodesia by stemming the tide of rampant black
nationalism along the Zambezi. From the point of view
of the Security Council, the Council will obviously
not be in a position to give its blessing to any settlement
which does not correspond to the aim it has set, without
betraying the interests of the people of Southern
Rhodesia.

12. The representative of France agreed with the substance of that draft resolution, and, according to the
representative of the United States, the aim of the
Council and of each of its members was selfdetermination and majority rule in Southern Rhodesia.
13. Lord Caradon, the former British representative,
assured the Council again and again that as far as the
British Government was concerned there would be no
betrayal of African interests, that any settlement which
would be arrived at had to be acceptable to the people
of Rhodesia as a whole, and that his Government had
no intention of abandoning the fundamental principles
of democratic
government,
majority
rule, selfdetermination
and racial equality. At the 1475th meeting on 13 June 1969 Lord Caradon proclaimed the
pledge of the British Government to the Security Council and the people of Southern Rhodesia in the following
words:

17. The people of Southern Rhodesia have long lived
with the colonial situation; they have been living with
the racist minority rkgime and they will probably live
with’any settlement that is reached, but the question
remains: will they be satisfied with anything less than
the total application
of the principles
of selfdetermination,
majority rule and racial equality?

“Of all the principles which have been stated and
confirmed in the long consideration of this matter,
the principle I have always thought most important
is the principle that no settlement can be accepted
which is not approved by the people of Rhodesia
as a whole. In the words of my Government, that
principle is ‘transcendent and overriding’ “.

18. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): My delegation supported the consensus resolution that we have
just adopted. As has been pointed out, the resolution
is a reiteration of the views already expressed and the
measures already decided by the Council. Some of
us may ask ourselves whether such a move is particularly constructive or necessary at this time.
However, the present resolution, unlike its predecessor, does take account of the position of my
Government which, as I explained when the Council
last met on 10 November, is that we cannot accept
any fresh commitment in the Security Council which
would restrict the United Kingdom Government in its
attempts to discharge its responsibility for Rhodesia.
We have therefore been glad to be able to support
the present resolution.

14. Sir Colin Crowe also stated at our last meeting
that one of the five principles2 concerning the settlement of the Rhodesian problem was that any such settlement must be acceptable to the people of Southern
Rhodesia as a whole.
15. For the same reasons for which we supported
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution contained in document S/9976, we support paragraph 2 of the present
resolution. The administering Power has assumed and
continues to accept an obligation, and, if words have
any meaning, that obligation is the granting of independence to Southern Rhodesia .in conditions acceptable
to the people of that territory. Like the previous draft
resolution, the present resolution does not seek to bind
the administering Power to the “how” and the “when”
Of a settlement; nor does it ask the British Government
to follow
a new or a particular course of action. It
states an obligation already stated and re-stated. That
is what the previous resolution had intended to do,
only in clearer terms.

19. Mr.

’ See Rhodesin:

Proposals

for

a Settlement-1966

(Burundi)

(intap~etatiolz

from

to the representatives of the United States and France
for the understanding they showed a week ago. My
thanks are especially relevant today because the statemeet by the Ambassador of France, Mr. KosciuskoMorizet, and the position of the United States have
shown that, little by little, they have left the position
taken by the United Kingdom on the problem of
Rhodesia, although it is true that they have not gone
as far as they could go.

16. My delegation appreciates that the administering
Power seeks to keep open its options of negotiation
vis-&.-vis the illegal minority rkgime. But we feel that
in the eyes of the world, particularly in the eyes of
the vast majority of the States Members of the United
Nations, the question of negotiations with the Smith
regime gives rise to certain misgivings. First, it is a
Majesty’s Stationery Office, Cmnd.3159).

TERENCE

French): I should like once again to express our thanks

20. We certainly hope that they will continue to move
in the direction of justice and human rights.
21. In extending my thanks, I can certainly not overlook all the other delegations that stood by us a week
ago in our efforts to bring about the triumph of justice.
I should have liked to mention everyone’s name, but
even though I will not do so, I trust all governments
and representatives will remain assured that they have
earned our gratitude.

(London, Her

3

22. The delegation of Burundi would like to make
a few additional comments. The situation which arose
a week ago served two objectives: first, the triumph
of human rights by virtue of the adoption of the draft
resolution which encountered a technical obstruction,
as it were; and secondly, the Security Council was
able to gauge the intentions and designs of the Conservative Government. For these reasons we feel that
last week’s meeting was a success.

no knowledge of the nature and the subject of those
talks.
27. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): My delegation already had
an opportunity, at the last metting of the Security
Council, to state its position and views on the substance
of the matter under discussion-the situation in Southern Rhodesia. The factors responsible for the further
deterioration of the situation in southern Africa, the
consolidation of the racist rCgime and the subjugation
of the Zimbabwe people have been identified and analysed. It was stressed in particular that on their own,
without external support, the Southern Rhodesian
racists would not be capable of withstanding the whirlwind of the national liberation movement of the peoples
of Africa or of challenging and ignoring its decisions.
The Smith rCgime is holding out precisely because of
the support it receives from its influential friends and
protectors, even here in the United Nations system.
Their connivance with this racist rCgime was particularly obvious at the Council’s last meeting when
a vote was taken on the draft resolution submitted
by five Afro-Asian States.

23. As regards the resolution just adopted, paragraph
2 makes a clear reference to the rights of the Zimbabwe
people. We should like to issue a warning to the delegation of the United Kingdom not to shirk its responsibility if a handful of men endeavour to seize power in
the present circumstances or in similar circumstances
in the future. Paragraph 2 then reaffirms the responsibility of the Government in London to accord independence as soon as possible to the Zimbabwe people
in accordance with the principles and ideals set forth
in the Charter.
24. With the passage of time, world public opinion
seems to have proven that the United Kingdom has
been right in one respect, no Government, not even
those of South Africa or Portugal, has formally recognized the Government
of Ian Smith, However, we
deplore the position of the United Kingdom. Instead
of seizing this fine opportunity to put an end to this
rebellion-which
may be called a rebellion officially
but which perhaps is encouraged by certain British
circles-the
United Kingdom has been satisfied with
timid secret moves in accordance with the diktnt of
Ian Smith, who judging from the position of the Conservative Government vis-8-vis the usurpers of power,
has been the beneficiary of a hands-off policy. He can
do precisely what he pleases, whereas in the normal
course of events the Government in London should
impose its will on Ian Smith.

The sponsors of that draft resolution have today
made statements strongly condemning those who
blocked its adoption. For the second time within a
year-and a year which marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations-the
world
and all the Members of the United Nations have seen
certain permanent members of the Security Council
give direct support within the United Nations to the
Southern Rhodesian racist rCgime.
28.

29. Such a situation can do nothing to strengthen the
United Nations or to enhance its effectiveness. It can
only undermine the faith in the United Nations of the
peoples of Africa and of the whole world. This serious
event in the life and hisiory of the United Nations
cannot be passed over or ignored.

25. It is really rather surprising to see the way the
United Kingdom views reality. When democracy and
human rights are at issue in the United Kingdom, those
principles are praised and upheld to the greatest extent
possible; but if the same principles are flouted and
if it is required of the Conservative Government that
the same principles be made a reality for Africans,
they no longer seem to have the same importance.
They are no longer called human rights and it is no
longer a question of democracy.

30. The deep concern felt by African States and all
other States and their peoples about the situation in
Southern Rhodesia was also reflected in the new draft
resolution submitted for our consideration by the President of the Security Council. Particular mention should
be made of the active part played by our President
in the drafting of this resolution. The text is extremely
clear. It reaffirms the Council’s condemnation of the
illegal declaration
of independence in Southern
Rhodesia and calls upon the United Kingdom as the
administering Power to discharge its responsibilities,
not to shirk those responsibilities and to take urgent
measures to bring to an’ end the illegal rebellion of
the racist rCgime in Southern Rhodesia, which has
established a reign of terror and is oppressing the. overmajority
of the indigenous
African
whelming
population.

26. Finally, the Security Council has every right to
stress the responsibility of the United Kingdom. There
is still plenty of time to act and act appropriately, but
constant procrastination
is very likely to lead us to
an impasse which will be of benefit neither to the
administering Power nor to the Conservative Government. It may well in fact be of benefit to the Zimbabwe
people and to those who are in prison in the country
now. We had hoped that the United Kingdom would
make some sort of gesture to do something about the
plight of those prisoners but nothing has been done
to date; there has been nothing but talk. As I said
the other day, those who are most concerned have

31, This resolution reaffirms decisions taken earlier
by the Council, including the sanctions decision. An
important and positive provision of the resolution
which has been adopted is the one in which the Council
deplores the attitude of those States which have Persisted in giving assistance to this terrorist racist rkgime.
4

33. In view of all these considerations, my delegation
voted in favour of the draft resolution.
34. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Since no other representative wishes to speak, I take
it that our consideration of this agenda item is completed. However, the Council remains seized of the
question itself, in conformity with the provisions of
the resolution.

32. It is admittedly true that, for the reasons I have
explained, the draft does not contain any elements
which do not appear in earlier decisions of the Security
Council. Nevertheless, the fact that the earlier draft
resolution and even such a draft as this were introduced
by agreement among the sponsors shows that the AfroAsian States do not intend to resign themselves to the
situation in Southern Rhodesiaor to accept the domination of a racist regime there.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
tar United Nations,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUELICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

thrwghout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unios sont en vente dans les libroities
et ICI ogences
dCporitoire.s
du monde entier.
Infarmez-vous
o~lpr&s de votre llbrairie
ou adressez-vous
b:
Notions
Unies, Section
des ventes,
New York ou Gen&ve.
KAK

fIOIlY’1MTb

M3AAHMfl

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLlCACtONES

OPTAHMBA~MM

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publlcocioncs
de las Nacioner
Unidas estbn
en todos parles del mundo.
Consultc
o su librero
Ventos.
Nueva York o Ginebro.

Litho in United

Nations.

New

York

Price: W.S.

OFabEAHHEHHblX

0.50 (or equivalent

HAl(HiI

UNIDAS

en venta en librsrlas
y cosas distribuidoros
o dirtjose
a: Nocioncs
Unidor,
Secci6n

in other currencies)

de
