S/PV.9014

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9014th meeting

Monday, 11 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Mr. Kariuki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Moe
Mr. Varganov
Ms. Al Amiri
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Implementation of resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31406 (E)
*2231406*

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

However, that figure is only 11 per cent in lowincome countries. A total of 83 per cent of the population
in WHO’s Africa region and 51 per cent in its eastern
Mediterranean region, which includes Afghanistan,
remain unvaccinated. In 2022 we must take the rapid
action needed to accelerate vaccination. The window
of opportunity is gradually closing. We risk losing the
momentum and failing on vaccine equity.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Implementation of resolutions 2532 (2020)
and 2565 (2021)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Ted Chaiban, Global Lead Coordinator for
COVID-19 Vaccine Country Readiness and Delivery;
Ms. Esperanza Martinez, Senior Adviser to the Office
of the Director-General of the International Committee
of the Red Cross; and Mr. Emmanuel Ojwang, Health
and Nutrition Coordinator, CARE South Sudan.
Mr. Chaiban, Ms. Martinez and Mr.. Ojwang are
joining via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Chaiban.
Mr. Chaiban: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Council today. We
congratulate the United Kingdom on its presidency
and appreciate convening with the United Arab
Emirates and other Council members to recognize the
importance of accelerating progress in coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) vaccination as a key milestone
towards ending the pandemic.
Slightly more than 1 million cases of COVID-19
were reported to the World Health Organization (WHO)
in the past 24 hours. The pandemic is still far from over.
We have safe and available vaccines that can protect
against death and severe illness caused by COVID-19
and help avoid the next variant. There is an urgency,
with more than 6 million lives having been lost to date,
to raise COVID-19 vaccination rates in countries that
did not have that opportunity in 2021.
The next six months are critical. More than
11.1 billion doses of COVID-19 vaccines have been
administered globally, and 124 of the 194 WHO member
States have vaccinated more than 40 per cent of their
population; 51 countries have reached more than 70 per
cent of their population.
2/22

11/04/2022

The COVID-19 vaccine delivery partnership is
focused, among other things, on 34 countries that were
at 10 per cent or less of full vaccine coverage and face
the biggest challenges to increasing such coverage. The
goal is to vaccinate all adults and adolescents, starting
with the elderly, health-care and other front-line
workers, and those with underlying health conditions,
who are at the highest risk from COVID-19.
Nineteen of the 34 countries identified for
concerted support by the delivery partnership are
included in the global humanitarian overview for
2022. We know that there are many competing
health, humanitarian and economic priorities in those
countries. We must therefore use every opportunity to
bundle or integrate COVID-19 vaccination with other
health and humanitarian interventions and leverage
those investments for the longer-term strengthening of
health-care systems.
In many countries, COVID-19 vaccination is being
integrated with measles campaigns and, in complement,
with maternal health and routine immunization.
COVID-19 vaccination is being used to strengthen the
cold chain and health-management information systems
and to train and provide incentives to health workers,
including the surge required.
With strong political leadership, country
coordination and planning, and the implementation
of mass vaccination campaigns, countries can quickly
pick up their vaccination rates and coverage. Since
January, the number of countries with a full population
vaccination coverage rate at or below 10 per cent
has dropped from 34 to 18. We have just wrapped
up a mission in Ethiopia where the campaign rounds
have increased vaccination coverage from 4 per cent
in January to slightly more than 20 per cent now,
including in some of the conflict-affected areas. We
have agreed to bundle COVID-19 vaccination efforts
with an upcoming measles campaign and to focus on
the vaccination of internally displaced persons using
the single-dose Johnson & Johnson vaccine.
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

In the Central African Republic, strong community
engagement through focus-group discussions, television
and radio spots with leaders and influencers, and young
people being mobilized has led to almost 19 per cent
of the population being vaccinated. I am speaking to
the Council now from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where this week we will be meeting with the
Government and key partners to better address the
urgent needs regarding and bottlenecks to expanding
vaccination coverage across this country of nearly
100 million people.
We know that risk communications and community
engagement are key components to success. We will
therefore be working with in-country partners to
support clear communications to increase demand and
work to improve convenient access to vaccinations.
In humanitarian settings, from Afghanistan to
Yemen, addressing low vaccination coverage rates
requires integrating campaigns with humanitarian
priorities, working with humanitarian partners and
a sustained country-by-country effort to identify
and overcome the primary obstacles to increasing
vaccination rates among the populations affected by
natural disasters, conflict and socioeconomic instability.
We recognize the significance of the humanitarian
buffer, a mechanism established within the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility to ensure
access to COVID-19 vaccines for high-risk and
vulnerable populations living in humanitarian
settings. As of today, two applicants — the Ministries
of Health of Iran and Uganda — have successfully
received vaccine doses via the humanitarian buffer,
but the partners are committed to making sure it is a
more user-friendly, easily accessible mechanism and
that populations that are affected by humanitarian
settings not included in national vaccination plans,
microplanning or the implementation process can
equally benefit from vaccination.
The COVID-19 vaccine delivery partnership and
partners, such as UNICEF, the World Health Organization
Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, the
World Bank and others, provide concerted support to
all these countries, mobilizing political engagement,
providing flexible funding — $21 million in the past
few months — strategic advice and technical assistance
and lining up partners behind one country team, one
plan and one budget to put countries at the centre and
reduce their transaction costs.

S/PV.9014

To address the significant vaccine equity gap that
continues to pose a threat to global health security, I
ask members to consider the following requests.
First, we call for continued strong support and
actions to implement resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565
(2021), with a particular focus on ensuring that countries
continue to prioritize COVID-19 vaccinations.
Secondly, with appreciation for the $4.8 billion
in pledges made at the COVAX Advance Market
Commitment Summit, co-hosted with Germany, we
must turn these commitments into tangible support for
lower income countries with COVID-19 vaccination
needs and a priority on a delivery system. Flexible,
agile funding is vital, and these investments can last
beyond the pandemic.
Thirdly, we ask that they advocate for and help
guarantee full, safe and unhindered access, in line
with international humanitarian law, including
protecting humanitarian corridors as a means to
getting vital supplies of vaccines and other essential
equipment for the delivery of COVID-19 vaccination to
populations in need, and ensuring the safety of health
and humanitarian personnel administering vaccines in
humanitarian settings.
Fourthly, we ask that they advocate across
Government and work with United Nations country
teams and partners to ensure strong national vaccination
planning that addresses the needs of all populations
living within the national territory, regardless of
nationality, migration or refugee status.
Fifthly, we ask that they engage in the important
conversations on the global health emergency
architecture and advocate for strong governance and
investment in the basics of primary health care as a key
element of future pandemic preparedness.
The President: I thank Mr. Chaiban for his briefing,
in particular as he is joining us from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Martinez.
Ms. Martinez: I thank Council members for the
opportunity to address them today and the United
Kingdom for the spotlight it has shone on the importance
of vaccination in conflict settings, through resolution
2565 (2021), as well as for continuing the Council’s
focus on what needs to be done.

22-314063/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

As Mr. Chaiban just said, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) has killed more than 6 million people
globally, with the number probably much higher, as these
are only the official reported statistics. The successes
in the development and production of vaccines mean
that many countries are starting to regain a sense of
normalcy. However, to end the pandemic, vaccination
needs to occur everywhere and that is not the case in
conflict-affected areas.
Health systems torn apart by conflict are less able
to contain the spread of diseases across front lines and
international borders. Vaccination and other health
activities in such contexts are incredibly difficult
to carry out. Furthermore, many people in conflict
settings are overlooked in public health responses,
including people who have been displaced or detained
or are living in areas controlled by non-State armed
groups. Moreover, in areas affected by armed conflict,
COVID-19 is now the most pressing issue people
face, as the most basic needs, such as food, water and
shelter, are often not covered. Even if the health system
continues to function, its focus turns from general
health care, including vaccination, to treating warwounded patients and keeping the core of the system
functioning. That can happen in any conflict setting.
The good news is that as the supply of vaccine
doses grows, the potential to get jabs in arms grows too.
To achieve that in conflict settings, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) presents three asks
to the Council, States Members of the United Nations
and conflict-affected countries.
First, they must ensure that international
humanitarian law is respected. Under international
humanitarian law, hospitals and other medical
facilities, as well as medical personnel, including those
administering vaccines, are specifically protected from
attacks, and where States cannot meet the basic needs
of populations, they must allow impartial humanitarian
organizations to conduct health activities, including
vaccination. Those obligations are reaffirmed in
resolution 2565 (2021). We call on all parties to conflict
to implement them in good faith, as attacks on health
care have a profound effect on people’s lives and futures.
Secondly, it is important to integrate COVID-19
vaccinations into a broader health strategy and, in
tandem, strengthen the health system. We have seen
vaccines expire on airport tarmacs in Afghanistan,
Nigeria, South Sudan and several other places. Some of
4/22

11/04/2022

those vaccines were wasted because they arrived with
expiration dates that were too short. Others were wasted
because the health systems of receiving countries were
not ready to distribute them. Countries need a degree of
capacity to deliver vaccines.
The COVID-19 pandemic offers an opportunity to
strengthen health systems in conflict-affected countries.
We need to consider how COVID-19 vaccinations can
be routinized, where possible, and integrated with
other health services that are prioritized during times
of conflict. That does not mean that we have to do
everything, but we must invest in country preparedness
and fortify the building blocks of the health system that
support immunizations and which, in turn, support the
response to other pre-existing health needs. Critically,
this investment can help address renewed outbreaks
of other highly contagious and lethal diseases that are
occurring today, for example, measles in Afghanistan
and polio in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
One strategy for addressing that is to invest in
developing health workers’ capacities and skill sets,
as well as improving the key components of service
delivery, such as local supply chains and infrastructure.
That is both critical and doable in contexts affected by
armed conflict. For example, the ICRC supported more
than 600 health facilities in Iraq in 2021, which allowed
the administration of more than 14 million doses of
COVID-19 vaccines.
Thirdly, we must involve the community in
vaccination activities and adequately resource
community engagement. Done well, effective
community engagement is a force multiplier. It
enhances the safety of front-line health workers and
expands the reach of vaccination and other health
efforts. Community involvement allows the community
to identify pressing needs and to take ownership.
For example, the ICRC has established a network of
community health committees attached to 28 primary
health-care centres in Somalia and 16 in South Sudan.
Many representatives are women from the community,
who play an important role in the control and prevention
of the COVID-19 pandemic and other diseases.
However, lack of or ineffective community
engagement can undermine public trust in vaccinations
and Government-run programmes more broadly,
with ramifications beyond the pandemic. We have
witnessed the effects of distrust in West Africa with
Ebola and now in many countries with COVID-19.
22-31406

Maintenance of international peace and security

11/04/2022

Even if communities can be reached, people will not
accept being vaccinated if they do not trust those
administering the vaccine and if they do not see other
pressing priorities being addressed.
For the ICRC and the wider Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement, community engagement ensures
that communities’ insights are an integral part of the
design and delivery of programmes, and that people
have accurate information about vaccines and public
health interventions so they can make informed choices
for themselves.
Beyond vaccination, the ICRC strives to build trust
with communities and parties to conflict concerning all
its humanitarian activities. The ICRC — as part of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement — will continue
to play its part. The ICRC helped to administer more
than 21 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines last year
in areas impacted by armed conflict, and we maintain
our offer of services to support States in implementing
their vaccination plans, in supporting national Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies as humanitarian
auxiliaries, and in acting as a neutral intermediary to
facilitate access to vaccines and vaccination activities
in hard-to-reach areas.
Equitable access to COVID-19 vaccination is a
humanitarian imperative. Our collective recovery
depends on it, because the longer COVID-19 circulates
anywhere, the longer it remains a threat everywhere.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Martinez

for

I now give the floor to Mr. Ojwang.
Mr. Ojwang: I thank the members of the Security
Council. I am honoured to address this organ today
on behalf of my organization, CARE International in
South Sudan.
CARE has been operating in South Sudan for
almost 30 years, providing humanitarian assistance
to various parts of the country in multiple sectors,
including health care, nutrition, gender and protection,
and food security and livelihoods. In the health-care
sector, CARE is one of the lead actors in South Sudan
supporting 56 health facilities across the country.
We are working in 4 of the 10 states, some of which
are hosting internally displaced persons severely
affected by seasonal flooding and recovering from
prolonged conflict.

S/PV.9014

We are working hand in hand with the Ministry
of Health, the World Health Organization (WHO),
UNICEF and the Health Pooled Fund to reach
communities, especially women and children, with
health services in various parts of the country. Those
are communities facing multiple challenges and crises,
not just coronavirus disease (COVID-19). They are
facing food insecurity, and there are still flare-ups of
intercommunal conflict and flooding that have caused
displacement in some of the states.
As has been the case elsewhere in sub-Saharan
Africa, there has been misinformation in some of the
locations where we work, which has contributed to
vaccine hesitancy, including very persistent myths that
vaccines cause infertility in women and men.
Even before COVID-19 hit, the health systems in
the areas where we work were fragile and overstretched.
Fifty-six percent of people had inadequate access to
health services and had to walk miles and miles to
reach a clinic. We faced shortages of skilled healthcare workers; only 30 per cent of women delivered with
skilled birth attendants, which meant we had some of
the highest rates of maternal mortality in the world,
related to very preventable causes. When COVID-19
hit, only 49 per cent of our children had received the
standard childhood vaccines.
One can imagine the huge challenge South Sudan’s
health system faced when we had to suddenly roll out
COVID-19 vaccines to a population of about 12 million
people, many of whom live in regions that are cut off
from the rest of country for several months of the year
owing to seasonal flooding.
But the story I really want to share with the Council
today is about how South Sudan’s Ministry of Health
and its partners worked together in June and July
of 2021 to make a series of smart investments that
dramatically increased their collective ability to roll out
COVID-19 vaccines, even in conflict-affected areas. In
fact, despite having had to send back 70,000 vaccine
doses in May 2021, just two months later the Ministry
of Health was able to administer almost all the 60,000
doses of COVID-19 vaccines they had in stock.
Key to those success stories were several innovative
approaches that the Government of South Sudan and its
partners implemented in June and July 2021.
First, we made strategic investments in community
education and mobilization to bust the myths and

22-314065/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

misinformation surrounding vaccines. For example,
we mobilized religious leaders to provide accurate
information to their congregations. Knowing that radio
is the primary source of information for most people
in South Sudan, we worked with local call-back radio
stations so that anyone could phone in to ask questions
in their local language and receive accurate information
from expert health-care workers.
Secondly, we extended and strengthened the healthcare workforce by bringing on additional vaccinators and
service providers. This meant that we could roll out the
COVID-19 vaccine without disrupting other essential
health services, such as childhood immunizations.
Thirdly, we made sure that all health-care workers,
including existing and new ones, were adequately
trained and supervised. We made sure that they
had personal protective equipment, and we rotated
vaccinators between COVID-19 vaccine delivery and
childhood immunizations to reduce burnout.
Fourthly, we made sure that everyone was paid
the same daily salary in accordance with the Ministry
of Health standards so that there were no pay gaps
between vaccinators working on the COVID-19
response versus routine health-care services. We
agreed that those health-care workers would stay on
after the COVID-19 vaccine effort to leave behind a
more resilient health system.
One key point I want to underscore is that the real
cost of inclusive, last-mile COVID-19 vaccine delivery
in South Sudan is significantly higher than the current
global estimates. We know the exact cost of vaccine
delivery will vary from context to context, but South
Sudan is just one of many conflict- and post-conflict
settings with a fragile health system where we know
we will need additional health-care workers, training
and infrastructure if we want to roll out the COVID-19
vaccine to the last mile, while also preventing the
disruption of other essential health services. In fact,
costs will go up as South Sudan works to reach remote
and underserved communities with highly effective but
very expensive approaches, such as mobile clinics and
health outreach. The WHO has already noted that those
approaches have been dramatically underfunded.
I also want to stress that we must centre gender at
the heart of COVID-19 vaccine roll-out if we want to
ensure an equitable and effective response. Seventy
per cent of front-line health-care workers globally are
women, many of whom are working without fair pay
6/22

11/04/2022

and in unsafe and unsupportive working conditions.
We have to invest in those women at the front lines of
service delivery if we are serious about an effective
vaccine roll-out.
CARE’s experience and evidence from across South
Sudan and other conflict and post-conflict settings
indicates that women are less likely to be vaccinated
than men, they are less likely to have access to health
information and services, and they may also have less
trust in vaccines, including persistent misconceptions
that COVID-19 vaccines cause infertility.
It is critically important that we identify and
address gender-related inequities and take concrete and
proactive steps to make sure women and girls in all their
diversity are reached with information and services.
In conclusion, I urge all Security Council members
to call on the United Nations system, the international
donor community and host Governments to take the
following actions.
First, they should ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to all people in need. That is
essential to create the enabling environment for
equitable vaccine delivery in conflict, post-conflict and
humanitarian settings across Africa and beyond.
Secondly, they should ensure that COVID-19
vaccine costing models and budgets cover all aspects of
delivery and reflect the real-world costs of rolling out the
vaccines to the last mile. That must include investments
in front-line health-care workers, community outreach,
monitoring and logistics.
Thirdly, they should ensure that non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), women-led organizations and
front-line health-care workers have meaningful roles in
the COVID-19 vaccine roll-out, not just in delivering
services to the last mile, but also in decision-making
about the response. That includes consistent roles in the
humanitarian cluster system. It also means investments
in feedback and monitoring systems that enable NGOs
to provide real-time data so we can pinpoint service
bottlenecks, identify equity gaps and address them.
Fourthly, they should invest in communitydriven, bottom-up approaches. That must include the
meaningful and consistent participation of local NGOs,
community groups and women’s groups. Such groups
understand the local contexts and real-world barriers
to delivery. They speak the local language and have
earned the trust and acceptance of communities. They
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

can reach remote areas and underserved communities
where the United Nations and Governments may not
have access.
Finally, they should make concrete investments
to ensure an equitable COVID-19 vaccine rollout that leaves no one behind. That must include
consistently collecting and using sex-, age- and
disability- disaggregated data. It requires robust gender
analyses that help us understand the unique barriers
to vaccination faced by men, women, boys, girls and
historically marginalized groups. All that data must be
used to tailor the response to ensure that we are reaching
the most marginalized with COVID-19 information
and services.
The President: I thank Mr. Ojwang for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
May I first thank our expert briefers Ted Chaiban,
Ms. Martinez and Mr. Ojwang for their insightful and
detailed briefings and, indeed, for reminding us all that
we are not out of the woods. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is still very much a reality for
all of us.
Together, we have now been battling the COVID-19
pandemic for a little over two years. It has been a time
of great pain for us all and for our families and our
friends, but also a true expression of how far humankind
has come on this journey together. We moved from
having no vaccine at all to having a steady supply of
multiple vaccines.
The United Kingdom has committed £1.4 billion
of United Kingdom aid to address the impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic and to help end the pandemic
as quickly as possible. That includes £829 million for
global development and the manufacture and delivery
of COVID-19 vaccines, treatments and tests.
Another good example was the United KingdomIndia partnership on vaccines, which enabled more
than 1 billion people to receive a COVID-19 vaccine,
saving lives and mitigating the spread of the pandemic
globally. The University of Oxford, AstraZeneca
and Serum Institute of India partnership combined
the United Kingdom’s leadership in research and
development and India’s manufacturing capacity as the
pharmacy of the world.

S/PV.9014

Last month, the United Kingdom hosted the
Global Pandemic Preparedness Summit, which raised
$1.5 billion in funding for the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innovations to develop vaccines against
new health threats in 100 days and to rapidly scale up
regional manufacturing for an affordable global supply.
Through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) Facility, the United Kingdom plays its
part in giving access to vaccines, wherever they are
needed. Indeed, we are among the largest donors to
the advance market commitment, having committed
£0.5 billion pounds so far. The COVAX Facility has
now delivered more than 1.4 billion vaccines to 144
countries, the majority of which are low- and lowermiddle-income ones.
Vaccination rates are also steadily increasing.
But, as we already heard from our briefers today, they
continue to lag in many low-income countries, and
particular communities in conflict and a humanitarian
crisis risk being left behind.
After more than a year of steady vaccine production,
the challenge has moved from being one of supply to
one of roll-out. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs report that less than 4 per cent
of the populations of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Yemen, Haiti and Burundi are vaccinated.
Frankly, that is a staggering inequity, which is bad for
us all.
The delivery of vaccines to marginalized and
conflict-affected communities is being obstructed by
underresourced and overstretched health systems and by
curtailed humanitarian access. Last year, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2565 (2021),
calling for the provision of vaccines to areas in conflict.
It gained the highest-ever number of co-sponsors of a
Council resolution.
It is clear that full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access and the protection of health workers, in line
with international humanitarian law, remain vitally
important, but, sadly, elusive. That point was amplified
by Ms. Martinez. What more can we do to ensure that
the most vulnerable are not left behind?
First, we can help to ensure that COVID-19
vaccination is prioritized by Governments in countries
in conflict. We can offer support through the COVAX
Humanitarian Buffer, a measure of last resort to
target individuals in fragile regions not included

22-314067/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

in national vaccination plans. We can also support
efforts to strengthen international cooperation. The
COVAX Facility recently set up a new vaccine delivery
partnership to improve coordination at the global and
country levels, including with the African Union, for
COVID-19 vaccine delivery and support, including
in the most vulnerable countries, most of which are
in Africa. Again, our expert briefers outlined that
very point.
Secondly, we can spell out to all parties to conflicts
their obligations under international humanitarian law
to provide unhindered humanitarian access, including
for vaccinations. That must happen.
Thirdly, we must work together, as the United
Nations, to overcome obstacles to delivery and to
advance Sustainable Development Goal 3 and our
collective efforts to build stronger health systems
worldwide. Mr. Ojwang also stressed the importance
of leveraging all in-country networks through his own
experience in South Sudan. Indeed, I welcome the
important role of faith leaders, who have also been
brought on board, as Mr. Ojwang highlighted.
In conclusion, resolution 2565 (2021) continues
to be an important road map for our discussions on
vaccines and health in conflict zones. COVID-19
has shown us that the best way to achieve success is
through a collaborative effort and by working together.
The resolution also represents a genuine investment
in stability and global health, not of just an individual
country but of the world as a whole, and, as such, must
remain a top priority for us all.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Al Amiri.
I am so pleased that we have been able to co-organize
this important briefing with the United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Al Amiri (United Arab Emirates): The United
Arab Emirates is honoured to partner with the United
Kingdom and France in preparing today’s briefing, and
I would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding. The United
Kingdom’s leadership in the Council on vaccination in
conflict and fragile settings remains deeply appreciated,
not least on resolution 2565 (2021). I would also like to
extend our gratitude to Mr. Ted Chaiban, Ms. Esperanza
Martinez and Mr. Emmanuel Ojwang for their insights.
This meeting is an important prompt to accelerate
our collective commitment to global vaccination and
8/22

11/04/2022

to realize the promise and values of resolutions 2565
(2021) and 2532 (2020). As a policymaker in science and
technology, I am heartened by the unprecedented speed
of innovation around coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
vaccines. It is a testament to the speed that we can
globally work at, leveraging existing capabilities and,
in our case, building new ones.
However, the pandemic is far from over and new
waves, coupled with new variants, are evidence that
no one is safe until everyone is safe. Furthermore, the
impact of COVID-19 on global security has a long tail
that reaches beyond mobility restrictions and supply
chain disruptions. It has inflicted social and economic
stress — and, in some cases, devastation — on already
fragile communities by undermining livelihoods and
basic services like education and health. As we know,
women and girls are still bearing the brunt of those
effects. The pandemic’s lasting security legacy will
likely be the worsening of the root causes of those
challenges globally, and a solution is necessary to avoid
far-reaching ripple effects from the pandemic.
Last month, during the United Arab Emirates
presidency, we highlighted the status of vaccination in
countries on the Council’s agenda. Progress in those
countries against the global goal of 70 per cent ranged
from a high of 49 per cent of the eligible population to
a low of less than 1 per cent, with an alarming average
below 10 per cent. We are therefore encouraged by the
Council’s continued commitment to the implementation
of resolution 2565 (2021). We have come too far to
give up and, as we have heard, this year represents
perhaps the best opportunity in two years to improve
vaccination in countries on the Council’s agenda.
The United Arab Emirates has been proud to
support both multilateral and bilateral vaccination
efforts, including vaccine and logistical contributions
to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility and large-scale global personal protective
equipment distribution in over 135 countries. From that
experience of working with humanitarian and health
agencies, we would like to highlight four areas where
the Council can support a faster implementation of
resolution 2565 (2021).
First, it is important that the Council continue to
underscore the security benefits of vaccination. It is
an important incentive for sustained contributions
to global vaccination campaigns, especially through
COVAX and its humanitarian buffer.
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, all instances of improved humanitarian
access enhance vaccination efforts, providing safety
and mobility for health workers and patients alike. The
Council’s support for those tools — from ceasefires
to days of tranquillity to humanitarian notification
systems, as appropriate in specific contexts — can
make a difference in the rapid delivery and distribution
of vaccines.
Thirdly, the Council should encourage entities
operating under its mandate to ensure coordination at
the country level so that COVID-19 vaccination is part of
the bundle of essential services provided by the United
Nations and its partners. That is especially important in
a period of food insecurity and high commodity prices.
That coordination will also ensure that we are taking
full advantage of opportunities provided by access
to communities.
Finally, the Council must advocate for gender
responsiveness in vaccination. Women receive fewer
doses in many fragile countries because of physical
and social barriers, prolonging the pandemic’s security
impacts. Women’s leadership in vaccination efforts, as
well as gender accountability tools for implementing
agencies, are proven ways to improve equity.
While much of the heavy lifting on vaccination and
resolution 2565 (2021) will be done by humanitarian
and health actors, the Council has a clear stake in the
results of their work and in supporting them at every
turn. The fair and equitable distribution of vaccines
is both a strategic investment and a moral obligation.
It is also achievable. This current drive, if dealt with
from a long-term perspective, will build the necessary
know-how and experience to aid in future vaccine
distribution, strengthening existing health-care and
logistical systems.

S/PV.9014

I think we all remember where we were when we
realized that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was
not a minor outbreak, but a highly contagious virus that
would change our lives. That was a little over two years
ago, but it feels like much longer than that. During
the past two very long years, COVID-19 has caused
immense hardships around the world. There have been
500 million confirmed cases and 6 million people have
died. So many of us have personally lost loved ones to
the virus.
However, while COVID-19 represents a darker
chapter, there is reason for hope. After all, the scientific
community was able to develop, test and start to roll
out life-saving vaccines in under a year — a historic
feat. Of course, having safe and effective vaccines and
getting shots into arms are very different things. The
United States recognized early on that we could play a
crucial role in vaccinating the world. Working with the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility
and other partners, we have provided over 518 million
doses to 114 countries, with no strings attached. We are
committed to donating 1.2 billion doses in total. Thanks
in part to those efforts, nearly 6 in 10 people around the
world have had at least two shots of the vaccine.
That is encouraging, but we know that we still have
work to do and we know that too many countries lack
far behind, especially countries in the midst of conflict
and instability. In Yemen, for example, just 1.3 per cent
of the population is fully vaccinated. In Haiti and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, that number is less
than 1 per cent. Tragically, that list goes on and on.

We learned through the global drive towards
developing, testing and deploying the COVID-19 vaccine
that silos can be broken and that global collaboration is
a possibility. As I look at my experience in other aspects
of my portfolio once deemed improbable, working
towards addressing the challenges while building a
better vaccine delivery system will remove COVID-19
as a source of fragility.

It is not an issue of supply. We have enough doses.
It is an issue of access. Aid organizations face steep
barriers to delivering humanitarian assistance, including
COVID-19 vaccines and treatments, to conflict zones.
Ukraine is a prime example. Russia’s unprovoked brutal
invasion has meant that COVID-19 vaccine distribution
and routine immunizations have come to a sudden halt.
Since the start of the war, COVID-19 vaccinations have
plummeted from more than 52,000 a day to less than
1,000 a day. Why? Because Russia’s senseless violence
has damaged the infrastructure necessary to get aid and
vaccines to people. Safe passage through humanitarian
corridors is sporadic, at best.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Sir, for bringing us together
today for this very important discussion. I also thank
the briefers for their insights.

Let me be absolutely clear. Aid organizations
delivering humanitarian assistance, including COVID-19
vaccines and treatments, must be given unfettered
access in Ukraine, in Syria, in Burma — in every single

22-314069/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

11/04/2022

country, in every single conflict. The United States
is already working with the international community
to expand access through our global vaccination
initiative. Thanks to the COVID-19 Prioritized Global
Action Plan for Enhanced Engagement, we have been
able to bolster supply chains, address information gaps,
support health-care workers and strengthen the global
health security architecture.

The obstacles preventing vaccination are
numerous: restrictions to humanitarian access and the
effective delivery of doses on the ground, insecurity,
weak health-care systems, disinformation and mistrust
vis-à-vis vaccination and many other humanitarian
priorities. We therefore have a collective responsibility
to achieve herd immunity. That is why we must focus
our efforts on four priorities.

But the Security Council has a central role to play
here as well. The Council has taken some important
steps by adopting resolution 2532 (2020) and 2565
(2021), but those resolutions need to be implemented, as
we have just heard from Ted Chaiban. We can and must
do more, including by renewing the United Nations
authorization to deliver cross-border humanitarian
assistance into Syria. The cross-border mechanism
is a literal lifeline and the only route through which
COVAX vaccines are reaching north-western Syria,
home to more than 3 million people.

The first is equitable and affordable access to
COVID-19 vaccines. The vaccine must be a global
public good and accessible to all. We continue to fully
support the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility, which has enabled the delivery of more than
1 billion doses to low- and middle-income countries.
France has committed to donating 120 million doses
by the summer of 2022, of which more than 86 million
have already been delivered. More than 90 per cent of
the vaccines we provide go through the COVAX facility,
and more than half of them benefit African countries.
Moreover, we are contributing to several multilateral
and bilateral initiatives to strengthen long-term local
production of health products, particularly vaccines, on
the African continent.

Many of the crises that we face do not have an instant
cure. We wish we could vaccinate the world from war,
hunger and all forms of suffering. Unfortunately, it is
not always that simple, but when it comes to COVID-19,
if we can get vaccines into arms, it is that simple. We
can save lives and end the pandemic. The challenge is
ensuring that the world’s most vulnerable, especially
those suffering in conflicts, get the COVID-19 vaccines
they need. Aid organizations are prepared to do that
difficult work. Let us support them in every way we can.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Chaiban, Ms. Martinez and Mr. Ojwang for
their briefings.
At the outset, I commend the outstanding work
of the entire United Nations and of humanitarian and
medical personnel in responding to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Despite some progress,
vaccination rates remain extremely unequal from one
country to another, particularly between the countries
of the North and the countries of the South, especially
in Africa. We are still far from the reaching global
herd immunity. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Yemen and Haiti, the vaccination rate remains
below 4 per cent of the population. The number of
COVID-19 cases is widely underestimated, owing to
low testing capacity. The World Health Organization
(WHO) estimates, for example, that two-thirds of the
population on the African continent has been infected
with COVID-19.
10/22

The second concerns the cessation of hostilities and
a humanitarian pause, in accordance with resolution
2532 (2020). That is a necessary condition for facilitating
vaccine campaigns. International humanitarian law
must be respected by all. I am referring not only to
full humanitarian access, but also to the protection of
humanitarian and medical personnel.
The third involves taking into account the most
vulnerable people in national vaccination plans, in
particular refugees and internally displaced persons.
It is also important that vaccination campaigns
incorporate the gender dimension, as women and
girls are particularly affected by inequalities in
access to vaccines. In that regard, we must ensure the
participation of women in decision-making processes
and the humanitarian response. It is also imperative
to strengthen communication and awareness
campaigns to counter misinformation and mistrust
concerning vaccines.
The fourth concerns strengthening health-care
systems and responding to humanitarian needs.
Without resilient health-care systems that enable the
improvement of effective access to quality health
services and contribute to achieving universal health
coverage, we will not be able to definitively end to the
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

pandemic. Beyond COVID-19, France will continue
to fully support the Gavi Alliance, which has made
possible the vaccination of nearly 900 million children
since 2000, and to support the work of WHO, including
through Access to the COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, to
strengthen health-care systems. We will also continue to
increase our financial contributions to the humanitarian
response. In addition to the humanitarian response in
Ukraine, we must collectively remain poised to meet
humanitarian needs throughout the world.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): The whole United
Nations system has ended up involved in the multilateral
response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, including the Security Council through the
important adoption of resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565
(2021).
The first resolution demands a general and
immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on
its agenda and calls on all parties to armed conflicts to
engage immediately in a durable humanitarian pause
to enable the safe, unhindered and sustained delivery
of appropriate humanitarian assistance. With a large
number of sponsors, the second resolution states that
people in conflict zones must not be left behind, as
mass vaccination campaigns were happening at a
speed never seen before. It also recognizes the crucial
role of extensive immunization on the path to ending
the pandemic.
The Council made it clear that it is both an ethical
and practical imperative to assist people in need in
conflict zones, including refugees, internally displaced
persons and those living in areas under the control of
non-State armed groups, out of reach of basic services
provided by the State.
The pandemic has shown once again the enormous
challenges to overcoming the current scenario of
profound inequalities among countries regarding access
to vaccines, medical equipment and other medical
products. The Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator
and the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility still face many challenges to promote a more
equitable and just distribution of safe, effective,
high-quality and affordable COVID-19 vaccines,
treatment and diagnostic tests. Having faced vaccine
hoarding and structural access barriers, Brazil, like
many developing countries, supports those important
multilateral initiatives. However, they were not able to
deliver on their initial promises.

S/PV.9014

We believe that COVAX might be better equipped
to fulfil its role. It has a humanitarian buffer — a
mechanism established to act as a measure of last resort
to ensure access to COVID-19 vaccines for high-risk and
vulnerable populations. Nevertheless, vaccination rates
in situations of armed conflict are disturbingly low.
Let us be clear. The role of ensuring that people are
fully vaccinated and that the world is better equipped to
respond to future pandemics with strong and resilient
national health systems rests with other international
bodies, especially the World Health Organization
(WHO). We must, however, ask ourselves the question
whether the Council can do more to guarantee that
people in conflict-affected areas have access to
vaccines, and resolution 2532 (2020) already provides
some clues as to what the Council can do.
First, it must try to overcome the access challenges
in conflict zones by renewing its call on all parties to
armed conflicts to engage in humanitarian pauses so as
to facilitate the full, safe and unhindered delivery and
distribution of vaccines and medical assistance in areas
of armed conflict. Those services must be provided by
impartial actors in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
Secondly, the Council can make sure that civilian
infrastructure, which is critical to the delivery of
humanitarian aid for essential health services, including
vaccinations, is always protected, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, the Council should adapt peacekeeping
operations and special political mandates so they
can, as appropriate, support host country authorities
in their efforts to strengthen their health systems and
carry out vaccination campaigns that include refugees
and internally displaced persons. The full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in those efforts
should be welcomed and encouraged.
Before concluding, I would like to thank the briefers
for their insightful information. We commend the
International Committee of the Red Cross for its efforts
to gain access across front lines through its neutral
humanitarian work and for helping with the logistics
of transport and cold chains to enable vaccinations. We
also thank Ted Chaiban, the Global Lead Coordinator
for COVID-19 Vaccine Country-Readiness and
Delivery for his commitment to achieving the targets
established by the WHO. We add our appreciation to

22-3140611/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

11/04/2022

Mr. Ojwang for his clear presentation of realities and
challenges on the ground.

rates in the 25 countries most in need where vaccination
coverage currently does not exceed 10 per cent.

Brazil remains committed to contributing to global
efforts aimed at increasing vaccine coverage against
COVID-19, especially in developing countries. We
have already donated more than 5.6 million doses
through bilateral cooperation and the COVAX Facility.
On 8 April, the Brazilian Government announced the
donation of $86.6 million to the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility Advance Market Commitment,
the greatest donation COVAX has ever received from a
developing country, and we hope that, throughout 2022
it will be possible for us increase this figure.

We also hope that it will be possible to swiftly
set up the work of the so-called humanitarian buffer,
which is focused on the most vulnerable categories of
recipients, as part of the framework of the multilateral
COVAX mechanism. It would be interesting to hear
the briefers’ opinion on how to address problems
hindering this process, particularly the legal issue of
indemnities. Unfortunately, as is traditionally the case,
we did not hear any analyses or assessments of how
the goal of achieving universal vaccination is affected
by unlawful unilateral economic coercive measures
that undermine the health systems and economies of
the countries affected. We regret to note that this topic
continues to receive a lack of attention in the Council,
which does nothing to improve the situation. Other
factors that deserve attention include delays in national
and international approval of anti-COVID-19 drugs,
expanding access to technology and supply chains, and
combating disinformation and vaccine hesitancy.

We also stand ready to contribute by sharing our
experience with mass-vaccination campaigns. Brazil
has been able to achieve high vaccination coverage,
including during the ongoing pandemic, thanks to the
strength of its universal health system, which aims at
covering all 5,570 municipalities in the country, with
priority given to those in the most vulnerable situations.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s briefing on the topic of vaccination in
the context of armed conflicts, post-conflict situations
and complex humanitarian crises is a timely one. We
thank the briefers for their useful overview of the global
situation in terms of ensuring universal immunization
against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the most
challenging conditions, as well as recommendations for
improvements on this track.
In the light of the responsibilities of the
Security Council and the guidance provided by its
resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021), we would
like to acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations
Department of Operational Support aimed at organizing
a proper vaccination campaign among peacekeepers.
We also welcome the establishment by the World Health
Organization (WHO), UNICEF and the Gavi Alliance
and their COVID-19 Vaccine Delivery Partnership,
which is designed to strengthen the coordination of
relevant efforts. This is especially important given
that logistical issues and the ability of national health
systems to ensure that received vaccine doses are
administered are problems that are now coming to the
fore, primarily as a result of an unprecedented number
of illegal sanctions. In this regard, we trust that by
improving the coordination and effectiveness of these
activities, it will be possible to increase the vaccination
12/22

For its part, Russia also possesses experience in
helping to combat COVID-19 in difficult conditions.
Indeed, we have delivered millions of doses of vaccines
and testing systems to foreign countries, including
countries on the Council’s agenda, for example, to
colleagues in the Syrian Arab Republic. According to
the latest data, our country is currently hosting more
than 730,000 citizens of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics and Ukraine. Refugees can access
COVID-19 testing at accommodation centres and
medical facilities, and, if they wish, they can also
be vaccinated with the vaccines used in our country
or receive free treatment for COVID-19 on an equal
footing with Russian citizens.
We are continuing to work on improving our
response to the novel coronavirus infection at the
research and development level as well. Therefore,
at the beginning of this month, a nasal form of the
Sputnik V vaccine was registered in Russia. It is to be
administered using a special spray nozzle. We would
like to note that, according to resolution 2565 (2020),
information on its implementation should necessarily
be provided — and it should also be an option — as part
of the ordinary reporting of the special representatives
of the Secretary-General, where and when that is
required. We would consider this mode of discussing
this issue within the Council to be optimal.
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, we are forced to respond to the
statement made by one delegation, which insists
on continuing to use practically every meeting of
the Security Council to attack our country. We have
repeatedly provided clarifications with regard to the
special military operation in Ukraine, and we do not
intend to return to this topic now.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Global Lead Coordinator
Ted Chaiban and Ms. Martinez for their briefings. We
listened to Mr. Emmanuel Ojwang’s statement.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay a special
tribute to the health workers who have been fighting
on the front line against the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19).
Our world is now in the third year of the COVID-19
pandemic. Armed with nearly all the effective tools
needed to fight this pandemic, humankind is beginning
to see the light at the end of the tunnel. That said, the
pandemic is not over yet. New variants of the virus, each
spreading faster than its predecessor, keep cropping up.
We are nowhere near the point where we can afford to
be complacent and let up. Only when each and every
country has subdued this common enemy of ours can
the world declare that we have prevailed.
I would like to make the following points in
connection with some pending issues that warrant our
special attention. First, we must work hard and work
together to build immunological barriers globally.
The World Health Organization target of 70 per cent
vaccination coverage is far from being achieved. In
particular, vaccination rates in countries in conflict are
generally below the world average — indeed, less than
1 per cent in such countries as the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Yemen and Mali.
Resolution 2565 (2021) calls for increased access
and affordability of vaccines in conflict areas. Right
now, it is imperative to scale up vaccine assistance and
supply to leave no country behind and no one forgotten.
China has provided a total of 2.2 billion doses
of COVID vaccines to more than 120 countries and
international organizations and is currently providing
an additional 1 billion doses to African countries,
150 million doses to Association of Southeast Asian
Nations countries and 50 million doses of free vaccines
to Central Asian countries.

S/PV.9014

To date we have contributed $100 million and
220 million doses of vaccine to the COVID-19
Vaccine Global (COVAX) Facility. Localizing vaccine
manufacturing is important to putting developing
countries in a better position to respond to the
pandemic. China was the first to support intellectual
property right (IPR) waivers for vaccines and the first to
transfer its vaccine technology to developing countries.
Chinese is co-producing vaccines with 20 countries,
with an annual capacity of 1 billion doses. We support
an early decision by the World Trade Organization on
an IPR waiver for vaccines in an active and positive
response to the strong appeals made by broad segments
of developing countries.
Secondly, public health systems in developing
countries should be strengthened. Developing countries
are at a serious disadvantage in the global health
system, as they were already facing all manner of grave
challenges. Many countries have been struggling to
provide timely vaccinations to all those in need because
of war, conflict, lack of transport access or poor healthcare infrastructure. Even when sufficient vaccines are
available, timely vaccinations are still not possible or
difficult to achieve.
The root cause of the bottlenecks in the last mile
of vaccine access is the long-standing problem of
inadequate public health systems. In order to better
prevent and respond to the next pandemic when it
arrives, the international community should look
far ahead and vigorously help developing countries
strengthen their public health system.
In that regard, it is necessary to expand
medical-services coverage and improve public
infrastructure such as transport and the power supply,
train more medical professionals and health workers,
and better disseminate public health information to the
entire population, especially youth and children.
The Council should work with other bodies and
take a pragmatic approach and tangible measures to
bring hope to people in countries in conflict.
Thirdly, we should inject fresh momentum into postpandemic recovery and socioeconomic development.
The pandemic is responsible for a slowdown or even a
recession in many economies, and the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
faces even more daunting challenges. The recent
global political and security upheaval, the soaring
prices of energy, food and other bulk commodities,

22-3140613/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

and a new upsurge in trade protectionism have added
to the woes of many developing countries that were
already struggling to cope. Today’s more challenging
external environment highlights the importance and
urgency of development for developing countries. That
is something that the international community must
take very seriously, and the United Nations should act
swiftly and take robust and effective measures to both
address current crises and explore long-term solutions
so that the world can discern fresh hope on the horizon.
China’s Global Development Initiative (GDI)
aims to address, as the first order of business, poverty
eradication, equitable vaccine access and financing
for development, among other things, which are of
the greatest concern to developing countries, and help
place development at the centre of the global macro
policy framework, thus providing a viable path to the
accelerated implementation of the 2030 Agenda and
post-pandemic recovery. China will host a high-level
meeting of the Group of Friends of the GDI in the near
future. We hope for extensive participation and active
contributions to the event.
Fourthly, true multilateralism is an imperative.
During the pandemic, which lasted more than two
years, more than 6 million people lost their precious
lives. The lesson is profound and deserves serious
reflection on our part. Nothing is more valuable in this
world than human lives. A people-centred approach is
the most important tenet that guides all our decisions.
At the global level, cooperation in solidarity is
the most powerful weapon in defeating the pandemic
and is as effective in tackling other global challenges.
Under these unprecedented circumstances, we
must work together to build back better with the
conviction — stronger than ever — that we are in this
together as a global community with a shared future.
Meanwhile, we must not lose sight of the fact that
our world is still confronted with multiple challenges.
A scant few countries are still holding on to their coldwar mentality for dear life, drawing lines of distinction
based on ideology, provoking renewed bloc-to-bloc
confrontations, imposing unilateral sanctions thick
and fast and without scruples, weaponizing economic
interdependence and forcing countries to choose sides.
That is plunging the international community into
division and pushing the world into a quicksand of grave
risks and uncertainties. Those irresponsible actions are
14/22

11/04/2022

harmful to others, as they are to themselves, and must
be categorically rejected.
The need for true multilateralism is even greater
in today’s world. In the post-pandemic period, all
countries should strengthen their solidarity under the
banner of the United Nations, respect one another,
build mutual trust and be trustworthy, show goodwill,
cooperate for mutual benefit and work together for a
better future.
Ms. Moe (Norway): I thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
It is clear that vaccines are not effective until all
people are vaccinated, and the disparity today is stark.
While some countries are close to universal vaccination,
others, including those affected by humanitarian
crises, have reached only 5 per cent. In the Democratic
Republic of Congo, less than 1 per cent of the population
is fully vaccinated and in Ethiopia, less than 18 per
cent. Equitable access between countries remains a
global challenge.
The most vulnerable have been hit the hardest by
the pandemic, including children affected by armed
conflict. They have seen an increase in the military
use of schools and in their vulnerability to recruitment
and use in armed conflict, as well as their vulnerability
to rape and other forms of sexual violence, including
trafficking. Community-protection mechanisms and
rule-of-law institutions have been weakened, and
monitoring and protection mechanisms on the ground
have been severely affected. All that has been caused
by isolation and the critical deterioration of the
socioeconomic situation resulting from the pandemic as
well as some of the measures put in place to counter it.
While the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
brought faster research and development and a larger
manufacturing capacity than ever before, delivery still
remains a challenge. Two years on, a fully financed
Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator and its
COVID-19 Vaccine Global (COVAX) Facility could
not be more urgent in order to ensure equitable access
to vaccines, diagnostics and treatments, including for
those displaced or living in areas beyond the reach of
national health authorities.
Regrettably, the COVAX humanitarian buffer has
not been a success so far. We call on manufacturers to
waive their indemnity and liability requirements for
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9014

buffer doses. We must address all obstacles that prevent
it from being used by organizations and countries.

especially as it relates to vaccination programmes in
conflict settings.

A sufficient supply of vaccine doses on its own is
not enough to increase vaccination rates. Allow me to
highlight three points in that regard.

Resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021)
demonstrate the Council’s concern about the impact
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on
the maintenance of international peace and security
in mandated peacekeeping missions, as well as in
other conflict settings and humanitarian crises. The
resolutions call for urgent and coordinated actions to
ameliorate the impact of the pandemic on key peace and
security objectives. Notwithstanding the absence of
compliance with the appeal for a global ceasefire, made
by the Secretary-General, and a durable humanitarian
pause for 90 consecutive days, advocated by the Council,
we believe that, overall and given the circumstances,
the Organization’s response to the pandemic in field
missions was satisfactory in maintaining the safety
of personnel. We also welcome the evolving health
advisories to troop- and police-contributing countries
on the management of the COVID-19 pandemic, based
on available science.

First, community engagement is key. Close dialogue
is vital to enhancing acceptance and confidence in
COVID-19 vaccines, especially in conflict settings,
where trust in national authorities may be low and the
level of misinformation high. High-risk groups must be
a priority in delivery everywhere.
Secondly, the capacity to deliver of local health
systems must be addressed. We have examples of
vaccines expiring on the tarmac in South Sudan,
Afghanistan and elsewhere. COVID-19 vaccinations
need to be integrated into our broader health strategies
and should complement routine vaccinations, not occur
at their expense.
Thirdly, we need to ensure access. As more
vaccines arrive in countries at war, full, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access remains imperative.
This must include the protection of humanitarian and
medical workers and their assets. Since the start of
2022, there have already been 52 reported incidents
of violence or threats against health care in Myanmar,
resulting in seven casualties among health-care workers
and eight damaged health facilities. In the Sudan, 10
health workers were reportedly injured by violence.
In Ukraine, there have been a total of 91 reported
incidents, including 21 attacks on health-care workers
and 77 attacks on health-care facilities, although we
know that actual figures are likely much higher. Attacks
on health-care, medical and humanitarian personnel
are unacceptable and show parties’ disregard for their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

The Ukrainian crisis has overshadowed COVID-19
in the media space, but we all know that the pandemic
continues to linger, with devastating impacts not only
on health systems, but also on the economies of nations
and the development aspirations of many peoples. The
pandemic has exposed underlying structural inequalities
that drive conflict and instability and exacerbated the
public health and socioeconomic challenges of several
countries, including their capacity to distribute vital
public services, such as vaccines, and respond to the
needs of marginalized and vulnerable groups.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for picking up this agenda item
during its presidency.

In countries already in conflict, the situation is
even worse. Indeed, statistics made available by the
United Nations estimate that approximately only
13 per cent of people in low-income countries have
been vaccinated, compared with almost 70 per cent
in high-income countries. As bad as that situation
is, it pales in comparison to the plight of millions of
people in countries in armed conflict situations, postconflict situations and humanitarian emergencies, who
are simply being overlooked by vaccination efforts.
That is unacceptable and reflects the failure of the
international community to administer vaccines in a
fair and equitable manner.

I also thank Mr. Ted Chaiban, Ms. Esperanza
Martinez and Mr. Emmanuel Ojwang for their unique
perspectives about the vaccine delivery situation,

The fulfilment of the mandate of resolution
2565 (2021), particularly the provisions relating to a
humanitarian buffer, continues to be relevant in ensuring

In resolution 2565 (2021), we recognize that those
affected by conflict and insecurity are particularly
vulnerable and at risk of being left behind. We
must continue to work to ensure equitable access to
COVID-19 vaccinations. The Council has a key role to
play, including following up on its resolution.

22-3140615/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

11/04/2022

equitable access to vaccines in order to bring an end to
the pandemic and help those countries prepare for the
next pandemic. My delegation therefore calls on major
stakeholders to address issues surrounding vaccine
indemnity and liability requirements, to streamline the
vaccine roll-out in high-risk and vulnerable populations
and to provide funding for delivery operations. We also
wish to urge countries to commit a portion of their
vaccine supply to the humanitarian buffer that will
be used to vaccinate people in countries experiencing
humanitarian crises.

Fourthly, we must strengthen and support existing
mechanisms, such as the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access (COVAX) Facility and the African Union and
African Vaccine Acquisition Trust initiatives, which
have played a vital role in the distribution of vaccines
to vulnerable countries, as well as countries in special
situations, including those in armed conflict situations,
post-conflict situations and humanitarian emergencies.
In that regard, we are heartened to learn that, so far, the
COVAX mechanism has distributed more than 1 billion
vaccines to low- and middle-income countries.

In addition to the implementation of the
humanitarian buffer, I wish to share a few thoughts that
I believe should form the basis for global cooperation
to address the issue of vaccine equity in countries in
armed conflict situations, post-conflict situations and
humanitarian emergencies.

The pandemic has taught us that national solutions
to international problems simply do not work. Ghana
therefore affirms its commitment to supporting
resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) and believes
that, through their successful implementation,
vaccination can be successfully implemented in all
settings, especially in conflict settings.

First, we need to strengthen the funding of existing
global health organizations. This must include a
greater, more predictable base of multilateral funding
for the World Health Organization and regional centres
for disease control, which play a central role in global
health security. It will require dedicating an additional
1 per cent of gross domestic product to funding global
health. This is an investment in a global public good,
not aid.
Secondly, COVID-19 vaccinations cannot be a
stand-alone goal. The international community needs
to take a common but differentiated approach and
work to strengthen public health systems to ensure that
vaccination is only one element of a broader health
strategy that responds to the reality of people’s health
needs and priorities.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need for the
deconcentration of manufacturing capacities for
vaccines, including in Africa, where a significant
number of conflict situations prevail and distribution
challenges persist. It is for that reason that countries,
such as Ghana, Rwanda and Senegal, in partnership
with the German biotechnology company BioNTech
SE, are venturing into vaccine development and
manufacturing so as to become hubs in sub-Saharan
Africa. Ghana has committed $25 million to develop its
domestic vaccine production capability and facilitate
the capacity of domestic pharmaceutical companies to
fill, finish and package messenger RNA COVID-19,
malaria, tuberculosis and other vaccines, as the first
step towards vaccine production.
16/22

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank the United
Kingdom for bringing to the Council the issue of
equitable access to coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
vaccines in conflict settings and humanitarian
crises. I congratulate the briefers on their insightful
interventions and useful recommendations.
The pandemic is far from over, despite a much
changed and improved global situation due to
vaccination. Our increased capacity to learn to live with
COVID-19 and a push to return to normal life should
not make us imprudent. We know only one way to win
over the virus — that is through protection measures
and vaccines.
Albania is a sponsor of resolution 2565 (2021),
demanding humanitarian pauses to allow access to and
the delivery of vaccines to all areas in armed conflict. In
June 2020, we signed a cross-regional joint statement,
together with 170 Member States, to voice our support
for the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire
in all conflict-affected areas to combat the COVID-19
pandemic, which is addressed subsequently in the
landmark resolution 2532 (2020). Earlier this year, we
joined the call of the President of the General Assembly
for vaccine equity as well.
Although a strong humanitarian response is in place,
challenges are on the rise. We still see the intensification
of existing and new conflicts in many parts of the world.
We all know the heavy toll of the COVID-19 pandemic.
It has profoundly affected livelihoods around the globe,
disrupting global education, throwing millions back
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

into extreme poverty, increasing humanitarian needs
and fuelling conflicts. It marked the worst economic
downturn since the great depression.
In this fragile context, I would like to highlight a
few points.
First, we need a more robust response to facilitate
equitable and affordable access to vaccines to fight the
virus in the world’s most vulnerable infrastructure,
guided by humanitarian principles, as well as by
inclusivity, gender, community engagement principles
and, of course, by equity.
The poorest and most conflict-affected humanitarian
response plan countries received the fewest doses.
Reports from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs show that, while we count 28
humanitarian response plan countries today, more than
one-third of them — including Yemen, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Haiti, South Sudan, Cameroon,
Burundi and Mali — have hardly vaccinated 3 to
10 per cent of their population. Let us not forget, as the
briefers rightly recalled, there is not only a question of
availability and access, but also of misinformation and
vaccine hesitancy.
Secondly, we believe that the Access to COVID-19
Tools Accelerator (ACT-A) is a powerful and truly
multilateral tool to deliver vaccines equally through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility.
Fully funding the ACT-A is of vital importance, and we
welcome the efforts of all countries that have donated
so far to the COVAX Facility. We urge every vaccine
donor to increase supplies for developing countries
and congratulate Germany on co-hosting the 2022
Gavi Alliance COVAX Advance Market Commitment
Summit and for pledging additional funding for
COVID-19 vaccination in lower-income countries.
Thirdly, the role of United Nations country teams,
peacekeeping and special political missions in trying
to support the vaccination process has proven to be
of crucial importance, not only in contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security, but
also in assisting local authorities and health facilities in
addressing the pandemic and its consequences.
Lastly, the Security Council should spare no efforts
in calling upon all parties to armed conflicts to stop
their hostilities and engage immediately in a durable
humanitarian solution.

S/PV.9014

The implementation of resolutions 2532 (2020) and
2565 (2021) should have our attention in each country
situation file and humanitarian crisis considerations, as
they are important resolutions that enjoy consensus and
constitute a good solid basis to further build upon.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico)
(spoke in Spanish): Mexico thanks Mr. Ted Chaiban,
Ms. Esperanza Martinez and Mr. Emmanuel Ojwang
for their briefings. We also welcome to the Security
Council Minister Al Amiri of the United Arab Emirates.
Mexico believes that the Security Council’s
monitoring of the implementation of resolutions 2532
(2020) and 2565 (2021, on the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the maintenance of
international peace and security, and the initiative
of the United Kingdom to that end, are particularly
commendable and timely.
The
devastating
and
multidimensional
consequences of the pandemic and the unacceptable
inequality that has prevailed in access to vaccines,
exacerbated in countries in conflict and post-conflict
and that are facing humanitarian crises, must be clearly
denounced. The emergence of new variants and the
onset of other armed conflicts have also stood in the
way of the global efforts to address this health crises in
a united and systemic manner.
Regrettably, the call for a general and immediate
cessation of hostilities in the context of the pandemic
has clearly been ignored. The armed conflict in Ukraine
is not the only instance where peace has broken down.
Hostilities continue in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Syria, Mali and Ethiopia, to name but a few
examples.
Fortunately, progress in science has made it
possible to develop effective vaccines against the
virus in record time, and it must be recognized there
has been some progress in their availability. However,
the situation in many of the countries whose situations
we periodically review in the Council is discouraging.
Although there are sufficient supplies to vaccinate the
entire adult population of our planet, Haiti has received
only enough doses to cover 3 per cent of its population
and even less than that percentage has been distributed;
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Yemen have
received only 4 per cent; and Mali and South Sudan
only 8 per cent. Those figures are a testament to the
unacceptable inequality that prevails.

22-3140617/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

To achieve a more equitable distribution of
vaccines, Mexico considers two criteria to be essential.
First, intellectual property rights should be
temporarily suspended in situations such as that of this
pandemic, as provided for in the regulations of the World
Trade Organization. Secondly, there must be universal
recognition of all those vaccines that have already
been approved by the World Health Organization, as
we have continued to say in the Group of 20, among
other forums. Politically motivated stigmatization of
vaccines is simply abhorrent. The commitment and
unity of Council members on those issues are critical to
strengthening genuinely effective action by the United
Nations and to mitigating the devastation brought on by
the pandemic in conflict situations.
With better coordinated work, the country teams
on the ground and the COVAX humanitarian buffer,
health workers in countries that are lagging behind can
be trained and the population’s trust in the effectiveness
of the vaccines can be enhanced. All the identified
challenges in the distribution and administration of the
vaccines can be overcome. Mexico therefore believes
that the resolutions we are considering today have been
a step in the right direction, as was General Assembly
resolution 74/274, which Mexico promoted in the
General Assembly in April 2020. However, we must
make the provisions a reality so that people affected
by conflicts benefit from what is and should be a truly
global public good. That is what vaccines should be,
especially in a pandemic.
Mexico has contributed to the global effort through
the COVAX platform and has donated 1.1 million
vaccines to six countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean: Paraguay, Belize, Bolivia, Jamaica,
Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras. In an effort
of solidarity and cooperation, which is even more
necessary today if we have retained any universal
conscience.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ted Chaiban, Ms. Martinez and Mr. Ojwang for
their briefings.
Since its emergence in 2019, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) has proven to be a formidable
enemy that has challenged many of our certainties, our
resilience to many challenges and our ability to predict
and combat them effectively.
18/22

11/04/2022

At the height of the crisis, recognizing the extent
of the threat, two years ago the Secretary-General
launched a global call for an immediate ceasefire
around the world in order to focus together on the real
fight: defeating COVID-19.
Resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) give
concrete expression to and amplify that appeal. They
call for an immediate cessation of hostilities by parties
to conflict and for the strengthening of national and
multilateral efforts and cooperation to ensure equitable
access to vaccines in situations of armed conflict,
post-conflict situations and complex humanitarian
emergencies. Two years after the emergence of
COVID-19, it is important to take stock of the
implementation of those resolutions and to assess how
to improve their effectiveness.
In terms of health, the results remains mixed.
The moral principle of vaccines as a global common,
underpinning the multilateral drive for equitable access
for all, is struggling to stand up to the test of reality,
nationalism and the good practices of multinationals.
As for the security situation, it is hardly more
encouraging. The humanitarian ceasefire called for
by the Security Council has not been observed. In
several areas of conflict, the weapons have not been
silenced. The situation has even deteriorated due to new
hostilities, in addition to chronic conflicts, particularly
in Africa and the Middle East. All that is compounded
by ongoing terrorist acts.
On the humanitarian front, the needs remain as
great as the obstacles to humanitarian aid. Famine and
disease, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and
internal and cross-border population displacements,
resulting in increasing numbers of displaced persons
and refugees, increase and, at the same time, complicate
humanitarian needs and the conditions and means of
response of humanitarian personnel.
Despite the joint efforts of the mechanisms set
up for equitable access to vaccines, in particular the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility,
the evidence is overwhelming. A small percentage of
people in developing countries have been vaccinated,
and even fewer in areas of armed conflict, as compared
to a little over 70 per cent in developed countries. It
is clear that the implementation of the envisioned
mechanisms is particularly complex in conflict
situations, especially where there is no humanitarian
ceasefire. In order to fulfil their mandate, humanitarian
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9014

personnel must be able to depend on the guarantees
provided for in the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their Additional Protocols. Similarly, the safety of
civilians must be ensured.

and Mr. Emmanuel Ojwang for their detailed briefings.
I would also like to compliment the United Kingdom
presidency on taking the initiative on this important
theme.

Let me turn to two concerns regarding the response
to challenges posed by the pandemic.

In the past two years, we have seen a global effort
to overcome the challenges caused by the pandemic.
Several countries have immunized large parts of their
populations against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
and have moved on to the next round of booster dosage.
However, much of the developing world is yet to be
vaccinated. The vaccination levels of populations in
countries facing conflict situations are even lower.
The irony is that, while we made significant progress
in developing newer vaccines against COVID-19, as
well as in their production, the issues of vaccine equity,
access, distribution and administration remain to be
addressed.

First, multilateral mechanisms must be deployed
in areas of armed conflict in a cooperative approach
that builds on regional and subregional mechanisms. In
the case of Africa, for example, the African Vaccine
Acquisition Task Team of the African Union (AU),
the AU Special Envoys for COVID-19 and the African
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention must be
engaged in effective partnerships.
Secondly, in terms of deployment on the ground,
it is essential to consider and prioritize a communitybased approach in order to overcome certain
constraints, particularly social ones. We know that the
low coverage in countries of the South is due to various
factors, including reluctance and vaccine scepticism.
In order to reach populations in remote rural areas or
those afraid of the unknown, it may be helpful to draw
on community networks to build the necessary trust in
such situations.
The issue of vaccine equity cannot be resolved in
a sustainable way without recourse to local production,
making it possible to deal with logistical constraints,
avoid stock-outs and prevent distribution problems.
In that regard, we welcome the recent announcement
by the Director-General of the World Health
Organization regarding the establishment of a vaccine
production programme on the African continent. The
implementation of such a programme should clearly be
supported by robust international measures, such as a
moratorium on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights within the World Trade Organization.
Such a moratorium would send a strong message
regarding our ability to meet the challenges posed
by the COVID-19 pandemic and mitigate threats to
international security.

The lack of coordination in vaccine distribution,
as well as a lack of sufficient capacity to administer
vaccines, has adversely affected vaccination initiatives
in countries facing armed conflict and post-conflict
situations. It has impacted underdeveloped countries
the hardest. We must scale up our efforts to expedite
the delivery of safe and affordable COVID-19 vaccines
to such population centres.
The COVID-19 crisis has demonstrated the
need to improve public health infrastructure for lastmile delivery, especially in regions where the health
infrastructure is weak. We need to find ways to ensure
vaccine delivery in such areas affected by conflict and
post-conflict situations, which are not adequately served
by a health infrastructure. We also need to work on
tackling vaccine hesitancy by evolving contextualized,
curated and empathetic strategies to relay scientific and
accurate information to the people. With the resurgence
in COVID-19 cases and an increase in the number of
variants of concern, it is of paramount importance that
international collaboration on genomic surveillance
be encouraged to track virus mutations and exchange
information on a regular basis and in a timely manner.

In conclusion, I would like to once again call for
increased international cooperation and a greater
commitment by the international community to
overcoming this terrible pandemic and its impact on
our collective security.

It is a matter of concern that the acceleration
of vaccination drives against COVID-19 has seen a
reduction in the vaccination of children against other
diseases. We need to ensure that any slackening of
other vaccinations is reversed to ensure a sustainable
health recovery from the pandemic.

Mr, Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Ted Chaiban, Ms. Esperanza Martinez

In line with our One Earth, One Health vision, India
has been instrumental in saving innumerable lives by

22-3140619/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

providing timely and necessary medicines and vaccines
to many countries. India’s own vaccination efforts have
strengthened the global fight against COVID-19.
Following the emergence of the COVID-19
pandemic, India played its due part by supplying
made-in-India vaccines, essential life-saving medicines
and medical equipment to the entire global South. India
has supported more than 150 countries through the
supply of essential medicines and medical accessories
since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we
continue to support countries in need.
India is also ready to explore expanding its domestic
vaccine production capacity for a dedicated supply to
partner countries in the future as part of our vision
for vaccines for tomorrow. Further, in order to convert
vaccines into vaccinations, countries need robust
capabilities in critical sectors, including information
technology tools, such as our CoWIN application, cold
chain expansion and training and capacity-building for
health-care workers in vaccine administration. India
would be happy to partner with other countries to assist
in those important areas as well.
Our scientific community, along with the support of
a robust pharmaceutical industry, has been successful in
developing and producing safe, effective and affordable
vaccines, including the world’s first DNA-based
vaccine. More than 170 million doses of made-in-India
vaccines have reached 96 countries and United Nations
entities, including 41 million doses to 48 countries
through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility
and 14 million doses to 48 countries and United Nations
peacekeepers as bilateral donations. We have also
assisted several countries in building their capacities
to administer the vaccines through customized training
programmes. We also upgraded two peacekeeping
hospitals in Goma, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Juba, in South Sudan, respectively, right at
the onset of the pandemic.
It is a matter of deep concern that, even while the
Security Council has called for a humanitarian pause
in hostilities, terrorists and other non-State actors have
only taken advantage of the pandemic by increasing
their nefarious activities. Terrorists have made
attempts to exploit the financial and emotional distress
caused by pandemic-related lockdowns to weaken the
cohesiveness of societies. The increased use of digital
platforms during the pandemic has, unfortunately,
20/22

11/04/2022

made people more vulnerable to radicalization and
recruitment by terrorist groups.
As the current data on COVID-19 cases demonstrate,
we are still far from a post-pandemic world. That
means that we must continue to work together to find
innovative, affordable and safe solutions to counter the
virus. To ensure continued supplies of vaccines, we
need to ramp up our manufacturing capacities, both
qualitatively and quantitatively, and keep the global
supply chain for raw materials open and uninterrupted.
India has been strongly advocating for the principle of
equity in the World Health Organization and has also
proposed, along with South Africa, a waiver on the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights at the World Trade Organization for
COVID-19 vaccines, diagnostics and medicines.
In conclusion, India stands ready to work with the
global community to build adequately funded robust
health systems, strengthen preparedness and ensure
equitable access to vaccines.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I would like to commend
the United Kingdom for convening this meeting and
acknowledge its leading role in the adoption of the
landmark resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021). I
thank Mr. Ted Chaiban, Ms. Esperanza Martinez and
Mr. Emmanuel Ojwang for their informative briefings
and reflections.
In its capacity as the informal coordinator between
the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Kenya would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
written advisory reflecting the pertinent work of the
PBC in advocating for vaccine equity, availability and
access in countries affected by conflicts to ensure an
inclusive and sustainable recovery.
The dire effects of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) globally and in conflict-riddled countries
in particular are staggering. It has strained humanitarian
aid flows; it has exposed vulnerable groups, particularly
women and children, to further risks; it has undermined
peace processes and peacebuilding efforts; and it has
eroded critical development gains made by countries in
transition or undergoing post-conflict reconstruction.
But if the multilateral machinery had been
activated swiftly and effectively, we believe that the
colossal impact of the pandemic could have been
avoided. Instead, the pandemic exposed the fickle
commitment to multilateralism and a false sense of
22-31406

11/04/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

autonomy, resulting in a series of knee-jerk reactions
that allowed the pandemic space and time to surge,
including through new, rapidly spreading variants.
The yawning gap in vaccination rates between the
North and the Global South is a clear manifestation
of the failure of multilateralism. That is a cause for
concern in relation not only to the pandemic, but also
other global threats. Even as the pandemic shows signs
of easing, we must not relent in our joint efforts to fight
it. We must learn from the painful lesson it has taught
us that no one is safe until everyone is safe.
COVID-19 is potentially a harbinger of future and
possibly more potent pandemics that would further
threaten international peace and security. We must
continue to deal with the lack of equitable access to
vaccines, poor distribution infrastructure and vaccine
hesitancy through multipronged approaches. I will
highlight four points in that regard.
First, to combat the pandemic, in particular in
developing and conflict-afflicted countries, it is critical
that we build long-term resilience in data, vaccine and
testing infrastructure and provide greater institutional
strength to withstand future COVID-19 waves and
other pandemics.
Secondly, with a paltry 1 per cent or less of all
vaccines used in Africa being produced locally, we
must move from discretionary bilateral aid to strategic
investment in local vaccine production. In that regard,
Kenya recently signed a memorandum of understanding
with Moderna for the establishment of a vaccine and
related drug-manufacturing facility in the country.
Thirdly, the Security Council can, in collaboration
with other United Nations agencies, encourage
peacekeeping missions to enhance mediation between
parties to armed conflicts to facilitate the COVID-19
response, including vaccination in situations of armed
conflict. In their ordinary reporting to the Council,
those missions can identify barriers to accessibility
and those disrupting or blocking vaccine supply and
distribution infrastructure.
Fourthly, in view of the challenging circumstances
in armed conflict situations, the Security Council
should reiterate its demands that all parties to armed
conflicts engage immediately in a durable, extensive
and sustained humanitarian pause to facilitate, inter
alia, the equitable, safe and unhindered delivery

S/PV.9014

and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines in areas of
armed conflict.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for
collaborative, human-sensitive action and solidarity. In
that regard, we applaud the concerted continental and
regional actions taken by the African Union, including
through the African Medicines Agency, which is
tasked with enhancing regulatory oversight across
the continent and availing access to quality, safe and
efficacious medicines.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank the briefers for
providing us with updated analyses and insights on the
scale of the challenge remaining on the implementation
of measures related to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in fragile and conflict-affected contexts.
We remain firmly of the opinion that no one is safe
from COVID-19 until all of us are safe. Commendable
progress has been made towards the World Health
Organization (WHO) target of a global vaccination rate
of 70 per cent by mid-2022, but significant and persistent
gaps in coverage remain. That is a risk we cannot afford
to ignore. Addressing very low vaccination rates in
conflict or post-conflict contexts must be prioritized
and flexible, creative solutions must be applied.
The creation of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access (COVAX) Facility humanitarian buffer was a
positive move, and COVAX has indeed been responsible
for the delivery of significant volumes of vaccine doses
to countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Afghanistan, Yemen and Ethiopia. COVAX
is to be commended for its continued ability to adapt
and respond to evolving needs, and I welcome the
current strategy’s emphasis on delivery, including
but not limited to humanitarian and fragile contexts.
Access needs to be prioritized for humanitarian actors,
including the WHO, UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and various civil society
actors with the relevant expertise to ensure that the
doses available can make it into the arms of those who
need them.
In recent months and in general, the international
community has responded well to the call for dose
sharing. However, the challenge we face in 2022
goes far beyond tackling supply issues. We need to
restore, rebuild and supplement health-care systems.
In particular, we will need to concentrate on capacities
for logistics, transport and health service delivery.

22-3140621/22

S/PV.9014

Maintenance of international peace and security

11/04/2022

Those need to be enhanced rapidly and at scale in
fragile settings.

health-care and humanitarian workers to prevent and
treat COVID-19 cases.

International humanitarian law requires that parties
to armed conflict protect medical personnel so that they
can administer vaccinations and provide medical care
without discrimination to the wounded, the needy and
the sick. As of 8 April, WHO had reported 160 attacks
on health-care facilities, workers and transport globally
in 2022, including more than 100 attacks in Ukraine.

It is imperative that we refocus our efforts on
meeting the WHO target of 70 per cent global vaccination
this year, lest we find ourselves once again debating
the best countermeasures to be taken against a more
aggressive variant of COVID-19. In order to do that, we
must strengthen health systems and accelerate our work
in conflict, post-conflict and humanitarian settings.

We must condemn in the strongest possible terms
any and all incidents in which health-care workers
or health-care facilities are targeted by any party to
a conflict. The Council must continue to ensure the
implementation of resolution 2565 (2021), and we
welcome this opportunity to take stock of the progress
made to date and the many challenges that remain on
the ground.
It is in all of our interests to ensure that as many
people as possible are safely vaccinated against this
all-too-easily transmissible disease, which continues
to pose a grave threat to lives, health and well-being
worldwide. We supported the Secretary-General’s call
for a global ceasefire at the onset of the pandemic, and
we reiterate that support now.
Ireland has always promoted the importance
and necessity of equitable access to vaccines, and I
reaffirm our commitment to that today. Alongside
strengthening the capacities of health-care systems to
deliver vaccinations and other essential health services,
we must tackle the wealth of misinformation that has
been allowed to build up around vaccines, which, as
we have heard here today, is hampering the efforts of

22/22

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation asked earlier how indemnity challenges
hindered the operationalization of the humanitarian
buffer. I give the floor to Mr. Chaiban to respond to
that question.
Mr. Chaiban: In terms of the humanitarian buffer,
the issue of liability and indemnity is key. We need now
to recognize that there is a different situation than when
we started the whole vaccination effort with billions of
doses having been administered. We therefore have
much more of a track record when it comes to adverse
effects. That then requires an evolution in the discussion
around indemnity and liability and a look, first, at steps
that can be taken for the full approval of vaccines and,
secondly, different insurance instruments that can be
used to cover any remaining concerns about indemnity
and liability. The discussion concerning the buffer is
looking into those different options.
The President: I would like to conclude by
acknowledging the advice on coronavirus disease
vaccination provided to the Security Council by the
Peacebuilding Commission and to thank its members
for their interest in doing so.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

22-31406
