26

General Auembly -

the report on South West Africa submitted to the Committee by the Union of South Africa ( or a report on
conditions in the Territory of South West Africa
prepared by the Committee in accordance with paragraph 12 (c) of General Assembly resolution 749 A
(VII1)) together with the observations of the Committee on the report as well as the comments of the
duly authorized representative of the Union of South
Africa, should that Government decide to follow the
General Assembly's recommendation and appoint such
a representative.
Special rule B: The General Assembly shall, as a
rule, be guided by the observations· of the Committee
on South West Africa and shall base its conclusions,
as far as possible, on the Committee's observations.
PROCEDURE WITH REGARD TO PETITIONS

Special rule C: The General Assembly shall receive
annually from the Committee on South West Africa a
report with regard to petitions submitted to it. The
summary records of the meetings at which the petitions
were discussed shall be attached.
Special rule D : The General Assembly shall, as a
rule, be guided by the conclusions of the Committee
on South West Africa and shall base its own conclusions, as far as possible, on the conclusions of the
Committee.
PRIVATE MEETINGS

Special rule E: Having regard to rule 62 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, meetings at
which decisions concerning persons are considered shall
be held in private.
VOTING PROCEDURE

Special rule F: Decisions of the General Assembly
on questions relating to reports and petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa shall be regarded as important questions within the meaning of
Article 18, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations.
494th plenary meeting,
11 October 1954.
845 (IX). Educational advancement in Non-Self.
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Noting resolution 743 (VIII) of 27 November 1953,
by which the Administering Members were recommended to make the greatest possible use of offers that
might be made to them by other Member States
through the Secretary-General or through the specialized agencies concerned or in other appropriate
ways, for the purpose of facilitating the educational
advancement of the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories by s:tch means as making available fellowships, scholarship!> and internships to qualified students
from these Territori~s,
Noting the view 3 exprt:<;ed by the Committee on Information from N on-Self-G,werning Territories in
1953 that the attainment of seli-government by Non8 Sec Official Records of the General Assemb.!y, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 15, part two, para. 10.

Ninth Sellsion

Self-Governing Territories is, inter alia, hindered by
inadequacies in the education of their peoples,
Considering that facilities for study and training at
all levels of education, despite all the efforts made by
the Administering Members in the direction of their
improvement, are not yet adequate in most of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories,
1. Invites Member States to extend generously their
offers of facilities not only for study and training of
university standard but, in the first place, for study at
the post-primary level as well as technical and vocational training of immediate practical value;
2. Invites Member States offering facilities, in cases
where the languages of instruction differ from the
languages of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, to
consider the possibility of extending the duration of
the facilities offered by a preliminary period of language training and other adjustment to the country
of study ot training ;
3. Invites Member States to transmit the details of
such offers to the Administering Members, to the
Secretary-General and to the appropriate specialized
agencies;
4. Recommends that the Administering Members
make the greatest possible use of facilities at all levels
of education and training, including the field of fundamental education, that may be offered by States Members of the United Nations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Administering Members and the specialized
agencies concerned, to establish a simple procedure
which would enable offers and applications made
through the United Nations or the specialized agencies
to be brought to the attention of the Administering
Members, and thereafter, in the case of applications, to
the attention of the offering States concerned together
with any observations the Administering Members may
have submitted;
6. Invites the Administering Members to give appropriate publicity in Territories under their administration to offers of study and training facilities and to
take such other measures as will ensure that the
greatest possible advantage is taken of the offers ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
United Nations information material details of all such
offers and of the procedures to be followed in submitting applications, and further requests him to transmit such details to the specialized agencies with a
view to securing similar publicity in their appropriate
publications;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the Administering Members, to prepare a report
for the information of the General Assembly giving
details of the offers made and the extent to which they
have been taken up.
498th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
846 (IX). Work of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report' of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on
the work of its 1954 session;
' Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18.
