United Nations

A/RES/57/159

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 28

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.53 and Add.1)]

57/159. Assistance in mine action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/7 of 19 October 1993, 49/215 of 23 December
1994, 50/82 of 14 December 1995, 51/149 of 13 December 1996 and 52/173 of
18 December 1997, on assistance in mine clearance, and its resolutions 53/26 of
17 November 1998, 54/191 of 17 December 1999, 55/120 of 6 December 2000 and
56/219 of 21 December 2001, on assistance in mine action, all adopted without a
vote,
Recognizing that, in addition to the primary role of States, the United Nations
has a significant role to play in the field of assistance in mine action, and
considering mine action to be an important and integrated component of United
Nations humanitarian and development activities,
Reaffirming its deep concern at the tremendous humanitarian and development
problems caused by the presence of mines and other unexploded ordnance that
constitute an obstacle to the return of refugees and other displaced persons, to
humanitarian aid operations and to reconstruction and economic development, as
well as to the restoration of normal social conditions, and that have serious and
lasting social and economic consequences for the populations of mine-affected
countries,
Bearing in mind the serious threat that mines and other unexploded ordnance
pose to the safety, health and lives of local civilian populations, as well as of
personnel participating in humanitarian, peacekeeping and rehabilitation
programmes and operations,
Encouraged by the reduction in the number of new mine victims, but
reiterating its dismay at the existing high number of victims of mines and other
unexploded ordnance, especially among civilian populations, including women and
children, and recalling in this context Commission on Human Rights resolutions
1995/79 of 8 March 1995, 1 1996/85 of 24 April 1996, 2 1997/78 of 18 April 1997, 3
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
2
Ibid., 1996, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/1996/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
3
Ibid., 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II, sect. A.

02 54865

A/RES/57/159

1998/76 of 22 April 1998, 4 1999/80 of 28 April 1999, 5 2000/85 of 27 April 2000, 6
2001/75 of 25 April 2001 7 and 2002/92 of 26 April 2002 8 on the rights of the child,
and resolutions 1996/27 of 19 April 1996,2 1998/31 of 17 April 1998, 4 2000/51 of
25 April 2000 6 and 2002/61 of 25 April 2002 8 and decision 1997/107 of 11 April
1997, 9 on the human rights of persons with disabilities,
Deeply alarmed by the number of mines that continue to be laid each year, as
well as the presence of a decreasing but still very large number of mines and other
unexploded ordnance as a result of armed conflicts, and therefore remaining
convinced of the necessity and urgency of a significant increase in mine-clearance
efforts by the international community with a view to eliminating the threat of
landmines to civilians as soon as possible,
Noting the inclusion in Amended Protocol II 10 to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects11 of
a number of provisions of importance for mine-clearance operations, notably the
requirement of detectability, and provision of information and technical and material
assistance necessary to remove or otherwise render ineffective minefields, mines
and booby traps, and noting also that Amended Protocol II to the Convention
entered into force on 3 December 1998,
Noting also the conclusions and recommendations adopted at the Third Annual
Conference of the States Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention, held in
Geneva on 10 December 2001, 12
Recalling that the States parties at the Second Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Convention decided to explore further the issue of mines other than
anti-personnel mines, the effects of explosive remnants of wars and possible
measures which could reduce the risk of casualties among civilian populations and
humanitarian problems after conflicts,
Noting that additional States have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, 13 which entered into force on 1 March 1999,
bringing the total number of States that have formally accepted the obligations
therein to one hundred and thirty,
Noting also the conclusions of the Fourth Meeting of the States Parties to the
Convention, held in Geneva from 16 to 20 September 2002, 14 taking note of the
reaffirmed commitments that were made, among other things, to intensify further
the efforts in those areas most directly related to the core humanitarian objectives of
_______________
4

Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II, sect. A.
Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II, sect. A.
6
Ibid., 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
7
Ibid., 2001, Supplement No. 3 (E/2001/23), chap. II, sect. A.
8
Ibid., 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II, sect. A.
9
Ibid., 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23), chap. II, sect. B.
10
CCW/CONF.I/16 (Part I), annex B.
11
See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 5: 1980 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII.
12
See CCW/AP.II/CONF.3/4 (Part I) and Corr.1 and 2.
13
See CD/1478.
14
See APLC/MSP.4/2002/1.
5

2

A/RES/57/159

the Convention, to provide assistance for mine clearance and rehabilitation, the
social and economic reintegration of mine victims and mine-risk education
programmes and to eradicate anti-personnel mines, and taking note of the work of
the intersessional programme established by States parties to the Convention,
Stressing the need to convince mine-affected States to halt new deployments of
anti-personnel mines in order to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of mineclearance operations,
Stressing also the need to convince non-State actors to halt immediately and
unconditionally new deployments of anti-personnel mines,
Recognizing the importance of assisting mine clearance in mine-affected
countries by ensuring that the necessary maps and information and appropriate
technical and material assistance are provided to help to remove existing minefields,
mines, booby traps and other unexploded ordnance,
Noting that the resources allocated to mine clearance and other mine-action
activities have increased in recent years, but stressing the need to mobilize
additional resources to meet increasing requirements, and encouraging all States, the
United Nations and other international, regional and non-governmental
organizations to continue their efforts in this regard,
Concerned at the limited availability of safe and cost-effective mine-detection
and mine-clearance equipment, as well as the need for effective global coordination
in research and development to improve the relevant technology, and conscious of
the need to promote further and more rapid progress in this field and to foster
international, national and local technical cooperation to that end,
Reaffirming the need to reinforce international and regional cooperation and
coordination in the area of mine action and to devote the necessary resources to that
end, including resources to support national and regional capacity-building
initiatives, where applicable, and the work of the United Nations in that regard,
Welcoming the various established mine-action coordination centres, as well as
the creation and existence of international trust funds for mine clearance and other
mine-action activities,
Noting with satisfaction the inclusion in the mandates of several peacekeeping
operations of provisions relating to mine-action work carried out under the direction
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat, in the context of
such operations,
Commending the action taken by donor and recipient Governments, the United
Nations system, the International Committee of the Red Cross and nongovernmental organizations to coordinate their efforts and seek solutions to the
problems related to the presence of mines and other unexploded ordnance, as well as
their assistance to victims of mines,
Welcoming the role of the Secretary-General in increasing public awareness of
the problem of landmines,

3

A/RES/57/159

1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General; 15

2.
Calls, in particular, for the continuation of the efforts of States, with the
assistance of the United Nations and institutions as appropriate, to foster the
establishment and development of national mine-action capacities in countries in
which mines constitute a serious threat to the safety, health and lives of the local
population or an impediment to social and economic development efforts at the
national and local levels, and urges all Member States, in particular those that have
the capacity to do so, to assist mine-affected countries in the establishment and
development of national capacities in mine clearance, mine awareness and victim
assistance;
3.
Invites Member States to develop and support national programmes,
where appropriate in cooperation with the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system and relevant regional, governmental and non-governmental organizations, to
promote awareness of landmines, including among women and children;
4.
Expresses its appreciation to Governments, regional organizations and
other donors for their financial and in-kind contributions to mine action, including
contributions for emergency operations and for national and local capacity-building
programmes;
5.
Appeals to Governments, regional organizations and other donors to
continue and, whenever possible, increase their support to mine action through
further contributions, including contributions through the Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Action, to allow for the timely delivery of mine-action
assistance in emergency situations, and stresses that such assistance should be
integrated into broader humanitarian and other strategies;
6.
Stresses the importance of international support for emergency assistance
to victims of mines and other unexploded ordnance and for the care, rehabilitation
and social and economic reintegration of the victims, and also stresses that such
assistance should be integrated into broader public health and socio-economic
strategies;
7.
Encourages the finalization of an emergency response plan by the United
Nations to respond to emergency mine-action requirements, and emphasizes the
need for that plan to build upon all existing capacities;
8.
Encourages all relevant multilateral and national programmes and bodies
to include, in coordination with the United Nations, activities related to mine action
in their humanitarian, rehabilitation, reconstruction and development assistance
activities, where appropriate, bearing in mind the need to ensure national and local
ownership, sustainability and capacity-building;
9.
Encourages Governments, relevant United Nations bodies and other
donors to take further action to promote gender- and age-appropriate mine-risk
education programmes, victim assistance and child-centred rehabilitation, thereby
reducing the number of child victims and relieving their plight;
10. Stresses the importance of cooperation and coordination in mine action,
while emphasizing once again the important role of the United Nations in the
effective coordination of mine-action activities, based on the United Nations policy

_______________
15

4

A/57/430.

A/RES/57/159

on mine action and effective coordination, 16 and especially the role of the Mine
Action Service, stresses also the important role that national authorities and regional
organizations can play in this regard, and underlines the need for the continuous
assessment of these roles by the General Assembly;
11. Emphasizes the role of the Mine Action Service as the focal point for
mine action within the United Nations system and its ongoing collaboration with
and coordination of all mine-related activities of the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, and in this regard expresses its appreciation of the roles played by
other bodies of the United Nations system, in accordance with United Nations mineaction policy;
12. Notes with appreciation the implementation of the United Nations mineaction strategy for the period 2001–2005 developed by the Secretary-General, 17 and
requests him to review it formally by further seeking and taking into account the
views of Member States and taking into consideration the impact of the landmine
problem on rehabilitation, reconstruction and development, in order to ensure the
effectiveness of assistance in mine action by the United Nations;
13. Emphasizes the importance of undertaking further multisectoral
assessments and surveys to better define the nature, scope and impact of the
landmine problem in affected countries and to support the establishment of clear
priorities and national plans of action, notes with appreciation the ongoing
development by the United Nations of the International Mine Action Standards, with
the assistance of the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Demining and
other partners in mine action, to support the safe and effective conduct of mineaction activities, emphasizes the need for an inclusive process to be followed in the
development and review of such standards, and encourages the Secretary-General to
circulate the completed standards as a United Nations document to all Member
States;
14. Takes note with appreciation of the information management policy for
mine action submitted by the Secretary-General, 18 and emphasizes in this context
the importance of developing and maintaining a comprehensive information
management system for mine action, following an inclusive and continuous
improvement process, under the overall coordination of the Mine Action Service and
with the instrumental support of the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian
Demining, in order to facilitate the coordination of field activities and the setting of
priorities therein;
15. Requests the Mine Action Service to develop further the electronic mine
information network as a user-friendly repository of mine-related information and as
a means for mine-action programmes to circulate on a regular basis to donors and
other partners standard reports on the scope and impact of the mine problem,
available mine-action resources and capacities and the progress achieved in the
field;
16. Urges Member States and regional, governmental and non-governmental
organizations and foundations to continue to extend full assistance and cooperation
to the Secretary-General and, in particular, to provide him with information and

_______________
16

A/53/496, annex II.
See A/56/448 and Add.1 and 2.
18
See A/56/448/Add.2.
17

5

A/RES/57/159

data, as well as other appropriate resources that could be useful in strengthening the
coordination role of the United Nations in mine action;
17. Emphasizes in this regard the importance of recording the location of
mines, of retaining all such records and making them available to concerned parties
upon cessation of hostilities, and welcomes the strengthening of the relevant
provisions in international law;
18. Calls upon Member States, especially those that have the capacity to do
so, to provide the necessary information and technical, financial and material
assistance, as appropriate, and to locate, remove, destroy or otherwise render
ineffective minefields, mines, booby traps and other devices, in accordance with
international law, as soon as possible;
19. Recognizes the importance of the various mine-action coordination
centres, encourages the further establishment of such centres, including those
supported by the United Nations Development Programme or under the auspices of
the Mine Action Service, especially in emergency situations, and encourages States
to support the activities of those centres and the trust funds established for the
coordination and promotion of assistance in mine action;
20. Urges Member States and regional, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and foundations that have the ability to do so to
provide, as appropriate, technological assistance to mine-affected countries and to
promote user-oriented scientific research and development on mine-action
techniques and technology, within reasonable time frames, so that mine-action
activities may be carried out more effectively at lower costs and through safer
means and to promote international and local collaboration in this regard;
21. Encourages Member States and regional, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and foundations to continue to support ongoing
activities to promote appropriate technology, as well as international operational and
safety standards for mine-action activities;
22. Takes note with appreciation of the ongoing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to study ways and means of increasing public awareness of the impact of
the problem of landmines and other unexploded ordnance on affected countries and
the presentation of options to this effect to the General Assembly;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session a report on the progress achieved on all relevant issues outlined
both in his previous reports to the Assembly on assistance in mine clearance and
mine action and in the present resolution, including the progress made by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other international and regional
organizations as well as national programmes, and on the operation of the Voluntary
Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Action and other mine-action programmes;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the item entitled “Assistance in mine action”.
76th plenary meeting
16 December 2002

6
