A /76/PV.64

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

64th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 29 March 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gastorn
(Tanzania), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 129 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolution (A/76/L.43)
Mr. Sharma (India): A healthy life is every
person’s basic right, and the onus is on our respective
Governments to make every possible effort to ensure
that right is fully protected and enjoyed by all. We
appreciate the contribution of the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative in mobilizing political support
for major public-health issues, thereby ensuring that
they are high on the international agenda.
Since its outbreak, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has caused more than 6 million
deaths around the world. It continues to pose a great
threat to global health and economies. The pandemic
has also brought home to us several lessons. It has made
us realize the importance of strong primary health-care
systems, increased investment in health and effective
public health systems.
India has taken a holistic approach to this issue,
based on the four main pillars of health care. The first is
preventive care. We have put special emphasis on yoga,
Ayurveda and fitness as means of controlling lifestyle
diseases, such as diabetes, hypertension and depression.

The second pillar is affordable health care. India
launched its national health protection scheme in
September 2018, based on a twin-focus approach,
expanding access to primary health-care services
to health and wellness centres and providing poor
and vulnerable families with insurance coverage for
secondary and tertiary care hospitalization. To date,
over 210 million health cards have been issued, and
more than 30 million people have been treated under
the scheme. The scheme also provides health insurance
coverage of up to $7,000 per family per year for
secondary and tertiary hospitalization. That insurance
is provided to about 100 million households, or about
500 million people.
The third pillar is improvements to the supply side.
We have taken several major steps to provide quality
medical education and develop medical infrastructure,
including the plan to set up 157 new medical colleges.
The fourth pillar is mission mode intervention. We
have introduced a national nutrition policy to improve
people’s nutritional status, especially for disadvantaged
groups, including mothers, adolescent girls and
children.555
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought the linkage
between global health and foreign policy closer together
than ever before. India believes that equity is of critical
importance for global health. We should address the
barriers to development, as well as the distribution of
medical countermeasures, including aspects related
to intellectual property, technology transfer and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30415 (E)

*2230415*

A/76/PV.64

the scaling up of local and regional manufacturing
capacities during health emergencies
The public health infrastructure in developing
countries is underdeveloped and requires international
support. Our efforts should therefore focus on the
provision of technical and financial support for
building the capacities of Member States. In line
with our “one heart, one health” approach, India has
continued to contribute to global action against the
COVID-19 pandemic through the supply of medical
countermeasures and vaccines to over 150 countries.
Since January 2021, we have supplied more than
170 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines to 96
countries and two United Nations entities, including
more than 14 million doses as grants to 47 countries
and United Nations peacekeepers. We have already
resumed the external supply of vaccines, in fulfilment
of our commitment to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility.
India has been strongly advocating for the principle
of equity in the World Health Organization and, with
South Africa, has proposed a waiver — for COVID-19
vaccines, diagnostics and medicines — of the
intellectual property rights protected in the World Trade
Organization’s Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights agreement. While we await a
decision on our waiver proposal, India has offered
technology transfers for the production of indigenously
developed vaccines, such as Covaxin. We have also
offered indigenously developed COVID-19 mitigation
technologies, solutions and products that are affordable,
effective and safe. At the CoWIN Global Conclave held in
July last year, we offered our CoWIN delivery platform
as open-source software to interested countries.
The Government of India’s motto — “Together, for
everyone’s growth, with everyone’s trust” — resonates
with the core principle of the Sustainable Development
Goals to leave no one behind. We are committed to
partnering with Member States and other stakeholders
to synergize our efforts to accelerate progress towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and
universal health coverage with the most productive,
efficient and effective utilization of resources.
Ms. Anderson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the core group and all delegations for their
active and constructive engagement in negotiations.
The United Kingdom is proud to co-sponsor the draft
resolution (A/76/L.43).
2/8

29/03/2022

At the United Nations, the General Assembly must
rally around efforts to learn from the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and pursue long-term global
policies to increase pandemic preparedness and lessen
the likelihood of future pandemics. It is in that context
that the United Kingdom sees the draft resolution as
timely and crucial.
We condemn, in the strongest possible terms,
Russia’s indiscriminate attacks on the Ukrainian
population and on health facilities and health workers
caught in the crossfire in Ukraine. Health must remain
a priority, with health workers being protected so that
they can provide emergency care to save lives and
health systems and facilities being protected so that
they remain accessible to all who need them.
Now is the time to continue to maintain and
strengthen efforts to build strong, resilient health
systems. The United Kingdom remains committed
to multilateral efforts to enable equitable access to
COVID-19 vaccines. We continue to use Security
Council resolution 2565 (2021) to ensure that people
affected by conflict are not left behind.
Looking ahead, the United Kingdom welcomes the
high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance to be held
in 2024, which will be critical for maintaining political
momentum behind tackling antimicrobial resistance
and wider health resilience. Ahead of the meeting, we
must all work together to generate political will on
concrete action to tackle antimicrobial resistance.
Mr. Nakagawa (Japan): On behalf of Japan, I
express our support for the draft resolution on global
health and foreign policy, entitled “Elevating pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response to the highest
level of political leadership” (A/76/L.43). We are
grateful to the facilitators and the core group for their
leadership and dedicated work.
Our hearts also go out to all the victims and
survivors in Ukraine. They must be protected, including
from a global health perspective.
While appreciating the 2022 draft resolution on
global health and foreign policy, we would first like to
reiterate the importance of placing various health issues
in the context of universal coverage and the health
system as a whole, as well as strengthening the overall
health agenda within the United Nations system.
Two years of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic have reminded us of the importance of strong
22-30415

29/03/2022

health systems as the foundation for achieving universal
health coverage and health security. In that context,
we value the draft resolution soon to be adopted, as
it adequately reflects the challenges we face as we
continue to address the pandemic.
Furthermore, we appreciate the addition of a
paragraph referring to the issue of antimicrobial
resistance. We acknowledge that antimicrobial
resistance will remain a public health threat after the
COVID-19 pandemic. Some experts are concerned
that the pandemic could undo much of the world’s
progress on antimicrobial resistance, both in hospitals
and in communities, for example by hampering proper
monitoring. The fact that available antimicrobial
options are disappearing is a serious problem from a
human security perspective.
As COVID-19 and other health issues become more
complex, we believe that it is time to integrate efforts
in the health arena, which historically have been siloed
by disease and feuds, and to address health issues in
a comprehensive manner, including at the high-level
meeting on antimicrobial resistance in 2024. We should
not treat antimicrobial resistance as a stand-alone issue,
but take an integrated approach to various health issues
beyond individual disease control. We should now aim
for an all-inclusive approach, especially in New York,
bringing together the efforts of individual healthrelated agendas, including the high-level meetings on
universal health coverage and antimicrobial resistance.
Finally, we promise to contribute faithfully to the
discussion on the modalities of the high-level meeting
on antimicrobial resistance. We also look forward to
enthusiastically discussing how to harmonize various
health issues while streaming budget implications.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Challenges
in global health demand persistent attention and
require strengthening health system resilience through
affordable health care, which should be a priority
commitment for all countries.
On the other hand, the strengthening of health
systems cannot be realized without first improving
infrastructure and ensuring technology, as well as
knowledge transfer in relevant fields. Further, greater
access to affordable quality health-care services,
along with quality, safe, effective, affordable and
essential medicines, vaccines and diagnostic and
health technologies, should be available to all countries
without any discrimination or political consideration.

A/76/PV.64

It is an essential priority for international
development that everyone, everywhere, should enjoy
access to quality and affordable health care. In fact,
health issues should never be politicized to merely
entertain the interests of particular parties at the cost
of disrupting the well-being of entire populations.
Therefore, it is far more important that we address the
availability, accessibility and affordability of health
care for all.
Access to affordable health care is an essential
component of responding to and recovering from the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as
other public health emergencies. In fact, COVID-19 is a
sobering reminder for us all that health is a precondition,
outcome and indicator of sustainable development. It is
indeed one of the foundations of social, economic and
political stability.
However, as the entire world continues to work
together to contain the COVID-19 pandemic, and while
we all agree that progress in global health depends
primarily on international partnerships, solidarity and
multilateral cooperation, particularly during global
crises, we are also witnessing the illegal measures
taken by the United States and several others that
blindly follow their own policies in imposing inhumane
unilateral coercive measures on a number of countries.
Those measures include unlawful and oppressive
economic sanctions on countries that have faced
and continue to face great suffering due to the grave
consequences of the pandemic.
As far as the Islamic Republic of Iran is concerned,
the United States’ illegal unilateral coercive measures
continue to pose a serious threat to the Iranian people’s
right to health, as well as access to essential medicines
and medical equipment. The United States baselessly
claims that those unilateral coercive measures do not
target food and medical supplies; however, in reality,
they do. The exclusion of countries from the international
banking system deprives them of the ability to acquire
those items through existing commercial and financial
and mechanisms, thereby affecting food and medical
supplies through unilateral coercive measures.
In spite of those difficulties and unjust pressures,
my country has managed to make astonishing progress
in the area of biotechnology, as well as stem cells. Today,
we are proud to announce that Iran has become one of
the few countries to manufacture COVID-19 vaccines.

22-304153/8

A/76/PV.64

For well over four decades, the Islamic Republic
of Iran has hosted millions of Afghan refugees and
generously shared with them its much-needed resources
despite facing a difficult situation, including the illegal
unilateral sanctions imposed by Western countries,
particularly the United States.
A living example of this triumph can be seen
just this year, as we have managed to fully vaccinate
a large population of Afghan refugees and other
Afghans present in Iran. Nevertheless, over the
course of these years, only considerably few expenses
have been covered by international donors for the
provision of all such services. While we will do our
best to ensure the continuation of such services, it is
obvious that rendering them and providing facilities to
millions of Afghans cannot continue in the absence of
sufficient and continuous financial assistance from the
international community.
To date, we have done much more than our fair
share in that regard. Now the international community
must fulfil its responsibilities, based on the principle of
solidarity and burden-sharing.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, during
this unprecedented health situation, cooperation,
solidarity and unity are more important than ever.
Let us seize this opportunity to not only promote
multilateralism but also fight unilateralism and in order
to focus on addressing this humanitarian crisis, in the
interest of one and all.
Mr. Rakhmetov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan would like to thank the core group of global
health and foreign policy delegations of Norway, Brazil,
France, Indonesia, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand
for facilitating the negotiation process and inviting
Kazakhstan to co-sponsor the timely and important
draft resolution A/76/L.43. We are delighted that,
along with many vital commitments and issues being
raised, the text calls upon Member States to ensure
that primary health care is among the core components
of strengthening preparedness and response to future
health emergencies.
For health systems to be resilient in the face of
health crises of the current magnitude, strong primary
health care is essential. Primary health care delivers the
first line of care during the acute phase of a health crisis.
It also reduces pressure on the entire health system by
providing comprehensive and preventive care during
and after the crisis.
4/8

29/03/2022

As the world moves from emergency response to
the control phase of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
it will be essential to utilize primary health care and
ensure that everyone has access to testing, treatment
and vaccines.
Strengthening primary health care now will not
only reduce the impact of the current pandemic on the
health and well-being of millions, but will also limit
their susceptibility to subsequent pandemics, while
ensuring that the world can one day fulfil the promise of
health for all. As indicated in the Declaration of Astana,
primary health care is a cornerstone of a sustainable
health system for universal health coverage and healthrelated Sustainable Development Goals.
In conclusion, let us once again emphasize our
gratitude to the core group and all delegations for the
unanimous consensus that aligning with the Declaration
of Astana is important in driving primary health care
during the pandemic and beyond.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/76/L.43, entitled “Elevating pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response to the highest level of
political leadership”. In that connection, I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. The present
statement will also be distributed to Member States.
Under the terms of operative paragraph 17 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would decide to hold
a high-level meeting in 2024 on antimicrobial resistance
and requests the General Assembly to appoint two
co-facilitators to present options and modalities for the
conduct of such a meeting. The adoption of the draft
resolution would not entail any budgetary implications
with regard to the programme budget. Upon a decision
on the modalities of the meeting, the Secretary-General
would assess the budgetary implications and advise the
General Assembly, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, in accordance with established
practice, the date of the high-level meeting will be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
22-30415

29/03/2022

The statement I just read was distributed through
the plenary place on the e-deleGATE portal and will
be made available in the Journal of the United Nations
under the e-statements link for the meeting.
The Acting President: Before proceeding further, I
would like to inform the Assembly that draft resolution
A/76/L.43 has closed for e-sponsorship. I give the floor
to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/76/L.43: Albania, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, the Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mauritius, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, the
Niger, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu, Viet Nam,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.43?
Draft resolution A/76/L.43 was adopted (resolution
76/257).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote after the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by representatives from
their seats.
Mr. Leiby (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to join consensus on the text today
and we thank Norway for its facilitation of resolution
76/257.
The United States continues to work alongside its
international partners to end the global coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and strengthen our

A/76/PV.64

global capacity to prevent, detect and respond to future
global health security threats.
The United States joins others in condemning
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the Russian military
forces’ attacks, which have disrupted health services,
destroyed numerous health facilities, including
maternity and children’s hospitals, and struck buildings
where innocent civilians, including children, were
sheltering. The World Health Organization (WHO) has
verified numerous incidents of attacks on health-care
facilities in the past month. There is no justification
for those unprovoked and unwarranted attacks. While
addressing pandemic preparedness and response,
we cannot ignore such brazen attacks against such
facilities. We thank the WHO and other United Nations
humanitarian agencies and partners that are working
tirelessly to ensure protection for affected communities
and health workers and ensure access to life-saving
supplies and services.
More broadly, we appreciate the emphasis in
today’s resolution on building up manufacturing
capacity to ensure the diversification of production in
a full range of medical response, with an eye towards
future pandemic response. To date, the United States is
the largest contributor to the Gavi Alliance in support
of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX)
Facility. We have provided, both in partnership with
COVAX and bilaterally, over 480 million doses to more
than 110 countries and economies.
The United States supports strong and growing
trade relationships around the globe. We welcome
efforts to bolster those relationships, increase economic
cooperation and advance prosperity for all people
within the appropriate institutions. It is our view
that the United Nations must respect the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
trade negotiations, and must not comment on decisions
and actions in other forums, including at the World
Trade Organization (WTO). While the United Nations
and the WTO share some common interests, they have
different roles, roles and memberships.
The United States understands that, with respect to
the resolution, references to the transfer of technology
and know-how are to voluntary technology transfer and
know-how on mutually agreed terms. Resolutions of
the General Assembly also do not interpret or alter any
WTO agreement or decision, including the Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property

22-304155/8

A/76/PV.64

Rights. We underscore our position that trade language
negotiated or adopted by the General Assembly or
under its auspices is not binding and has no relevance
to United States trade policy, to our trade obligations or
commitments or to the agenda at the WTO, including
discussions or negotiations in that forum.
Ms. Babikyan (Armenia): I take the floor in
explanation of position on behalf of the delegation of
Armenia on resolution 76/257, just adopted, entitled
“Elevating pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response to the highest level of political leadership”.
As the international community has embarked
on the long path of recovery, the United Nations
continues to exercise its vital role in coordinating and
leading the global efforts to respond to the health,
socioeconomic, humanitarian and other consequences
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We
appreciate the cooperation and support of the United
Nations development system in operationalizing the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility
to ensure vaccine deployment to many countries,
including Armenia.
The resolution contains a reference to the special
session of the General Assembly in response to the
coronavirus disease pandemic, held on 3 and 4 December
2020, promoted by a country that instrumentalized the
pandemic to unleash a large-scale military escalation
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate
global ceasefire.
The aggression by Azerbaijan against the people
of Nagorno-Karabakh from September to November
2020 led to thousands of human casualties, war crimes,
atrocities and other gross violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The humanitarian crisis caused by the war was further
exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus disease
in Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijan’s deliberate and
targeted attacks against critical civilian infrastructure,
including health-care institutions and water and gas
pipelines, severely limited the capacities of the Artsakh
authorities to contain and respond to the pandemic.

29/03/2022

just adopted by consensus, for bringing the important
issue of pandemic prevention to the highest organ of the
United Nations.
On 22 April 2020, within the framework of the
World Health Organization (WHO), Chile put forward
a proposal for a global instrument for the preparation
of a multidimensional response to pandemics that
would strengthen and complement international health
regulations and their effective implementation. The
instrument would potentially also tackle relevant aspects
that might arise as a result of the recent coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, such as facilitating the
return of nationals and residents affected by restrictions
on movement in their countries of residence; the needs
of particularly vulnerable groups affected by such
phenomena; and the production and distribution of tests
and treatments, including vaccines.
In March 2021, the former President of Chile
signed a public letter, together with over 20 other
global leaders, including the President of the European
Council, Mr. Charles Michel; the former Chancellor of
Germany, Mrs. Angela Merkel; the President of France,
Mr. Emmanuel Macron; and the Director-General of
the WHO, Mr. Tedros Ghebreyesus, underscoring the
need for such an agreement.
In November, Chile, together with Australia,
led consultations among all Member States to reach
agreement on a decision-making text to be put forward
to the special session of the World Health Assembly,
co-sponsored by more than 120 member States. That
decision, which was adopted by consensus at the special
session, led to the establishment of an intergovernmental
negotiating body open to all member States and tasked
with drafting and negotiating the aforementioned
text pursuant to article 19 and other provisions of the
Constitution of the WHO that the intergovernmental
negotiating body deemed relevant.

Therefore, Armenia disassociates itself from the
ninth preambular paragraph, which refers to the special
session of the General Assembly.

On 1 December, the special session of the World
Health Assembly was held in Geneva, where the
decision was taken to begin negotiations on a new
convention, agreement or other international instrument
of the WHO on prevention, preparation and response to
pandemics. Chile continues to lead the Group of Friends
of a Pandemic Treaty, which is a powerful catalyst in
the negotiations process on that treaty.

Mr. Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
thanks the countries that presented resolution 76/257,

That is why Chile joined the consensus on the
resolution just adopted.

6/8

22-30415

29/03/2022

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
We shall now hear those delegations wishing to
make statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Murphy (Holy See): The Holy See
welcomes the adoption of the global health and
foreign policy resolution entitled “Elevating pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response to the highest
level of political leadership” (resolution 76/257). My
delegation further thanks the core group of Norway,
Indonesia, Brazil, Senegal, South Africa, France and
Thailand for its leadership and facilitation during
the negotiations.
In particular, the Holy See welcomes a number of
provisions in the adopted text. Those include recognition
of the importance of ensuring universal health coverage,
which is essential to realizing sustainable development
as a cornerstone of effective pandemic preparedness;
recognition of the need to improve access to quality,
safe and effective vaccines, therapeutics, diagnostics
and other health technologies, including through
capacity-building for local production; and support
for international collaboration and coordination on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response,
including by participating in discussions to draft and
negotiate an international instrument on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response; as well as
support to build and strengthen capacity in developing
countries. Those and other provisions reflect the gravity
of the lessons learned during the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the need for a strong commitment by
States to preventing and responding to future global
health crises.
My delegation would also like to express its full
support for the approach taken by the core group in
conducting the negotiations, particularly its decision
to maintain a narrow focus on the major topic. That
enabled richer discussion on the subject from a range of
perspectives and avoided the process being negatively
impacted by inserting topics known to be complex and
controversial. The Holy See lauds that methodology
and hopes that it will be applied in future negotiations
on this important agenda item and, indeed, in other
forums.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.

A/76/PV.64

The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
I remind members that statements in the right of reply
are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and
five minutes for the second, and should be made by
representatives from their seats.
Ms. Ahmadova (Azerbaijan): We have asked for
the floor to exercise our right of reply in connection
with the comments made by the representative of
Armenia in explanation of position after the adoption
of resolution 76/257, entitled “Elevating pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response to the highest
level of political leadership”.
We would like to make the following points.
First, no matter how many initiatives Azerbaijan
puts forward, it is its sovereign right — as well as the
right of any State or international organization — to
put forward initiatives and contribute to them or not.
Armenia’s attempts to challenge resolutions of the
General Assembly simply because they may refer to
initiatives put forward by Azerbaijan, even as Chair
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, are
irresponsible and unethical.
Secondly, Azerbaijan did not unleash an aggression
against anyone. Assertions to the contrary are absurd,
contradicting international law and numerous
resolutions and documents adopted by international
organizations. Azerbaijan’s military actions during the
44-day war unleashed by Armenia in 2020 were carried
out in accordance with international humanitarian law
and in exercise of its inherent right to self-defence.
Suffice it to mention that the 44-day war resulted in
more civilian casualties in Azerbaijani-populated
settlements, far outside the theatre of active hostilities,
than within Armenian-populated areas.
The conclusion is self-explanatory: instead of
wasting time and energy on spreading lies and blame,
Armenia must abandon its obsolete and false narratives
and prioritize compliance with international law and
good-neighbourly relations.
Ms. Babikyan (Armenia): I take the floor to
exercise the right of reply in response to the delegation
of Azerbaijan.
We reject all of the outdated fabrications and
distortions just voiced by the representative of
Azerbaijan, which are aimed at concealing its
responsibility for numerous violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

22-304157/8

A/76/PV.64

We have already elaborated, in our explanation of
position, that the reality is that Azerbaijan unleashed
a large-scale military escalation amid the global
pandemic, causing immense human suffering, violence
and destruction.

8/8

29/03/2022

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 129.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

22-30415
