NATIONS

UNI

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

19 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

., .. ... ... . .. .,... .. .. .... .. .... .. .,.

1

of the agenda . . . , , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162) . . , , . , , , , . . . . , , . , . . . . , , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , , .

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2380)

SIPV .2380

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2380th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday,
P~*esi&nr:

Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

de NANTEUIL

Pwsmr: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Provisional
I.

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2380)

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162)

Adoption of the agenda

The situation

in the Middle East:

19 June 1982, at 7.30 p.m.
introduced by France. In addition, I should like to
draw the attention of Council members to documents
S/15180, S/15183, S/15186. S/15187, S/15188, S/15190,
S/15195, S/15197, S/15200, S/15209, S/lSZlO, S/l521 I,
S/15220, S/15221, S/15222, S/1.5223, S/15224, S/l5225
and S/15226.
3. I shall now speak in my capacity as representative
of FRANCE.
4. Ever since the beginning of the tragic events that
have steeped Lebanon in blood in the past two weeks,
the Council has, above all, been seeking ways and
means to put an end to the bloodshed and to prepare
the way back to the only politically satisfactory situation-that
is, one in which the territorial
integrity,
sovereignty and independence of Lebanon are respected.
5. The Council unanimously
adopted resolutions
508 (1982) and 509 (1982), which deal in clear-cut terms
with the withdrawal of Israeli forces. It adopted resolution 511 (1982), which extends the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon [UNIFIL)
for two months. So far, however, the Council has not
dealt specifically with the tragic situation of the civilian
populations, both Lebanese and Palestinian.

Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)

6. But these are the people who have suffered. It is
about them that we are constantly thinking. It is to them
that we must express our concern in an active way.
In particular, we must see to it that these civilian
populations receive large-scale and effective aid.

I. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretmtion jiwn Fwwh):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [2374th, 2375th and 2377th
~nc~tinjis], I invite the representatives of Lebanon and
Israel to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table; I invite
the representative of Egypt to take the place reserved
fdr him at the side of the Council chamber.

7. That is why my Government has deemed it necessary to submit the draft resolution now before the
Council [S//5240]. It essentially meets that two-fold
concern. We feel that urgent action is required. Any
delay in the tangible expression of our solidarity with
the civilian populations concerned would be as incomprehensible as it would be dangerous.
8. It is true that major efforts have already been
made to come to the aid of these people. However,
much still remains to be done. Many obstacles remain
to be overcome. We must see to it that aid is dispatched
and distributed effectively. We must see to it that the
organizations concerned are in a position to carry out
their tasks.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation ,fiotn Fwrzc~h):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15240, which contains the text of a draft resolution

9. We must therefore strive to ensure that existing
obstacles are removed and that no new ones arise.
My country, which has a particularly deep attachment

--

17. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of Amcrica): My Government, in consultation with the Governments of Lebanon and Israel and with United Nations
authorities, wholly supports the positive efforts now
going forward in the field to provide humanitarian services to the people of Lebanon. Each day this humanitarian effort is more effective, reaching more of those
needing special service. We believe that such progress
will continue.

to Lebanon, feels directly concerned by the suffering
of the populations there. That is why it regards the
adoption of this draft resolution by the Council as of
special importance.
10.

I now resume my functions

as PRESIDENT.

I I. I understand that the Council is prepared to vote
on the draft resolution before it. If there is no objection, I will now put to the vote the draft resolution.

18. As an earnest of our commitment,
President
Reagan has appointed the Administrator of the United
States Agency for International
Development as his
personal representative to co-ordinate all United States
efforts to assist in this process. Fifteen million dollars
have already been committed to the effort: we anticipate the authorization of an additional $20 million.

12. The PRESIDENT
(inie~prctation .j?om Frerzck):
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
have asked to be allowed to make statements following
the voting.

19. Our principal concern remains the restoration of
full Lebanese sovereignty and authority throughout
Lebanon’s territory.

13. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): The Government of
Japan has been following with grave concern the
serious developments taking place in Lebanon in the
past few weeks. We strongly deplore Israel’s invasion
of Lebanon and its violation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Lebanon. My Government wishes to express once again
its profound sympathy to the Government and people
of Lebanon that are confronted with this serious
situation. It also expresses its deep regret over the
great number of civilian casualties, the deprivation and
displacement
suffered by the inhabitants
and the
heavy destruction of property in Lebanon.

20. As I have said. we are wholly committed to
serving the human needs of the people of Lebanon.
We hope and we trust that no party and no Government
will exploit these fundamental humanitarian concerns
for narrow political purposes.
2 I. In the context of those considerations and reflcotions, my delegation has supported the draft resolution.
22. The PRESIDENT
(intc~~/.cttrtion
I call on the representative of Israel.

14. The Israeli invasion has brought about the tragic
displacement of reportedly as many as 600,000 inhabitants, both Lebanese and Palestinians,
who are
consequently in dire need of emergency assistance,
such as foodstuffs, medical supplies and other basic
materials. In view of this distressing situation, the
Secretary-General
has made an urgent appeal to the
international
community,
requesting it to extend
emergency
humanitarian
assistance to Lebanon
[S//S/94/Add.2,

prim.

,fiom

Frcvnr~hl:

23. Mr. BLUM (Israel): My Government welcomes
every humanitarian
effort aimed at relieving and
alleviating human suffering anywhere around the
world. In keeping with this policy we support any
genuine humanitarian effort to alleviate the plight d
human beings in Lebanon, as we do with regard to
suffering human beings in Afghanistan, in Kampuchea.
in Chad, in Uganda, in the Falkland Islands (Malviniis).
in Viet Nam and elsewhere. I note with re:gret thut
I have forgotten to add to my list Syria, Iraq and
Iran.

31.

15. The Government of Japan, in response to this
urgent appeal by the Secretary-General
and in view of
the severity of the suffering, decided yesterday to
contribute $US 1 million through the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for the affected
inhabitants of Lebanon.

24. We shall therefore welcome co-operation with the
Secretary-General in promoting genuine hurnanit:lrian
efforts in Lebanon. This is fully in keeping not only
with the traditions of the people and the State which
I represent, but also with the policies of the State of
Israel over the years and in particular over the past
two weeks, as 1 had occasion to inform the Council
in greater detail last night [237Yth mcetingj.

16. My delegation takes this opportunity to demand
once again that all the parties concerned cease hostilities at once. We also demand that Israel withdraw
its forces immediately
and unconditionally,
in accordance with Council resolution 509 (1982). My delegation
further urges that all the parties concerned, in particular the Israeli occupying forces in Lebanon, fully cooperate with the international
organizations engaged
in the humanitarian relief activities in Lebanon.

25. In this connection, I wish to make a point of
clarification. Last night I quoted from a press COGmunication released by ICRC in Geneva yesterday.
18 June [ihid., pare. /29].‘1 wish to make it clear that
in referring to the 300 wounded that are receiving treatment 1 was speaking of the situation in the city of Sidon
2

and quoting from a report that had been received in
Ckncva frt)m the ICKC delegates based in that city.
This point of clarification
I think effectively disposes
of the exercises in sophistry that were carried out
here fOll0Whg
my statement by a number of speakers,
and in particular by Mr. Maksoud, that living menumerit of truthfulness and intellectual
integrity,
whose
absence, incidentally,
from our deliberations here we
all deeply’ regret.

Nowhere were the innuendos contained in the present
reso]ution to be found there, and I wi]J have to say
a few words about this.
31. We do not expect any recognition for our humanitarian efforts on the part of the international community. We know the parliamentary constellation in this
body and we know the personalities and the States
which they represent well enough not to expect such
recognition. Moreover, the humanitarian assistance
that we are extending to the population of Lebanon
is not based on any expectation of recognition; we do
it because we consider it our human duty. But we are
entitled to expect and we demand that the Council
refrain from innuendos and from attempts to abuse
humanitarian concerns for the purpose of political
objectives-sometimes
very dubious political objectives.

26. I also wish to inform the Council that in keeping
with these policies df my Government direct contact
has now been established
between Mr. ya’acov
Meridor, a member of the Cabinet of Israel’s Government. who has been put in charge of the humanitarian
efforts t)f my Government
in Lebanon and is acting
as
its co-ordinator.
and his opposite number in the Lebil lCSC
Government.
27. Having said this, let me also say a few words
aboUt the resolution just adopted by the Council.
Mr. President, I will not hide from you and from the
other members of the Council our feeling that perhaps
not nil the members of the Council who voted for this
resolution have been motivated solely and exclusively
by humanitarian
considerations,
I would be happy to
be proofed
wrong.
hut there are too many indications
to ttlc contrary.

32. We have heard the representative of the United
States of America. In contradistinction to most members of the Council, he knows what he is talking about,,
because his Government has been actively involved in
those humanitarian efforts in co-operation with my
Government. Thus it is not surprising that he is not
bandying about all kinds of figures that belong in the
sphere of imagination and fantasy.
33. The resolution adopted here expresses deep concern at the sufferings of the Lebanese and Palestinian
civilian populations. What about the sufferings of
Israel’s civilian population? The Council treats the
sufferings of the population of Israel over the past
weeks with the same callousness and indifference
as it has treated it with over all these years. Operation
“Peace for Galilee” became necessary in order to
alleviate the sufferings of the people of northern
Galilee. And now that we are in control in southern
Lebanon, we know better than before how necessary
it was.

28. First of A, we have the sad record of the Council
in tbc field of humanitarian
efforts in general around
the world. Then, of course, as I look around the table
1 cannot help noticing representatives from a number
of countries which have excelled in their humanitarian
efforts in recent years. So as not to attract replies on
their part, I leave them unnamed today. If they feel
they have been the targets of my remark, they will
reply anyway.
29. With regard to the situation in Lebanon, the
Council’s
bizarre attitude is even more evident. As
I told the Council yesterday, over the past seven years
100,000 or so Lebanese civilians have been killed,
250.000 have been wounded and more than a million
have been displaced (ihid., pmr. 1331. May I inquire
of you, Mr, President, about the humanitarian resolutions adopted by the Council over a]] these Years
with regard to the population of Lebanon.

34. To give the Council just one example, yesterday
we discovered a bunker in Sidon containing military
equipment and ammunition
for the transportation
of which we shall need 500 trucks. All that equipment-peace-loving
Soviet equipment-was
assembled there to cause suffering, agony and misery
to the civilian population of Israel. There is not one
word about that civilian population in the resolution.

30. So as to shorten the proceedings, I should like to
draw your attention to Council resolution 436 ( 1978).
I think it is particnlnrly pertinent to mention that resolution because, like the resolution adopted here tonight,
that resolution too ~21s adopted under French Presidency; that is, under the presidency of Your Predecessor, Mr, Leprette. It was adopted at the height of
the Syrian excesses against the population of Beirut,
which cost the lives of thousands of People. What do
we have in that resolution? There is one Paragraph,
p;~t*agl*aph 2, in which the CoUnCil
“d]s uPon a]]
involved to ~I]OW units of the International Commtttee
of the Red Cross into the area of COIlfliCt
to evacuate
the wounded and provide
humanitarian
assistance”+
That was a]/ the Council had to say on that occasion*

35. But we are dealing with a humanitarian reSOh.Ition, which, surprisingly, reaffirms resolutions 508
(1982) and 509 (1982).
36. I need not repeat my Government’s position on
those resolutions. I did that last night, and ] did that
last week, But those are not humanitarian resO]Utions.
And the true intentions of this resO]UtiOn
are c]earlY
revealed by the reference that is made to those reso]utions in this allegedly humanitarian resolution.
37. Then, of course, in paragraph 3 we have the
ug]y innuendo. ln the second part of that paragraph
3

quite obvious that only its fear of being isolated prevented the United States delegation from continuing
to insist that that humanitarian provision be excluded
from resolution 5 I I (1082).

the Council culls upon all the parties to the conflict
not to hamper the exercise of those responsibilities
and to assist in humanitarian efforts.
38.

We reject this innuendo.

49, Today, when the draft resolution that has now
become resolution 512 (1982) was submitted
to us.
only one delegation-the
delegation of the United
States-in
the corridors
of this building categorically
objected to this exclusively
humanitarian
proposal
and, once again, only the fear of finding itself con
pletely isolated prompted the United States to ugree
to this humanitarian action by the Council.

39. As I said before, and as I want to say again in
conclusion.
WC shell co-operate
with any genuine
humanitnritm effort. We shall resist, reject and foil any
effort which, under the guise of humanitarian
concern, attempts to advance dubious political objectives.
40. The PRESIDENT
(intcrp~(~ttrtiort ,fhom Frcrwh):
I call on the representative
of Lebanon.

SO. I want to say one more thing. Yesterday,
in his
statement. Mr, Blum said that a crime is a crime is
a crime [ihid., ptr,*tr. 1441. We agree with him, But
there is something else that must be recognized:
that
is, that Israel’s aggression against Lebanon is aggression is aggression is aggression.

4 I. Mr. TUhNI
(Lebanon)
(intcrprcltcrtion
,fhm
F/*rnc*/r): Mr. President, on behalf of Lebanon and all
the Lebanese without exception I have the privilege of
expressing
the most profound
gratitude to you personally, the representative
of France, to the Government of France and to France, for which Lebanon has
always had and continues to have feelings of confidence and historic ties of friendship,

5 I, The PRESIDENT
(into’~,‘c’ttrtiort
fiwn Fwrtdd:
I shall now call upon those representat’ives
who wish
to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

42. We should like to thank each and every member
of the Council and also those Governments
that have
helped us in these difficult days and that are not represented here this evening,
43. In conclusion,
my Government
how much we appreciate the prompt
Secretary-General
and his colleagues.
depend a great deal on their efforts
days,

52. Mr, BLUM (Israel): I said in my statement
that
I was not going to identify those countriles which
I think are not motivated solely and exclu~sively by
humanitarian considerations,
so as not to attract replies
on their part.

wishes to say
reaction of the
Our future will
in the coming

53. For some reason the representative
of tlhe Soviet
Union felt that he belonged to that category. I respect
his judgement.
54. My remark last night that a crime is a crime
is tl crime did not originate with me: I was quoting
the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. But since
the representative
of the Soviet Union has’ brought
up the issue again I indeed agree: aggression iis aggl-ession is aggression-in
Budapest, in Prague, in East
Berlin, in Warsaw,
in Kabul and elsewhere.
And
imperialism is imperialism is imperialism,

44. As for the words of the representative
of Israel,
I hlive no comments to make on that subject.
45. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(i/lt(‘/‘/)/‘Ptflfioll
,/kern Rmsion):
I listened
very carefully to two statements made today-that
of
the representative
of the United States and that of the
representative
of Israel.

55. Mr, LICHENSTEIN
(United States of Amcrica): I am a relative newcomer to these preciincts.
hut
I take the liberty of observing
that it has been my
impression that the discussions
and consultations
thut
take place both in informal settings and in the corridors
of the United Nations are largely a matter of COIleagues working together in good faith towa,rds common goals, We in the delegation of the United StM%,
at any rate, will continue so to regard the consultation
process.

46. The representative
of Israel. Mr. Blum, said
that not all of those that voted for the draft resolution
adopted by the Council today-now
resolution
512
( 1982)--were
guided by humanitarian considerations.
I agree with him,
47. As for the delegation of the United States,
although it talks a great deal about its humanitarian
motives, yesterday and again today it has shown that it
is guided by whatever
suits it, but certainly not by
humanitarian considerations,

56. Any suggestions that the Permanent Representative of the United States made yesterday wlith regard
to resolution 51 I (1982) were mnde in an effort
to
improve that draft resolution and more finely to focus
it on the problems that were then before the Council.

48. Yesterday.
when the Council was discussing
the
draft resolution
that became resolution
5 I 1 ( I982),
the United States delcgution
rtlised objections
to
parugraph
2, which in fact refers precisely
to the
humunitarian efforts of UNIFIL.
It wished to exclude
that humanitarian provision from the resolution. It was

57, Today, as her deputy, I have attempted to muke
the same contribution
to a well-designed
and finely
4

targeted draft resolution,
which has become the
unanimously adopted resolution 512 (1982). I make no
apology for our behaviour or our actions. I did, however, feel it essential to refer to them in light of the slurs
of the representative of the Soviet Union.
58. Mr. OVTNNIKOV
Republics) (interpretdon

(Union of Soviet Socialist
from Russitrn): The repre-

sentative of Israel has said that he agrees with my
judgement with respect to who was guided by nonhumanitarian
concerns. I said that it was the United
States that was guided by non-humanitarian
concerns.
I am very grateful that the representative of Israel has
finally agreed with me.
T~LJ meeting

I’OSC of 8.20 p.m.

MOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATlONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unres
mnnde enticr.
Inrormez-vous
aupres
dcs vcntes.
New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sent en ventc dans les librairies
et les agences
de votre libraire
ou adresscz-vous
a : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

dcpositaircs
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Ventas.

8x-60YXY-June

IYHY--?.WW
