United Nations

S/PV.6325*

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6325th meeting
Monday, 31 May 2010, 1.55 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam/Ms. Ziade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Davutoğlu
Mr. Mugoya
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
President of the Security Council (S/2010/266)
Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the President of the Security Council (S/2010/267)

*

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons.
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-38189* (E)

*1038189*

S/PV.6325

The meeting was called to order at 1.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Turkey to the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/266)
Letter dated 31 May 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the President of
the Security Council (S/2010/267)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took at seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
31 May 2010 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which reads as
follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the emergency meeting of the Security Council
which will be held on Monday, 31 May 2010,
regarding the Israeli aggression against the Gaza
aid flotilla on 31 May 2010.”
This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2010/268.
With the consent of the Council, I propose to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with rule 2 of its provisional
rules of procedure in response to a letter dated 31 May
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to
the United Nations, and to a letter also dated 31 May
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council, to
be issued respectively as documents S/2010/266 and
S/2010/267.
I wish to recognize the presence at this meeting
of the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha-Rose
Migiro.
At this meeting the Security Council, will hear a
briefing by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I
now give the floor.
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: In the early hours of
this morning, Israeli naval forces boarded a six-ship
convoy that was heading towards Gaza. The stated
purpose of the convoy was to deliver humanitarian aid
to Gaza and to break the Israeli blockade on Gaza. The
convoy was reportedly carrying a range of educational,
medical and construction materials and approximately
700 activists, citizens of a number of countries. Among
their numbers were reportedly members of Parliament
from several countries.
In the lead-up to today’s events, the Israeli
authorities conveyed their intention, both publicly and
through diplomatic channels, not to allow the convoy
to reach Gaza. The Israeli authorities stated that,
should the convoy proceed contrary to these warnings,
they would divert the convoy to an Israeli port, inspect
the cargo, facilitate the entry of only those goods that
are allowed into Gaza, in accordance with Israel’s
blockade, and deport those on board.

10-38189

S/PV.6325

The organizers of the convoy indicated their
intention to proceed with their convoy and to attempt
to deliver their full consignment of cargo to Gaza and
to break the blockade. A committee of persons
organized by the de facto Hamas authorities in Gaza
was formed to receive the convoy.

According to Israeli statements, the seriously
injured were subsequently evacuated by helicopter to
hospitals in Israel. All of the ships have arrived under
escort at the Israeli port of Ashdod. An Israeli Ministry
of Foreign Affairs spokesman has stated that all
international persons from the vessels will be deported.

Several Governments with nationals on board the
vessels urged restraint on all sides and indicated to the
Israeli authorities their utmost concern that their
nationals be protected. The Secretary-General’s
spokesman warned on Friday that all involved should
act with a sense of care and responsibility and work for
a satisfactory resolution.

Israeli authorities have expressed regret about the
casualties but blamed the activists for the violence.
President Abbas has condemned Israel’s actions and
the killing of the activists, and declared three days of
mourning in the occupied Palestinian territory. There
have been widespread regional and international
expressions of alarm and concern at the bloodshed, as
well as diplomatic demarches seeking a full
explanation from the Israeli authorities. There have
been protests in Gaza, the West Bank, Israel and
several regional capitals.

The convoy was due to reach Gaza today.
According to the Israeli authorities, Israel’s naval
forces conveyed directly to the convoy during the early
hours this morning that it would not be allowed to
reach port in Gaza. However, the convoy proceeded
towards Gaza.
At approximately 4 a.m. local time, the Israeli
navy acted to intercept the convoy. This reportedly
took place 14 nautical miles off the coast in
international waters and involved Israeli military
personnel boarding the vessels, supported by naval
ships and helicopters. Israeli forces took control of all
six vessels. However, there was serious violence on the
main passenger vessel, a Turkish-registered ship named
Mavi Marmara. We have also seen media reports of
violence related to a Greek-registered ship, the
Sfendoni. As a result of this violence, according to the
latest information, at least 10 people were killed and at
least 30 injured, while at least six Israeli military
personnel were injured. There are no final confirmed
casualty figures at this stage.
Given the circumstances, it is not possible to state
definitively the sequence or details of what happened.
The Israeli Government has stated that the
demonstrators on board used knives and clubs against
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) naval personnel and
possibly live fire, and that a weapon was grabbed from
an IDF soldier. Given that those who were on board the
ships are now in Israeli custody, including reporters
who were travelling with the convoy, and had their
transmission equipment confiscated by the boarding
Israeli forces, further information from the organizers
of the convoy has been minimal since this morning. We
have no independent information on what transpired.

10-38189

The Secretary-General stated earlier today in
Kampala that he is shocked by the killing and injury of
people on the boats and condemned the violence. He
called for a full investigation to determine exactly how
the bloodshed took place and stressed that Israel must
urgently provide a full explanation.
At the Secretary-General’s direction, Special
Coordinator Robert Serry, along with Filippo Grandi,
the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, have been actively engaged on the ground
since the crisis broke to urge restraint and an end to the
violence, and to coordinate with all relevant parties in
the aftermath of this tragedy.
In conclusion, we underscore the importance of a
full investigation into this incident, as called for by the
Secretary-General. It is also imperative that Israel
provide access to the detainees in accordance with
relevant international legal standards. And more
broadly, we stress the importance of all parties strictly
adhering to the framework of international law,
including international humanitarian law and the law of
the sea. We also stress that these developments come at
a time when all efforts should be focused on the need
to build trust, advance Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
and nurture regional cooperation in support of peace. It
is vital that the proximity talks continue.
Finally, we wish to point out that today’s
bloodshed would have been avoided if repeated calls
on Israel to end the counterproductive and
unacceptable blockade of Gaza had been heeded. We

3

S/PV.6325

stress the scale of the unmet needs of Gaza’s civilian
population and reiterate that the blockade is
unacceptable and counterproductive and must end.
Special Coordinator Serry briefed the Council in detail
on 18 May on the serious humanitarian, human rights
and socio-economic conditions facing the civilian
population in Gaza, and made clear the range of
interventions — from water and sanitation to
education, health and the commercial sector — that are
urgent to meeting needs. The only way forward for
Gaza is a different and more positive strategy that
implements resolution 1860 (2009). It is now more
vital than ever that this be put into effect.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council. I take this opportunity to welcome
Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey.
Mr. Davutoğlu (Turkey): I appear before the
Council today as a result of a very sad and tragic
occasion on which one State Member of this house has
committed a serious crime in total disregard of all the
values we have vowed to uphold since the
establishment of the United Nations system.
I am distraught by the fact that the Israeli
Defense Forces stormed a multinational civilian
endeavour carrying humanitarian aid to Gaza in
international waters — 72 nautical miles off the coast,
to be exact — killing and wounding many civilians.
This action was uncalled for. The Israeli actions
constitute a grave breach of international law. In the
simplest terms, it is tantamount to banditry and piracy.
It is murder conducted by a State. It has no excuses or
justification whatsoever. A nation-State that follows
this path has lost its legitimacy as a respectful member
of the international community.
The multinational civilian flotilla, composed of a
few ships and a total of around 600 people from
32 countries carrying humanitarian aid to impoverished
Gaza, was unlawfully ambushed early today. The sole
aim of this civilian mission was to provide muchneeded relief to the children of occupied Gaza, who
have been under illegal and inhumane Israeli blockade
for years. The ships were hardly a threat to the State of
Israel or any other State, for that matter.

4

Humanitarian aid was on its way to children who
have been stripped of their opportunities to live as
children and enjoy all the basic amenities that all of
our children take for granted. These children do not
know where their next meal is coming from. They
either have no shelter or live in extremely deprived
conditions. They receive no education. They have no
future in which they can contribute to a peaceful and
stable Palestine and the wider region. The ships carried
amenities and facilities — such as playgrounds — that
would remind the children of their childhoods. They
carried very basic goods, such as cancer medication
and milk powder to enhance child growth and health in
the absence of milk proper.
The international community has been witness to
this humanitarian tragedy for years and failed to act.
Today, this is where we are. Today, we have observed
through live coverage an act of barbarism whereby the
provision of humanitarian aid has been punished
through aggression on the high seas, 72 miles off the
coast. Today, many humanitarian aid workers are
returning in body bags and Israel has blood on its
hands.
This is not off the coast of Somalia or in the
archipelagos of the Far East, where piracy is still a
phenomenon. This is the Mediterranean, where such
acts are not the norm. This is where we need common
sense. This is where civilization emerged and
flourished, and where the Abrahamic religions took
root. Those are religions that preach peace and teach us
to extend our hand when others are in need.
The use of force was not only inappropriate, but
also disproportionate. International law dictates that,
even in wartime, civilians are not to be attacked or
harmed. The doctrine of self-defence does not in any
way justify the actions taken by the Israeli forces.
High-seas freedoms constitute one of the most basic
rights under the international law of the sea, including
customary international law. The freedom of navigation
is one of the oldest international norms, dating back
centuries. No vessel can be stopped or boarded without
the consent of the captain or the flag State. The law
permitting such action in exceptional cases is clearly
stated. Furthermore, any suspected violation of law on
the part of a vessel and its crew on the high seas does
not absolve the intervening State of its duties and
responsibilities under applicable international law. To
take humanitarian aid delivery as a hostile act and to
treat aid workers as combatants is a reflection of a

10-38189

S/PV.6325

dangerous state of mind, with detrimental effects on
regional and global peace. Therefore, the Israeli actions
cannot be deemed legal or legitimate. Any attempt to
legitimize the attack is futile.
This unacceptable action was perpetrated by
those who in the past made use of ships carrying
refugees and those escaping one of the worst tragedies
of the past century. They should be more aware than
most of the importance of humanitarian assistance and
of the dangers and inhumanity of ghettos, such as that
we currently see in occupied Gaza. I am proud to
represent a nation that has in the past helped those in
need and escaping extermination.
Following this act of aggression, I have heard
official statements claiming that civilians on the ship
were members of a radical Islamist group. It saddens
me to see officials of a State stoop so low as to lie and
struggle to create pretexts that would legitimize their
illegal actions. However, the flotilla consists of citizens
from 32 countries, all of them civilians representing
many faiths — Christianity, Islam and Judaism — and
people of all creeds and backgrounds. It represents the
conscience of the international community. It is a
model of the United Nations.
Therefore, this was an attack on the United
Nations and its values. The international system has
suffered a sharp blow. It is now our responsibility to
rectify this and prove that common sense and respect
for international law can prevail. We must be able to
show that the use of force is not an option unless
clearly stated in law. We must uphold our commitments
and punish those who are in contradiction. The system
must be set right. Otherwise, the trust of the people in
the system, in their leaders and in us will be
demolished.
No State is above the law. Israel must be prepared
to face the consequences and be held accountable for
its crimes. In these conditions, any slim chance that
existed with regard to peace and stability in the region
has suffered a serious setback. The processes in place
have been suffocated by this one single act. It seems as
if Israel has gone the extra mile to negate any positive
developments and hopes for the future. It has become
an advocate of aggression and the use of force.
In view of all those considerations today, I call on
the people of Israel to express their dismay with regard
to this wrongdoing. They must not allow another
blatant action to once again present Israel as an

10-38189

aggressor. They must take steps to reinstate their status
as a credible partner and responsible member of the
international community.
Turkey would like to see the Security Council
react strongly today and adopt a presidential statement
strongly condemning this Israeli act of aggression,
demanding an urgent inquiry into the incident, and
calling for the punishment of all responsible authorities
and persons. I call on the Council to step up and do
what is expected of it. We hereby expect the following
to be included in the decision.
Israel must apologize to the international
community and to the families of those who were
killed and wounded in the attack. An urgent inquiry
must be undertaken. Appropriate international legal
action must immediately be taken against the
authorities responsible for and the perpetrators of this
aggression. A severe expression of disappointment and
warning must be issued by the United Nations. Israel
must be urged to abide by international law and basic
human rights. The countries concerned must be
allowed to retrieve their deceased and wounded
immediately. The ships must be expressly released and
allowed to deliver the humanitarian assistance to its
destination. The families of the deceased and wounded
and the non-governmental organizations and shipping
companies concerned must be compensated to the full
extent. The blockade of Gaza must be ended
immediately and all humanitarian assistance allowed
in. Gaza must be made an example through its swift
development as a region of peace. The international
community must be invited to contribute.
This is a black day in the history of humankind,
on which the distinction between terrorists and States
has been blurred. Anyone who stands in the way of
re-establishing dignity and respect for the international
world order will have to answer to world public
opinion. It is incumbent upon us to show that all States
are bound by international law and humane values.
Turkey is prepared to shoulder its responsibility in that
regard. I am sure that this is our common goal.
In conclusion, I salute all humanitarian workers
who endeavour to provide relief. They are the people
on the front lines. I convey my condolences to the
families of those who gave their lives in this pursuit,
whatever their background, religion or ethnicity. I
share their grief.

5

S/PV.6325

According to Abrahamic tradition and my belief,
killing one human being is killing humankind as a
whole. Yesterday, humankind drowned in the
international waters of the Mediterranean.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Despite the very sad circumstances, I welcome the
Foreign Minister of Turkey to the Security Council this
afternoon and acknowledge the presence of the Deputy
Secretary-General. I would also like to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
The United Kingdom deeply deplores the loss of
life during the interception of the Gaza flotilla this
morning. It is a matter of grave concern that Israeli
actions should end in such heavy and tragic loss of life.
My Government has been in regular contact with the
Israeli Government about these events throughout the
day.
The United Kingdom advised British nationals
against attempting to access Gaza in this way because
of the risks involved. But, at the same time, there is an
unambiguous need for Israel to act with restraint and in
line with its international obligations. Given the
number of casualties in this incident, Israel now bears a
responsibility to provide a full account of what
occurred, what efforts were made to minimize the loss
of life and why the death toll was so high. It will be
particularly important to establish whether enough was
done to prevent deaths and unnecessary injuries.
These events are clearly very serious, but we
cannot view them in isolation. They must be set against
the context of the intolerable and unsustainable
situation that prevails in Gaza. It is clearer than ever
that Israel’s restrictions on access to Gaza must be
lifted, in line with resolution 1860 (2009). The current
closure is unacceptable and counterproductive. There
can be no more important international response to this
tragedy than to ensure an urgent and durable resolution
to the Gaza crisis. This will remain among the highest
international priorities of the new British Government.
The international community must meet its
responsibilities as well. The United Kingdom continues
to work to alleviate suffering in Gaza. We call on all
concerned to continue to assist with humanitarian and
reconstruction aid and economic development.
The events also highlight the need to find a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict. It is essential that proximity talks progress and

6

that the parties enter direct negotiations as soon as
possible.
We may be entering another period of anger and
instability in the region. We urge all sides to act with
transparency and restraint to make sure that this
incident leads to no further violence and no further
deterioration of the situation in Gaza.
We call on the Israeli authorities first to provide a
full, timely and transparent account of the incident that
led to the loss of life and the subsequent actions taken,
including what measures are in hand to ensure an
impartial and comprehensive investigation and to
ensure that there is no further such loss of life.
Secondly, they should provide full information and
immediate consular access to all embassies whose
nationals are involved in that incident. Thirdly, Israeli
authorities should open the crossings to allow
unfettered access for aid to Gaza and to address the
serious concerns both about the deterioration in the
humanitarian and economic situation and about the
effect on a generation of young Palestinians. Israel
must allow the unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza,
consistent with resolution 1860 (2009).
Finally, we also urge Hamas and all parties to
comply with the call in resolution 1860 (2009) for
renewed and urgent efforts to achieve a comprehensive
peace based on the vision of a region where two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace, with secure and recognized borders.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey and appreciate the briefing that
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco presented to us.
We are dismayed and surprised by the grave
events that took place along the coasts of the
Mediterranean off the Gaza Strip today. We condemn
in the strongest terms the armed attack carried out by
the armed forces of Israel in international waters
against the flotilla of civilian boats seeking to carry
humanitarian aid to the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip.
We also deplore the loss of human lives and the
persons wounded as a result of the attack. We extend
our condolences and solidarity to the relatives of the
victims and the wounded in those tragic events.
Attacks in armed conflict situations directed
specifically against civilians and other persons or

10-38189

S/PV.6325

goods subject to protection — in this case,
humanitarian assistance personnel — and the
restrictions on access to humanitarian assistance, are
serious violations of the norms and principles of
international humanitarian law, in accordance with the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1979. They also constitute international
crimes. We also believe that actions of that type, which
are contrary to international law, arbitrarily limit the
right to the freedom of legitimate navigation.
For all those reasons, the Government of Mexico
requests a broad investigation of those facts and that
measures to alleviate the regional situation be taken as
soon as possible so as to renew the peace process in the
Middle East.
Such regrettable facts confirm that the blockade
on Gaza not only deeply affects the civilian population
in Gaza but also is counterproductive for Israel,
causing grave incidents like that of today, which could
well have been avoided. Therefore we once again urge
the Government of Israel to lift the blockade against
the Gaza Strip so as to allow access of humanitarian
aid to the population, whose situation has been grounds
for great concern to the international community since
the end of the conflict in that territory in January 2009.
We also reiterate the importance of full
compliance with the provisions of resolution 1860
(2009) and underscore once more the significance of
establishing an international ceasefire monitoring
mechanism that allows the passage of humanitarian
supplies and materials necessary for the reconstruction
of the Gaza Strip and puts an end to illicit arms
trafficking to that region.
In the current difficult conditions, we call on the
parties involved to refrain from any action that could
provoke an escalation in violence. We also call for the
renewal of the dialogue between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, which is the only way to attain
lasting peace in the region.
Such acts should not interrupt the process of
proximity talks under way, the urgency of which has
been shown today. The opposite would serve to inflame
to most extremist sectors, enemies of peace in the
region, which in the end would prevent the coexistence
of two States there — Israel and Palestine — within
secure and recognized borders.

10-38189

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey, His Excellency Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu. I also
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing.
It was with shock and consternation that Brazil
learned of the attack by Israel early today, reportedly in
international waters, on vessels carrying humanitarian
supplies to Gaza, which resulted in the tragic loss of
more than ten civilians and tens of injuries. The
Brazilian Government vehemently condemns the
attacks. There can be no justification for a military
operation against a humanitarian convoy. The gravity
of the incident is compounded by the fact that the
attack reportedly took place in international waters.
Brazil expresses its deep condolences to the
families of those who have been killed. We are
particularly concerned by unconfirmed reports that a
Brazilian national is or may have been on board one of
the ships. The Ambassador of Israel to Brazil has been
summoned to the Ministry of External Relations to be
informed of Brazil’s indignation at the incident and of
our concern about the Brazilian citizen. Brazil believes
that the incident must be fully clarified in the light of
international law and international humanitarian law
through an independent investigation.
The tragic results of this deplorable incident
show yet again the need for the blockade of Gaza to be
immediately lifted. The blockade is a blatant violation
of international law. Resolution 1860 (2009) called for
the unimpeded provision and distribution throughout
Gaza of humanitarian assistance, including food, fuel
and medical treatment. However, despite repeated and
virtually universal calls from the international
community, including from my own Government,
Israel has systematically refused to lift it. The blockade
also violates the basic rights of approximately
1.5 million people. Palestinians are still forced to live
in entirely unacceptable conditions almost a year and a
half after the end of operation Cast Lead.
We join the whole of the international community
in strongly urging Israel to immediately suspend the
unlawful blockade of Gaza and take the necessary steps
towards full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).
Continued violations of international law will only
increase the human and political costs of an
unjustifiable policy.

7

S/PV.6325

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Thank you, Sir, for
having convened this meeting so rapidly. I should like
to welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey, Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu. I should also
like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her
presence here today and Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing on the Israeli
military operation against the flotilla sailing to Gaza.
Austria is deeply shocked at the loss of lives and
casualties and wishes to express her condolences to the
families of the victims. We are very disturbed about
this dramatic escalation and condemn the use of
violence that has lead to a high number of victims.
Austrian Foreign Minister Michael Spindelegger
has called for a rapid, full and independent
investigation of this operation, which occurred in
international waters. We have also formally
communicated this position to the Ambassador of
Israel in Austria. Moreover, we call on the Israeli
authorities to urgently provide concerned States with
consular access to and information about their citizens
detained in Israel.
The lack of full compliance with Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) is at the core of the
deplorable events of last night. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains a source of utmost concern.
Austria has consistently acknowledged Israel’s
right to protect her citizens against indiscriminate
attacks emanating from Gaza. We repeat our call for an
immediate end to such attacks. At the same time, we do
not believe that such concerns can in any way justify
what has happened today.
We regard the ongoing blockade as totally
unacceptable and counterproductive; it only benefits
spoilers and advocates of violence. We reiterate our
call for an immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of all crossings for the flow of humanitarian
aid, commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza.
We urge Israel to take all immediate and credible
steps to avoid any recurrence of such violent incidents
in the future and to act in full accordance with her
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law. We call on all sides to exercise
utmost restraint and refrain from any action that could
prolong or even worsen the plight of the civilian
population of Gaza.

8

Mr. Takasu (Japan): I should like to welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey
at this very tragic meeting. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her presence and the Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
The Japanese Government is shocked to learn
what took place aboard the maritime convoy carrying
supplies to the Gaza Strip. On a number of occasions,
including through resolution 1860 (2009), the Security
Council has called on Member States to support efforts
to alleviate the humanitarian situation in Gaza. It has
repeatedly called for unimpeded access for
humanitarian aid to Gaza. Japan condemns the violent
acts of hostility that caused this tragic incident
involving the humanitarian convoy, when the
humanitarian situation in Gaza has not improved at all
for a year and a half.
Japan deeply deplores the casualties and the
injuring of so many innocent people. We express our
deepest condolences to the families of victims, and we
believe that full investigation needs to be carried out
urgently. Japan urges parties to act with restraint and to
refrain from taking any further action that might create
a cycle of violence.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Sir, for
having convened today’s meeting. We wish to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey. We
acknowledge the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, and we thank Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his very lucid briefing.
The Nigerian delegation is dismayed by this
morning’s assault on a Gaza-bound aid flotilla, which
resulted in several deaths and injuries. We extend our
sympathies to the families of the dead and wounded.
This incident is not only unfortunate but regrettable, as
it has come at a critical time when two rounds of
proximity talks have already taken place between Israel
and Palestine. All well-meaning people were hopeful
that the two parties would work assiduously for the
resumption of direct negotiations.
The maximum use of force to intercept an
international humanitarian convoy is not only
unnecessary but, more significantly, has created a new
situation that could unleash fresh unrest with grave
consequences for peace in the Middle East. We
therefore call for maximum restraint and urge all
parties to recommit to their roadmap obligations. Even
in the face of such provocation, we must not relent in

10-38189

S/PV.6325

our efforts to tread the path of dialogue and long-term
political reconciliation. We call for an urgent and full
inquiry into this unjustified violence. Those
responsible must be compelled to account for their
actions.
We remain concerned about the deplorable
humanitarian conditions in Gaza. The restrictions and
blockade on Gaza must be lifted to alleviate the
suffering of innocent people.
It is important that security be guaranteed to all
nations and all peoples in the Middle East. The Council
should be united in the message it sends out whenever
there is a clear threat to peace and security. In this
regard, we support the draft presidential statement.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I wish to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing.
The United States is deeply disturbed by the
recent violence and regrets the tragic loss of life and
injury suffered among those involved in the incident
last night aboard the Gaza-bound ships. We are
working to ascertain the facts. We expect a credible
and transparent investigation and strongly urge the
Israeli Government to investigate the incident fully.
As I stated in the Council Chamber in December
2008 when we were confronted with a similar situation
(see S/PV.6030), mechanisms exist for the transfer of
humanitarian assistance to Gaza by Member States and
groups that want to do so. These non-provocative and
non-confrontational mechanisms should be the ones
used for the benefit of all those in Gaza. Direct
delivery by sea is neither appropriate nor responsible
and is certainly not effective under the circumstances.
The United States remains deeply concerned by
the suffering of civilians in Gaza and the deterioration
of the situation there, including the humanitarian and
human rights situation. We continue to believe the
situation is unsustainable and is not in the interests of
any of those concerned. We will continue to engage the
Israelis on a daily basis to expand the scope and type
of goods allowed into Gaza to address the full range of
the population’s humanitarian and recovery needs.
Hamas’ interference with international assistance
shipments and the work of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) complicates efforts in Gaza. Its
continued arms smuggling and commitment to

10-38189

terrorism undermine security and prosperity for
Palestinians and Israelis alike.
We will continue to work closely with the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
along with international NGOs and the United Nations,
to provide adequate access for humanitarian goods,
including reconstruction materials, through the border
crossings, while bearing in mind the legitimate security
concerns of the Government of Israel.
Ultimately, this incident underscores the need to
move ahead quickly with negotiations that can lead to a
comprehensive peace in the region. The only viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an
agreement negotiated between the parties that ends the
occupation that began in 1967 and fulfils the
aspirations of both parties for independent homelands
through two States for two peoples — Israel and an
independent, contiguous and viable State of Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. We call again
on our international partners, both inside and outside
this Council, to promote an atmosphere of cooperation
between the parties and throughout the entire region.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the statement to the Council by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, as well as
the briefing on the situation by Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco.
We express our condolences and deep regret
about all those who have died as a result of this
incident. In Moscow we are expressing our
condemnation and deepest concern regarding the
incident in international waters, especially because so
many people died and have been wounded, people
participating in a humanitarian convoy.
We need clarification of all factors in what
happened. It is obvious that the use of weapons against
civilians and stopping ships on the high seas without
justification is a gross violation of the norms of
international law. At the same time, we look at what
happened as confirmation of the need for a prompt
cessation of Israel’s blockade in Gaza and for
implementation of realistic steps to ensure that the
humanitarian and social situation will go forward for
all people in the sector.
We are very concerned about the fact that this
incident happened at a time when there were the
prerequisites for moving forward in the Palestinian-

9

S/PV.6325

Israeli settlement. We hope that the tension that has
arisen will not have a long-term negative impact on the
prospects for this process.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We welcome and thank
the Foreign Minister of Turkey for his informative
statement. We also welcome the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General and thank Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
It was with shock that we received the reports of
the Israeli attack on the humanitarian flotilla travelling
to Gaza in international waters this morning. Uganda
condemns the attack on the humanitarian convoy,
which resulted to loss of life and injuries, and we
express our condolences to the bereaved families.
While we do not have the full facts and will await full
details, we do support the call by the Secretary-General
for a full investigation into this matter.
We are concerned by the grave humanitarian
situation caused by the continued blockade imposed
against the people of Gaza. This incident serves only to
exacerbate the political stalemate arising from a lack of
substantive progress in the Middle East peace process.
It is also a reminder, and we reiterate our call on Israel
to end the blockade of Gaza and to allow delivery of
humanitarian aid to its population. We call on Israel to
release the ships and civilians they hold and to permit
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to its final
destination.
Finally, we re-emphasize the importance of the
full implementation of Security Council resolution
1860 (2009).
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Turkey, Mr. Davutoğlu. We also appreciate the
presence of Her Excellency the Deputy SecretaryGeneral. I also wish to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing.
China is shocked by Israel’s attack on the
multinational convoy carrying humanitarian aid to
Gaza, which resulted in heavy casualties. We condemn
Israel’s actions targeting humanitarian workers and
civilians. We wish to express our condolences on the
bereavement of Turkish citizens and those of other
nationalities. We support a quick response by the
Security Council and its taking necessary actions.
At present, the humanitarian situation remains
grim in the occupied Palestinian territory, especially

10

the Gaza Strip. China expresses its serious concern. We
urge Israel to immediately and fully implement Council
resolution 1860 (2009), to fully open border crossings
and to lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip so as to allow
the unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid and allow the
local people to achieve early recovery and the
restoration of their normal lives.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Turkey. I also wish to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for her presence, and
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
We have expressed our emotions at the tragic
consequences of the Israeli operation against the
flotilla heading for Gaza. We have presented our
condolences to the victims and their families. The
human toll of this operation leads us to believe that
there was disproportionate use of force and a level of
violence that nothing justifies and that we condemn.
That being the case, before drawing conclusions it is
necessary to know the facts. Therefore, we would like
to have full light shed through an in-depth
investigation, which should be conducted immediately.
That investigation should be independent, credible and
in line with international standards.
Beyond this tragic event, this business reminds us
of the need to re-establish humanitarian access to Gaza
under resolution 1860 (2009), and we call for the
lifting of the blockade, which is unsustainable and
illegal.
France, like the European Union, requests that
consular access be granted immediately under the
Vienna Convention to the nationals of member States
who at this moment are being held in Israel after the
operation.
But beyond the Gaza event and the questions
raised by the blockade of Gaza, this incident brings to
mind the need to resume the peace process. In the
absence of a credible peace process we are doomed to a
repetition of incidents, which are becoming bloodier
and bloodier. That is why France believes that a
meeting of the Quartet at the ministerial level could
enable both a lifting of the Gaza blockade and support
for resumption of the peace talks.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
wish to welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Turkey as well as of the Deputy

10-38189

S/PV.6325

Secretary-General and to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
My delegation learned with great regret of the
attack by Israeli forces against a flotilla carrying
humanitarian assistance to the Gaza Strip, which
caused more than ten deaths and a number of people
wounded, including peace activists travelling with the
flotilla. Gabon regrets the many deaths and takes this
opportunity to convey our profound condolences to the
bereaved families. We reiterate our support to
humanitarian organizations that are working in Gaza
and in Palestine in general.
This new violence is unacceptable under
international law and has already revived tensions that
put at risk the indirect talks between Palestinians and
Israelis that had started three weeks ago. Along with
the rest of the international community, my delegation
firmly condemns these attacks, which are a hindrance
to the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. In that regard,
we support the Secretary-General’s call for an
international investigation to clarify the circumstances
of the raid.
This new situation reminds us once again of the
urgency of lifting the Gaza blockade, in accordance
with resolution 1860 (2009). Gabon calls on the parties
to refrain from all provocation which could cause an
escalation of violence in the region. We also call upon
the parties to heed the international community and do
everything possible to resume the peace talks. We
support the draft presidential statement on this matter.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we take this opportunity to warmly welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey.
We also welcome Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco, and thank him for his briefing
today.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to join other
members of the Security Council in condemning in the
strongest possible terms the attack that was carried out
by the Israel Defense Forces on a flotilla of ships
carrying unarmed civilians and humanitarian aid for
Palestinians in Gaza, leaving at least 10 of those
unarmed civilians dead and numerous other injured.
Bosnia and Herzegovina deeply regrets this tragic loss
of life and the injuries sustained, and we wish to
extend our deepest condolences and heartfelt sympathy
to the families of the victims.

10-38189

This attack on and killing of innocent
humanitarians comes at a time when new efforts have
been made in order to create the environment for
negotiations. It can only aggravate the suffering of the
Palestinian population and deepen the crisis. These
were civilian ships carrying unarmed civilians and
humanitarian aid intended for the 1.5 million
Palestinians who are being held in Gaza under siege by
Israel.
This Israeli attack on unarmed civilians aboard
foreign vessels sailing in international waters
constitutes a grave breach of international
humanitarian law and a violation of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. Nothing can justify
such a use of violence. Bosnia and Herzegovina calls
for a full investigation into the attack to be carried out
immediately, so that the perpetrators, as well as those
with command responsibility for the attack, are swiftly
brought to justice, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
This tragic event points to the urgent need to lift
the ban on humanitarian aid intended for Palestinian
civilians in Gaza. Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply
concerned about the hardship and tragedy of the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza. Their living conditions
are unsustainable. We therefore reiterate our call upon
Israel to allow the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) and the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access.
It is unacceptable for Israel to continue to act as a
State that is above the law. If there is to be lasting
peace in the Middle East, Israel must stop violating
international law and start to act with restraint and in
line with its international obligations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.
I wish at the outset to once again welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey. I also thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her presence here today. My thanks go also
to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.
As all members know, the Israeli occupier’s navy
carried out a raid — an action that could be described

11

S/PV.6325

as piracy — against a freedom flotilla transporting tons
of humanitarian assistance to Gaza. This incident
caused at least 15 deaths and a number of injuries.
First of all, on behalf of Lebanon, I convey our
sincere condolences to the families of the martyrs who
fell as a result of this barbarous Israeli attack and wish
a speedy recovery to the injured. According to reports,
the Israeli navy opened fire on the flotilla after white
flags had been raised by those on board and before
those forces had even boarded a single ship. There
were some 600 unarmed civilians from 40 countries on
the vessels in the flotilla; they included 1976 Nobel
Peace Prize laureate Mairead Corrigan Maguire of
Northern Ireland and a Holocaust survivor, Hedy
Epstein, along with foreign parliamentarians and other
eminent individuals, both officials and private citizens.
The flotilla was carrying medical equipment,
prefabricated houses, building materials and electric
wheelchairs for the disabled.
In spite of the humanitarian nature of the flotilla,
the occupier’s navy deployed three missile-launching
patrol boats in the attack. Lebanon considers that this
aggression is one of a series of actions by Israel against
innocent civilians. It is a flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law,
international humanitarian law and the law of the sea.
First of all, Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
states that States must refrain from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. I
do not believe that anyone here considers that this
attack is consistent with those purposes.
Secondly, article 87 (a) of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which enshrines
international practice, states that the high seas are open
to all States without foreign intervention and must be
used for peaceful purposes. But the news that we have
heard confirms that this attack took place on the high
seas. Thirdly, article 89 of the Convention states that
no State has the legal right to submit any portion of the
high seas to its own sovereignty.
Fourthly, article 30 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War states that occupying Powers
have the responsibility to facilitate visits to protected
persons by representatives of institutions intended to
provide material assistance. In Gaza, Israel continues

12

in an act of collective punishment to impose an illegal
blockade by systematically closing checkpoints,
preventing freedom of movement, including of sick
people, and blocking access for indispensable
humanitarian assistance including food, medicine, fuel
and construction materials.
Israel acknowledges the blockade, as Daniel
Ayalon, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, said at a
press conference earlier today. He described it as legal.
But the law he had in mind is clearly totally different
from the one that the United Nations recognizes and
that we all respect: their law is the law of the jungle,
which the United Nations has declared must be
combated. The blockade imposed by Israel on families
in Gaza, because the regime there is hostile to Israel, is
nothing less than example of the collective punishment
imposed by Israel for more than three years, which has
intensified since the most recent Israeli war against
Gaza in late 2008. Israel makes no distinction between
civilians and military personnel.
Finally, Lebanon insists that there be
accountability for this crime. We demand that all those
arrested be freed immediately, that this abominable
aggression against unarmed innocents be firmly
condemned, that an investigation immediately take
place to identify the perpetrators so that they may be
punished and to undo the harm caused to the victims,
and — perhaps first and foremost — that the blockade
imposed on Gaza be lifted immediately.
Lebanon wishes to express its support for the
draft presidential statement proposed by the delegation
of Turkey.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, who is with us
at this important meeting. I had the honour to be with
him a few days ago in Istanbul at the United Nations
international meeting on Palestine. I should like also to
thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
and to welcome Her Excellency Deputy SecretaryGeneral Migiro, who is with us today.
On this sad day, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas condemned
the crime committed in international waters and called

10-38189

S/PV.6325

it a massacre. For that reason the Palestinian Authority
has declared a three-day state of mourning to mark the
death of the civilian martyrs who fell victim to this
crime. Regardless of their nationality, we consider
them to be martyrs of Palestine, and we extend our
condolences to their families and loved ones.
At the outset, I would like to express Palestine’s
deep gratitude for the Council’s quick response in
holding a special meeting of the Security Council at the
request of Palestine, Lebanon and Turkey, in order to
investigate Israel’s blatant aggression against the ships
heading for Gaza, which caused the martyrdom of a
number of victims as well as to injuries and the
detention of those on board. These people were
activists for peace and freedom; their only slogan was
for peace. They were carrying only food, medical
equipment and other supplies for our civilians.
Israel has carried out its threats to suppress acts
of solidarity with blockaded Gaza. This Israeli crime
and all the threats that preceded it are not new to that
occupying Power; nor are its blatant acts of aggression
and violations directed at Palestinian civilians and
those who support them. The Palestinian Authority has
strongly condemned these acts of Israeli piracy and
views this flagrant aggression and this impunity as a
direct consequence of the international community’s
silence and its inability to put an end to Israel’s
flagrant acts of aggression and its violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law.
The international community must condemn this
crime, which runs counter to international
humanitarian and human rights norms. It must bring an
end to the suffering of the Palestinian people and to the
outrageous blockade of Gaza, implement justice and
international law and hold Israel accountable for the
war crime it committed today against the flotilla, as
well as all its other war crimes against the Palestinian
people. We call for an independent, impartial
international investigation into this crime, in order to
punish the perpetrators and to release and protect all
those detained, immediately and unconditionally.
It is high time for the Security Council to take
decisive measures against this serious escalation and
other acts by Israel, a country that always acts as if it is
outside the law and never held to account or deterred.
What led to today’s crime are the continuing Israeli
blockade of Gaza, the starvation of its people and the

10-38189

deprivation of their right to live in freedom and safety
and to have the food and shelter necessary for their
survival. That is what motivated these hundreds of
people from all over the world to side with us. One
after the other, these flotillas will keep coming until
this unethical blockade and the suffering of our people
are ended.
This attack on unarmed civilians on foreign ships
in international waters is more proof that Israel acts as
if it were outside the law. The international community
must therefore take urgent and appropriate steps in this
regard. It is time for the Security Council to come to
address the non-implementation of its many resolutions
on Palestine and the situation in the Middle East. It is
time for it to put an end to the unjust blockade imposed
on 1.5 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and to
bring resolution 1860 (2009) to bear. It is time for it to
end Israel’s lack of respect for its resolutions and for
the will of the international community, and to take the
necessary measures to deal with the settlement
activities and other illegal acts that are being carried
out in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
occupied East Jerusalem.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council, by
virtue of the United Nations Charter, to take the
necessary measures to maintain international peace and
security and to put an end to Israel’s occupation of
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem and the
territories occupied since 1967. This situation has
lasted for too long; it is time for the occupation to end
so that the Palestinian people may exercise their
inalienable rights and establish an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): The Security Council is
convened this afternoon following a serious event that
took place early this morning local time, when a
convoy of six ships attempted to break the maritime
blockade off the coast of Gaza. Although portrayed in
the media as a humanitarian mission delivering aid to
Gaza, this flotilla was anything but a genuine
humanitarian-only mission. If it had indeed been a
humanitarian-only mission, the organizers would have
accepted weeks ago, during the planning stages for this
flotilla, the offer by the Israeli authorities to transfer
the aid to Gaza through the port of Ashdod, via the
existing overland crossings, in accordance with
established procedures.

13

S/PV.6325

Many States and organizations, including the
United Nations, are using those mechanisms on a daily
basis, as we have heard before. Much material and
merchandise enters Gaza daily through those
mechanisms. And I would like to stress that there is no
humanitarian crisis in Gaza. This Council heard, not
long ago, from the Secretary-General’s representative
in the region, Mr. Serry, about positive developments
on this aspect. The flotilla’s organizers not only
rejected this offer, but stated clearly that “this mission
is not about delivering humanitarian supplies, but
rather about breaking the Israeli siege”, as Greta
Berlin, a flotilla spokesperson, told the media last
week.
What kind of humanitarian activists demand to
bypass the United Nations, the Red Cross and other
internationally recognized agencies? What kind of
peace activists use knives and clubs and fire from
weapons stolen from soldiers and other weapons to
attack soldiers who board a ship in accordance with
international law? What kind of humanitarian activists,
some with known terrorist histories, embrace Hamas, a
terrorist organization that openly shuns a two-State
solution and calls for Israel destruction, defying
conditions set by the international community and the
Quartet? The answer is clear. They are not peace
activists; they are not messengers of good will. They
cynically use the guise of humanitarian aid to send a
message of hate and to implement violence. That is
what we saw this morning.
Indeed, it is a sad day. It is a sad day because of
the results of this unwelcome provocation. Let me
remind the Council that a state of armed conflict exists
between Israel and the Hamas terrorist regime
controlling Gaza. Let me remind the Council that
rockets and mortars were still being launched by
Hamas and others towards southern Israel as recently
as a brief hour ago. That is the Gaza situation; that is
the situation of armed conflict that we have to endure
on a daily basis. Let me remind the council that Gaza is
occupied by terrorists that ousted the Palestinian
Authority in a violent coup, and that arms are
continuously being smuggled into the territory,
including by sea. Peace and security are being
threatened.
A maritime blockade is a legitimate and
recognized measure under international law that may
be implemented as part of an armed conflict at sea. A
blockade may be imposed at sea, including in

14

international waters. Let me stress that in this case,
Israel provided in due time not only information about
the existence of the blockade — as it is supposed to
do — but also appropriate notification to the relevant
Governments and to the organizers of the Gaza flotilla.
The organizers turned down Israel’s repeated offers to
transfer the aid to Gaza because they had other plans.
Let me read out a quotation from a statement
made prior to the events by one of the main organizer:
“They [the Israelis] are going to have to stop us
forcefully”. So said the leader of the IHH, one of the
primary organizers of the flotilla. Just prior to
departure, he added: “We are going to resist, and
resistance will win”. Moreover, it should be noted that
the organizing group, İnsani Yardim Vakfi (IHH) has a
radical anti-Western orientation. Alongside its
legitimate humanitarian activities, it supports radical
Islamic networks such as Hamas, and at least in the
past has even supported global jihad elements, such as
Al-Qaida.
Being members of a so-called humanitarian
mission, these champions of human rights also rejected
in the initial planning stage an Israeli request to ask
Hamas to allow the Red Cross to visit captured soldier
Gilad Shalit.
When it became clear that the protest flotilla
intended to violate the blockade despite the repeated
warnings, Israeli naval personnel boarded the vessels
and redirected them to Ashdod. Unfortunately, the
soldiers boarding one of the ships were attacked most
violently
with
life-threatening
means.
Live
ammunition, knives, clubs and others types of weapons
were used against soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF). The intentions were clear: to lynch the Israeli
soldiers. This is definitively documented, and I am
sure — I hope — that the media will publish it. This
was intended to be a real lynching on the ships.
Without any doubt, the soldiers acted in selfdefence. According to reports, the unfortunate event
resulted in death and injuries to the protesters, as well
as grave injury to our soldiers. The seriously injured
were evacuated and are currently being treated at
Israeli hospitals. The IDF, as part of its standard
operating procedures, will conduct debriefing on the
matter that will shed more light on the occurrences we
witnessed today. The information will, of course, be
shared accordingly.

10-38189

S/PV.6325

Let me be very clear — this was not a peaceful
protest. The IHH people on board one of the ships were
not humanitarian aid activists. The IDF operation was
not a military attack, as some have said. The operation
began as a preventive measure to counter illegal
breakage of the blockade. Any responsible Government
would act accordingly in similar circumstances. Let me
add that it is the responsibility of the organizers — the
provocateurs — some of whom are linked to terrorist
organizations.
The results of last night’s events are tragic and
unfortunate, and Israel deeply regrets any lose of
innocent life. But it cannot compromise its security.
Nobody would. The full picture of the circumstances
that led to these consequences will continue, as I have
stated before, to unfold over the next few days.
However, it is important that, while assessing this
particular event, not to lose sight of the bigger picture.
Many here in the Council have mentioned
resolution 1860 (2009), and I would like to remind
members of the Council that that resolution addresses

10-38189

many aspects other than the humanitarian. Thus, we
cannot ignore the threat to peace and security posed by
Hamas, nor can we ignore the most basic necessity and
obligation of Israel to safeguard its security by
appropriate measures when threatened.
Let us not become diverted from the need to
continue advancing on the political track. While the
complicated situation in and around Gaza persists —
and today’s incident is only one example of it — we
should continue to embrace, as has been mentioned, the
positive developments of the past few weeks so that we
and the Palestinian Authority can sit together for direct
talks for the benefit of our people and the region as a
whole.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda. As agreed, the members of the
Security Council will now resume their consultations
on this matter.
The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

15
