United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.20

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

20

th meeting
Friday, 19 September 2003, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
The President: I declare the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly on illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the occupied Palestinian Territory resumed pursuant
to General Assembly resolution ES-10/11 of 5 August
2002, whereby the Assembly decided to adjourn the
tenth emergency special session temporarily and to
authorize the President of the General Assembly at its
most recent session to resume its meeting upon request
from the Member States.
In that connection, I should like to draw the
attention of delegations to the following: document
A/ES-10/237, which contains the letter dated
17 September 2003 from the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan to the United Nations, in which he
requested, on behalf of the States Members of the
League of Arab States, the resumption of the tenth
emergency special session; and document A/ES10/238, which contains a letter dated 17 September
2003 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia
to the United Nations in his capacity as Chairman of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement, by which he also requested the resumption
of the tenth emergency special session.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
In keeping with the established practice, I should
now like to invite the attention of the General

(Saint Lucia)

Assembly to document A/ES-10/240, which contains a
letter addressed to the President of the General
Assembly by the Secretary-General, informing the
Assembly that 13 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the Assembly duly takes note of this
information?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.12)
The President: The General Assembly will now
resume its consideration of agenda item 5, entitled
“Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
In that connection, the Assembly has before it a
draft resolution issued as document A/ES-10/L.12.
The meeting was suspended at 10.55 a.m. and
resumed at 11.05 a.m.
The President: I call on the observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): We are very pleased
to see you, Sir, presiding over the fifty-eighth session
of the General Assembly. The head of the delegation of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-52481 (E)

*0352481*

A/ES-10/PV.20

Palestine at this session will extend
congratulations to you at a later time.

official

Today, we face the twenty-sixth veto of the
United States in the Security Council on the question
of Palestine alone. We face the decision of the
occupation force to “remove” the elected leader of a
people without the Security Council being able to do
anything. We face a Member State with an insane
Government that daily violates the Charter of this
international Organization and its resolutions, in
blatant contempt of and direct challenge to the
international community as a whole; all that with the
support and protection of the super-Power. We are
faced with the most oppressive military campaign
undertaken by an occupying Power against an entire
people, including a long series of war crimes
committed under the pretext of combating terrorism.
We face colonization of what remains of our
Palestinian land since 1967, which has gone on for 36
years and constitutes the greatest war crime of
contemporary history. This has gone on with the
rhetorical opposition of some and the sincere
opposition of others, without any of them being able to
end it.
Are we going to do something to confront all
this? Will the international community possess the
collective will, in the absence of the will of the superPower, to impose respect for international law and
United Nations resolutions and to achieve even the
minimal degree of justice? That is my deepest hope.
However, I can state that our Palestinian people, along
with the millions of the people of the region, have
begun to lose hope and confidence in the usefulness of
all this.
We come today believing in the collective will of
the Member States, which are united for peace. We
come to deal with the situation resulting from the
inability of the Security Council to fulfil its primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security because of the exercise of veto by one of its
permanent members during the Council vote on
16 September 2003 on the draft resolution. That draft
was aimed, inter alia, at preventing the Israeli threat to
the safety of the President of the Palestinian National
Authority, and thus at preventing grave consequences.
We express our gratitude and appreciation to you,
Sir, for your response to the request of the Arab Group
and the Non-aligned Movement to resume the tenth

2

emergency special session of the General Assembly.
We also express our thanks and appreciation to all
countries that will try to remedy what occurred in the
Security Council.
On 11 September, threats by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people and its leadership
reached an unprecedented level with the decision by
the so-called Israeli Security Cabinet to remove Yasser
Arafat and to request the Israeli army to draw up a plan
for his expulsion from his land and country. That was
followed by statements by Israeli officials, affirming
that killing President Arafat was an available option
and other statements saying that the implementation of
the Cabinet’s decision would not take place now, but at
a time to be determined by Israel. We strongly reject
and condemn that as being illegal and insane, and we
consider it an assault on Palestinian national dignity
and the democratic choices of our people.
These threats prove once again the intentions of
Mr. Sharon’s Government to attack the Palestinian
national leadership and to destroy our social economic
conditions. Any implementation of Israeli threats will
be considered terrorist acts that will lead to the end of
the Palestinian Authority and the actual demise of the
peace process.
We express our appreciation to most of the
nations and organizations of the world for their firm
and complete condemnation of the Israeli threats, and
we call upon you to reaffirm this today with the aim of
preventing and revoking those threats.
Indeed Mr. Sharon and his Government represent
a threat to the stability of the region. They reject real
peace and insist on the use of force and a military
solution. Mr. Sharon has publicly said, for those who
want to hear, that he does not want a lasting and
permanent settlement but only seeks long-term
transitional arrangements. The vision of Mr. Sharon,
clearly, is the imposition of a number of walled and
separate Palestinian bantustans confining the whole
Palestinian people into less than half of the West Bank
and slightly more than half of the Gaza Strip. The
Palestinians could find a way to connect these
bantustans and call them a Palestinian State if they
wish, while Israel keeps the rest of the Palestinian
territory and continues its colonization and gradual
annexation. We can add to all that the rejection of
dividing Jerusalem between the two sides and the
rejection of any rights of Palestinian refugees.

A/ES-10/PV.20

This is the truth, and everything Mr. Sharon has
said or done has been in line with such a vision and in
its service. That is why the expansionist wall is being
built — to wall in the bantustans and to terminate any
possibility for real settlement. That is also why
settlement activities are continuing, including the legal
transfer of Israeli settlers to our land. And that is why
Israel continues its military escalation and destruction,
and why it has worked so vigorously to reverse the
situation to pre-Oslo conditions ten years later.
This political position comes after a bloody
Israeli military campaign against our people, which has
continued for approximately three years. During this
time, it has inflicted horrific human and material losses
among our people, to the extent that the humanitarian
situation has deteriorated to a catastrophic level.
Throughout this campaign, the Israeli occupying
forces have committed actions that are prohibited under
the Hague Regulations, the Fourth Geneva Convention
and its Additional Protocol 1, including innumerable
war crimes. They have committed acts of wilful killing,
including extrajudicial executions, imposed collective
punishments and committed wanton and unwarranted
destruction of property and extensive destruction of
infrastructure and homes. They have prevented the
freedom of movement of humanitarian organizations,
including United Nations agencies, and emergency
rescue personnel, including ambulances. They uprooted
crops and trees and razed thousands of dunums of
agricultural land and imposed a siege and closure on all
population centres. As they have committed all of the
above, the occupying forces have used all types of
heavy weaponry, including warplanes, helicopters and
tanks.
The High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention and the parties to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court have a clear
responsibility with regard to those who commit war
crimes. We call on those countries to issue indictments
and to bring to justice those Israelis who have
committed war crimes against our Palestinian people.
Foremost among those individuals are General Shaul
Mofaz, the previous Chief of Staff of the Israeli army
and the current Defense Minister, and General Moshe
Ya’alon, the current Chief of Staff, and all the
commanders of the Israeli military units that have
committed war crimes. Throughout the years many
crimes and massacres have been committed against the
Palestinian people, from Deir Yassin to Kafr Qassem

and Khan Yunis, and also those crimes that have been
directly linked with an individual named Ariel
Sharon — Colonel Sharon with the massacre of Qibya,
Defense Minister Sharon with the massacre in Sabra
and Shatilla, and Prime Minister Sharon with the
massacre in the Jenin refugee camp. The international
community must ensure that such crimes and massacres
are not repeated.
As if these crimes are not enough, the Israeli
Government is trying to depict all that has happened
and is happening as if it were a battle against terrorism.
What is painful is that some have accepted this and
even have accepted Israel’s hijacking of the world
agenda to combat international terrorism to divert it in
the direction of an open war against Arabs and
Muslims in order to serve its narrow political interests.
It seems that they have forgotten that Israel was the
first to introduce terrorism to our region, from the
assassination of United Nations mediator Count
Bernadotte to the massacres of our people, from the
sinking of the USS Liberty to the downing of a Libyan
civilian aircraft and the bombardment of Arab civilian
targets such as the Beirut airport, the Bahr al-Baqar
school in Egypt and most of the Quneitra in the
occupied Syrian Golan. There was the assassination of
many Palestinian leaders and cadres in Beirut, Tunis
and Europe, the deliberate bombardment of the United
Nations building in Qana in southern Lebanon, and the
threat to the safety and freedom of the elected
Palestinian President. This list is too long and time is
too limited to go further.
At any rate, we all are against terrorism. For our
part, we have been very clear in our condemnation of
actions committed by Palestinian groups in
contravention of international law, specifically the
suicide bombings that have targeted civilians in Israel.
Moreover, we have constantly stated that those suicide
bombings do not serve the national interest of the
Palestinian people or the realization of their goals.
But matters do not begin or end here. The main
issue is the Israeli occupation of our land and the
settler colonialism of this land, and the rejection by
Israel of our right to the State of Palestine and its
national independence. Why do the Israelis not get out
of our land? Then they can build all the walls they
want on international borders. Why don’t they at least
stop the colonization of our land and the illegal transfer
of colonial settlers to it?

3

A/ES-10/PV.20

It is important to note that the first suicide
bombing occurred twenty-seven years after the
onslaught of the occupation, after Israel had actually
transferred three hundred and fifty thousand colonial
settlers to the occupied Palestinian territory and settled
them in more than two hundred settlements, and after it
had declared the annexation of Jerusalem. Indeed, all
this was done before, and not in reaction to, any suicide
bombings.

Palestinian side of its obligations, including the
cessation of all violence and provision of real security.
It is high time to face reality, to stop covering the
Israeli positions or running away from confronting
those positions, while hoping that the process will
continue to be alive, even if in appearance only. It is
high time to stop inventing other reasons for the
current crisis, such as the internal Palestinian situation
or other issues, despite the importance of such issues.

Why are the Israelis, even after the beginning of
the bombings, committing all this killing, destruction
and war crimes? Does this benefit the battle against
suicide bombings? And why has Israel committed all
this systematic oppression and those crimes it did
before that, and for more than a quarter of a century?
What our people also do not understand is the readiness
of some to quickly and enthusiastically condemn the
suicide bombings, which kill Israeli civilians, but
not — at least not with the same quickness and
enthusiasm — the warplane bombings or the tank
shelling, which kill Palestinian civilians in even greater
numbers. This is not right, legally or morally.

At this time, it is incumbent on the international
community and on us here at the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly to take the
necessary measures to prevent the looming explosion
of the situation and ensure that no harm will be
inflicted on our President. Such measures must be
taken in compliance with international law, to respect
the national dignity of our people and their democratic
choices and, finally, to preserve the option of peace.

In any case, these bombings must cease. Israeli
war crimes and all other types of violence must cease
as a way to end the occupation. This is the key to
everything. If this occupation continues, the Israeli
violence and crimes and violations will continue until
the imposition of occupation is completed. The
Palestinian violence will continue, whether the legal
resistance against occupation or whether the illegal
actions such as suicide bombings in Israel.
This is not our option or choice. We should
completely give up violence and the logic of military
solutions. We must rely on the political solution that
restores hope, and we must return to the negotiating
table. This is our option. We are also saying here that
the road map should be revived and implemented in a
real and honest way. But for this to happen, we cannot
continue in the old way. It is high time to admit that the
essential problem is the position of Israel that insists on
colonization and settlement, rejects ending the
occupation of the Palestinian land and fails to accept
the independent sovereign State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Without changing that, there is no peace process
and there can be no implementation of the road map or
any other initiative. Such change, in turn, when it takes
place, will open the road to the implementation by the

4

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan to introduce draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.12.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, it pleases and honours me to speak here
as head of the Arab Group and to extend to you our
heartfelt congratulations on your election to the
presidency of the fifty-eighth session of the General
Assembly. I am fully confident that your great
experience and capabilities will enable us to achieve
the success we all desire.
The Assembly is meeting today in a special
session on a matter on which many meetings have been
held and many resolutions and condemnations have
been issued over more than 50 years without restoring
rights to their owners or without lessening Israel’s
arrogance or its expansionist policies or by forcing
Israel to comply with Security Council and United
Nations resolutions adopted against it. Israel is a
usurping occupying Power that has practised all forms
of brutality and destruction against the Palestinian
people and persistently aborts all initiatives to find a
political settlement, the last of which is the road map,
which Israel has intransigently resisted since its
announcement.
Israel has continued its consolidation of the
occupation and the displacement of the Palestinian
people by constructing a wall dividing up Palestinian
territory. Israel did not stop there. It next announced a
few days ago to the international community its sudden

A/ES-10/PV.20

decision to expel President Arafat from Palestinian
territory. Such an action would cause an irreversible,
qualitative change in the situation. The international
community and its international Organization are
entrusted with moving beyond rejection and
condemnation to take a pragmatic, feasible approach
resulting in action.
We have resorted to the Security Council, which
faces a direct and great challenge in assuming its role
and full responsibility on this issue. We look forward to
decisive action to force Israel to renounce the horrible
step that it has taken. But the Council was not able to
adopt a resolution reflecting the will of the
international community as expressed in the many
statements delivered at its meeting. That was because
the United States, as a Permanent Member, wished to
make its will prevail over all members and used its
veto power, preventing an initiative reflecting the
unanimous will of the international community. It was
very frustrating that the party that is supposed to be the
honest broker in the peace process used its veto. The
United States could have sent a positive signal to the
peoples of the region and the entire world by
supporting the truth contained in that draft resolution.
Instead, it has chosen to interrupt the peace process
through its blind support for Israel, encouraging that
country to continue to flout the peace process, to
continue its arrogance and to consolidate its
occupation, injustice and brutality.
I speak before the Assembly as the last resort of a
Palestinian people that continues to believe in the
legality of the General Assembly and its leadership and
continues to have faith in the positive response of the
international community, which Israel flouts in
contempt of all principles of international law, the
stability of the region and the aspirations of the
Palestinian people and Arab and Islamic peoples
everywhere.
I would like to introduce before the Assembly
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.12, which calls for the full
cessation of all violent actions in the occupied
Palestinian territories and calls on Israel, the occupying
Power, to refrain from threatening the safety of the
elected President of the Palestinian Authority and to
express its support for the efforts of the Quartet, which
is seeking to implement the road map.
I would like to point out that although this draft
resolution has already been printed, the following

States have since joined the list of sponsors:
Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cuba, Djibouti,
Mauritania, Namibia, Pakistan and Senegal.
Israel, more than any other State, violates
international law and legal norms. Its actions do not
abide by any rules or laws. Israel’s actions are more
like the actions of gangsters. Israel, as it seems, will
pursue its course despite the general objection of the
international community unless the international
community shoulders the responsibilities entrusted to it
and works practically and seriously to stop Israel
before it is too late.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): First, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
General Assembly with such determination and vision.
I would also like to pay tribute to the serious and
impressive way in which you have prepared yourself
for this important role.
At this week’s opening of the fifty-eighth session
of the General Assembly, Mr. President, you boldly
called for a forward-looking and action-oriented
session to revitalize our work for the realities of a
fundamentally changed world. Objectivity and not bias,
you said, principal and not expediency — sentiments
that have also been echoed by the Secretary-General in
recent weeks. Such reform is critical if the United
Nations wants to make a relevant and credible
contribution to world affairs in the best tradition of the
United Nations Charter.
Sadly, we convene today — just two days after
setting out to embark on that important agenda — in
order to consider an initiative that is fundamentally at
odds with that goal, an initiative that relapses into the
familiar preoccupation of the General Assembly with
endless one-sided resolutions that have contributed
little to the security and peace of Israelis or
Palestinians.
At the beginning of this week, the Security
Council debated, considered and ultimately rejected a
resolution that would have come to the defence of a
man who has devoted all of his energies to scuttling a
long list of peace efforts now relegated to the dustbins
of history — a man who has sought to sabotage the
road map and prevent the emergence of a new and
empowered Palestinian leadership, which was the basis
of President Bush’s vision.

5

A/ES-10/PV.20

Mr. Arafat’s corrupt rule and his continuing
support for and tolerance of terrorism have for decades
caused untold suffering to both Israelis and
Palestinians. His promise of peace and his rhetoric of
reconciliation have been false, but his legacy of
hijackings and suicide terrorism have become all too
real and, tragically, all too global.
Almost 30 years ago, in 1974, Mr. Arafat stood
here, at this very podium, and first addressed the
General Assembly with a holster attached to his hip,
and spoke of carrying a gun and an olive branch. Just
two days ago, Mr. Arafat, while preaching to the
Western media about his hopes for a new truce between
Israelis and Palestinians, was quoted as saying to his
supporters, “There is not one person in Palestine who
does not dream of dying as a martyr.”
It is very clear to us all that for all this time he
has only taken the gun out of its holster and that the
olive branch has really been a fig leaf to obstruct and
hide his rejectionism. It may be Mr. Arafat who is the
topic of this debate, but it is the cause of peace and the
legitimate rights of Israelis and Palestinians that stand
to suffer from continuing the pretence that Mr. Arafat
is a legitimate leader.
Israel, more than any other State, invested a great
deal in Mr. Arafat’s word. We can no longer ignore his
duplicity. The Israeli Cabinet’s decision in principle
merely states what world leaders have already
recognized and what is effectively affirmed in the road
map itself — that Mr. Arafat is an obstacle to peace.
He represents the Palestinian’s dark past rather than the
bright future they could have. He is the region’s and his
own people’s greatest tragedy.
Like so many other resolutions presented by the
Palestinian side, this draft imagines an alternate reality
where the brutal acts of terrorism that deliberately kill
innocent civilians garner barely a passing mention. By
failing to condemn expressly and forcefully the
Palestinian leadership’s abject refusal to dismantle the
terrorist infrastructure, this draft resolution, presented
by the Palestinian representative, treats with disrespect
the thousands of lives devastated by Palestinian
terrorism. Are those lives not worthy of the General
Assembly’s protection?
By focusing criticism on the response to terrorism
and not on the terrorism itself and its victims, the draft
resolution becomes devoid of moral substance. By
equating the deliberate murder of innocent civilians

6

with targeted defensive operations against illegal
combatants responsible for that murder, this draft
resolution fails to provide us with a moral compass.
The very first clauses of the road map expressly
demand the dismantling of the terrorist infrastructure
of groups such as Hamas, Palestine Islamic Jihad and
the Fatah Tanzim. Should not the failure of the
Palestinian leadership to live up to this obligation take
a prominent role in any fair and balanced assessment of
the obstacles to peace?
There is more at stake today than another
resolution to add to the litany of one-sided Palestinian
initiatives that have been introduced in this Hall. What
is at stake today is a choice about what kind of
Organization we want the United Nations to be. Will
the Assembly continue to tolerate the squandering of
its precious resources on anachronistic and partisan
agendas, at the expense of addressing, without
selectivity, the myriad of important issues that concern
the international community today? Will the Assembly
surrender to efforts to manipulate its agenda to further
the political interests of some, or will it activate its
potential to show balanced and effective leadership in
the interests of all?
Member States are no doubt aware of the millions
of dollars already spent each year by the United
Nations to advance the interests and positions of the
Palestinian side to this conflict. More than 20
resolutions, many of them redundant, one-sided and
hopelessly out of touch with reality, are adopted by the
Assembly at every annual session. Investigative
committees
and
other
special
bodies
and
representatives, including a whole division of the
Secretariat itself, are largely manipulated to advocate
and disseminate the Palestinian position, rather than to
further the cause of peace for both peoples.
There is not one other country in the United
Nations that is singled out for such discriminatory and
one-sided attention. And to what end? Has the
inordinate amount of time and number of resources
helped bring the parties closer to peace and
reconciliation, or merely intensified the acrimony
between them? Has the message been forward-looking,
positive and progressive, or bitter and divisive? And
does the paper trail created by all this activity lead
anywhere but to the conclusion that support and
encouragement for peace between Israelis and
Palestinians must be sought outside this Hall?

A/ES-10/PV.20

Knowing all this, do we really need, on the very
eve of the general debate, to spend even more time
engaged in an emergency special session that violates
the very conditions of the Uniting for Peace procedure?
Do we really need to consider a draft resolution that is
designed to protect the personal interests of the
Palestinian representative’s patron, rather than the
legitimate rights of ordinary Israelis and Palestinians?
Is not it time for us all to say to the Palestinian
representative today, “Enough is enough”?
Delegates may not be aware of the exorbitant
costs of this entirely superfluous session. This meeting
alone will cost over $30,000. Each Security Council
meeting in which action on this issue has been debated,
considered and ultimately rejected has amounted to
thousands and thousands of wasted monies. How can
we possibly further the goals of reform in this
Organization, let alone the goal of peace in the Middle
East, if we continue in this way?
Pandering to the narrow agenda of the Palestinian
representative not only fails to empower those
genuinely committed to the cause of peace, but harms
the reputation and credibility of the United Nations as a
member of the Quartet and as a crucial voice in world
affairs. The States Members of the United Nations
must choose if they want to fill the Assembly’s agenda
with biased, divisive and outmoded issues, or if the
Assembly will adapt to the challenges of the twentyfirst century. It cannot do both.
These kinds of resolutions may help perpetuate a
corrupt and unaccountable regime, but they do nothing
to help the Palestinians themselves. There is scarcely
an Arab leader or a Palestinian in the street who will
not admit, at least in confidence, that Mr. Arafat has
not furthered the genuine welfare of the Palestinian
people. Mr. Arafat’s gain is the Palestinian people’s
loss.
Israel continues to hold out hope for a new
Palestinian leadership that will live up to its
obligations. We are committed to resolving this dispute
through dialogue, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and, while obligated to
protect our citizens against terrorism, we recognize that
ultimately there is no military solution to this conflict.
We remain committed, as we have proven before, to
making painful compromises so as to realize the vision
of Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in
mutual dignity and security, but we cannot negotiate

with those in the Palestinian leadership who are more
devoted to destroying the Jewish State than to creating
a democratic and vibrant Palestinian State. We cannot
compromise with a leadership that hates us more than it
loves its own children.
If we are to address the core issues of this conflict
and move towards its peaceful settlement, we do not
need more United Nations resolutions. We need, first
and foremost, leaders on both sides who are committed
to dialogue and mutual reconciliation. Mr. Arafat is no
such leader.
Leadership not only confers rights; it imposes
responsibilities. Leadership requires individuals that
seek the betterment of their people and not the sole
perpetuation of their own power and wealth. We know
that there are such leaders in Palestinian society and, if
freed from Mr. Arafat’s grip, these leaders can rise to
work with Israel to rescue the peace process and
deliver a genuine solution. But if this plague of
terrorism which has been nurtured for so long under
Mr. Arafat’s rule is not decisively stamped out,
Palestinians and Israelis will continue to suffer. The
promise of peace and prosperity will continue to be
denied by those who value death more than they
cherish life.
I urge the representatives in attendance today not
to support this draft resolution and to oppose the
continuing abuse of United Nations time and resources.
If they really care about peace in the Middle East; if
they truly care about the reputation and credibility of
the United Nations; and if they care about the success
of this fifty-eighth session, there should be no other
option.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to address the General Assembly
on this agenda item in my capacity as Vice-Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
The resumption of the tenth emergency special
session was warranted by the rapidly deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory and, most
recently, to the decision of the Government of Israel in
principle to expel Palestinian Authority President
Yasser Arafat.
At the Security Council meeting four days ago, an
overwhelming majority of the speakers denounced the
Israeli decision and urged that it be immediately

7

A/ES-10/PV.20

revoked. The appalling inability of the Security
Council to exercise its responsibility under the United
Nations Charter and to deal decisively with this issue
has again brought us to the General Assembly in order
to enable the United Nations to exercise its permanent
responsibility over the question of Palestine.
The Committee has repeatedly called on the
Israeli Government to lift the siege it has imposed on
President Arafat. For many long months, President
Arafat has been confined by the Israeli army to his
headquarters, the muqataa, in Ramallah. The
Palestinian people has been deprived of his leadership
and guidance, especially at a time when Israeli army
incursions, raids and extrajudicial killings have
intensified.
The Israeli decision was unjustified and highly
irresponsible. Senior Israeli officials have even
explicitly said that killing President Arafat was one of
the options in the implementation of this decision. The
intent of this decision is an affront to the dignity of the
Palestinian people and in no way helps to create a
climate conducive to restarting peace negotiations.
The Committee is extremely worried that this
decision, if implemented, would undoubtedly cause
further fury among Palestinians, who are already
enraged by the miserable conditions in which they live
under continued Israeli occupation. The Committee
calls on the Israeli Government to refrain from making
any threatening statements, especially on President
Arafat’s personal safety. It should abide by
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
The dismal situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory is deeply alarming. The period of relative
calm following the truce declaration by Palestinian
groups in June was followed by deadly tit-for-tat
violence last month. Our Committee’s position in this
regard is very clear and strong. While recognizing
Israel’s right to security, the Committee nevertheless
condemns in the strongest terms the policy and practice
of extrajudicial assassinations, emphasizing that such
actions
are
inadmissible
under
international
humanitarian law.
Similarly, the Committee condemns all attacks
against Israeli civilians, whatever the provenance or
motivation, as they have no moral justification and do
not serve the cause of peace and reconciliation pursued
by the Palestinian Authority. We believe that the

8

primary cause for these actions, however, is the
continuing occupation and lack of tangible progress in
the political area.
The Israeli Government has made no significant
move that would begin to improve the day-to-day lives
of Palestinians. After a cursory lifting of some
checkpoints and the release of some prisoners, it
continues aggressively to expand its illegal settlements.
We have voiced our concern about the construction of
the separation wall. This illegal project is built not on
the Green Line but on Palestinian land, choking
livelihoods and effectively creating a ghetto-like
situation for thousands of Palestinians. It prejudices the
outcome of future permanent status negotiations and
negates any possibility of establishing a contiguous
Palestinian State.
The Committee calls on the international
community, especially the principals of the Quartet, to
do all they can to bridge this chasm and to regalvanize
efforts to help the parties to return to negotiations and
to push ahead with the peace process, with the road
map as its guide. The road map remains the best way to
proceed. It was accepted by the Palestinians. Its goals
are clear and remain very relevant: an end to
occupation; an end to terrorism and violence; a
permanent settlement of the conflict based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002); and the realization of the vision of two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace within
secure and recognized borders.
I call on members of this Assembly to send a
clear message to the Government of Israel that it
should recognize President Arafat as the true and
legitimate leader of the Palestinian people. Any effort
to expel or marginalize him does not contribute to the
cause that we are all struggling for — the cause of
peace.
I would like to say the following on behalf of
Cuba.
Allow me to thank the President for reconvening
the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly in order that, given the paralysis in the
Security Council, Member States can take action,
consider the situation and democratically express their
opinions in the absence of the sort of authoritarian
restriction of their right to freely express themselves —
a restriction that does not even maintain the appearance
of sovereign equality — that was recently in evidence

A/ES-10/PV.20

in a meeting devoted to the same issue that took place
in the Council, that altogether undemocratic body
whose own non-permanent members are even
discriminated against.
About 3,600 people have died since September
2000 in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, almost 2,800 of
them innocent Palestinian civilians. Deliberate
extrajudicial executions are increasing. State terrorism,
including the use of modern lethal weapons, is
continuing. A wall is being built to create a Palestinian
Bantustan. The Palestinian economy is being
suffocated. The Palestinian Authority and its legitimate
President continue to be under siege.
The Security Council continues to be
immobilized by the veto of the United States, which to
date has been employed 26 times to impede the
implementation of that body’s own resolutions, avoid
the invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter and
prevent the establishment of an international force to
protect the unarmed Palestinian population.
There will be no just and lasting peace in the
Middle East until there is an end to Israeli occupation;
until the Palestinian people are able to exercise their
legitimate right to establish an independent State with
its capital in East Jerusalem; until all occupied Arab
territories are returned; until Israel withdraws from the
Gaza Strip, the West Bank and the Syrian Golan to the
4 June 1967 border; until Israeli provocation in
southern Lebanon comes to an end; until the return of
Palestinian refugees is guaranteed; and until Israeli
settlements are dismantled.
Cuba reiterates its condemnation of suicide bomb
attacks against Israeli civilians, who continue to be the
innocent victims of the spiral of violence generated by
the policies of their Government. We also reject the
manipulation of those individual acts to try to justify
State terrorism and the atrocities perpetrated by an
army possessing the most lethal and modern means.
The Cuban delegation reiterates the need to
respect international humanitarian law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
Cuba demands full respect for the physical
integrity and dignity of President Yasser Arafat. We
also demand that, given the obvious inability of the
Security Council to carry out its functions, the General
Assembly exercise the far-ranging and considerable

powers entrusted to it by the Charter without
vacillation or delay.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): On behalf of the NonAligned Movement, I wish to thank you the President
for convening this urgent meeting. We are confident
that he will be able to guide this meeting to a
successful conclusion.
The Non-Aligned Movement has wholeheartedly
supported the request of the Arab Group for a
resumption of the tenth emergency special session.
This meeting serves the important purpose of seeking
just treatment at the United Nations vis-à-vis an
important issue that concerns not only the Palestinian
people, who have gone through unimaginable hardship,
humiliation and indignity for far too long, but also the
whole international community. We seek recourse from
the General Assembly this morning under regrettable
circumstances, in particular in the light of the failure of
the Security Council to take urgent action in response
to Israel’s decision to expel President Arafat from the
West Bank.
Speaking on its behalf, I clearly stated the
position of the Non-Aligned Movement during the
debate in the Security Council on 15 September 2003. I
do not wish to repeat all of it today. The Non-Aligned
Movement remains deeply disappointed at the outcome
of the Security Council’s consideration of the draft
resolution that was introduced in that body.
Unfortunately, the date 16 September 2003 has become
another sad day, not only for Palestinians but also for
all those who want to see peace emerge between
Palestinians and Israelis. It became a sad day because
the Council failed to send the correct signal to Israel.
The draft resolution submitted to the Council
demanded an end to the cycle of violence and called
upon Israel to desist from any act of deportation and to
cease making threats against the safety of President
Arafat. Its adoption could have contributed to
promoting further efforts to ensure the implementation
of the road map. The Council could have acted
decisively to nudge the peace process forward.
Unfortunately, it could not do so. It therefore lost an
important opportunity.
The Non-Aligned Movement has made clear its
condemnation of violence and terrorism. We reiterate
that the killing of innocent victims in this conflict is
unacceptable, be they Israelis or Palestinians. But we
are outraged at the intensification of Israeli occupation;

9

A/ES-10/PV.20

the wilful killing of civilians; extrajudicial executions;
the destruction of homes, farmland and other property;
the strangulation of the Palestinian economy; and the
collective punishment and other practices committed
deliberately and systematically against the Palestinian
population. We are equally outraged at the continuation
of settlement activities on Palestinian land and, at this
particular moment, the building of the expansionist
separation wall. That behaviour by Israel, particularly
at a time when peace seems to be within grasp, calls
into question Israel’s own commitment to peace. What
Israel is continuing to do, and what it has now
promised to do to President Arafat, does not accord
with the behaviour of a genuine partner in peaceful
negotiations.
A clear attempt was made in the debate that took
place in the Security Council, as is being done at this
very moment in the General Assembly, to divert the
focus from the urgent matter at hand to the issue of
terrorism. President Arafat is portrayed as a terrorist,
who must therefore be removed. He is also portrayed as
the major obstacle to peace — again meaning that he
should be removed or, if not removed, kept in isolation,
diplomatically or physically. But the fact remains that
President Arafat is the leader of the Palestinian people.
Palestinians elected him democratically. To forcibly
remove, expel, deport or, as some suggest, even kill
him, would invite tragic consequences for Palestinians
and Israelis alike, not to mention the peace process
itself. We strongly condemn that decision and demand
that Israel desist from any act of deportation and that it
cease making threats on the safety of President Arafat.
The Non-Aligned Movement views the decision
by the Israeli Cabinet as yet another prime example of
Israel’s wilful attempts to intimidate and dominate the
Palestinian people, of its disregard for international
opinion and of its contempt for international law. That
provocative decision, and its implementation, would
only worsen the situation and spark a greater cycle or
violence. The Security Council failed to send that
message to Israel. The General Assembly must now
assume that responsibility. The decision to be taken by
the General Assembly should not just constitute a
message to Israel; it must also give hope to the people
of Palestine and to all who long for peace in the area,
in particular, Palestinians and Israelis. The General
Assembly must uphold the rule of law since the
Security Council failed to do so last week in response
to this particular issue. Each and every Member of the

10

United Nations has the obligation to ensure that the
deprivation of the sovereign right of the Palestinian
people would end immediately. Israel must be made to
realize that it cannot continue to disregard international
law while at the same time hoping for peace to be
achieved. Eliminating the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian people and the symbol of their struggle
would not guarantee peace and security for Israel. It
defies logic that the annihilation of the Palestinian
leadership, political structure and government
institutions could ever lead to peace, security and
prosperity for Israel.
We must not lose sight of the fundamental cause
of this violent conflict. The crux of it is not simply
terrorism and its threat to Israel’s security. It is in fact
Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian land and the
continuing humiliation of the Palestinian people.
This is a conflict that has long been fuelled by 36
years of Israeli occupation and its systematic human
rights violations and provocative policies and practices
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Israel cannot
justify its actions on the basis of combating terrorism.
We have heard accusations against President
Arafat and the obstacle that he poses to the peace
process. But, surely, we all know that what poses an
obstacle to peace is not President Arafat. It is Israel’s
refusal to end the occupation, dismantle settlements in
the West Bank and Gaza and renounce its expansionist
policies for a greater Israel. In order for peace to be
achieved, both sides must move and act accordingly. In
that regard, we hope that members of the Quartet
individually and collectively will undertake serious and
bold efforts to assist the parties to arrive at a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace to end the pain among
Palestinians and Israelis alike.
As I did in the Security Council, I wish to state
today that the Non-Aligned Movement is committed to
a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The Movement firmly supports the two-State solution
based on the 1967 lines. We believe that peace in the
Middle East can only be achieved through the
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination,
national independence and the exercise of their
sovereignty in their State, Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
We call on Israel to come to its senses and accept
the two-State solution as envisaged by Security

A/ES-10/PV.20

Council resolution 1397 (2002) and as promoted by the
roadmap. Israel’s acceptance of and commitment to the
State of Palestine is the only way to ensure Israel’s
security. The continued Israeli occupation and harsh
military action cannot be a viable solution. We are
convinced that the imposition of Israeli policies and
practices aimed at the destruction and devastation of
the Palestinian society and the Palestinian Authority
gravely undermines the peace process. Israel must be
made to act in accordance with international law and
international humanitarian law.
In that regard, we will continue to call for the
revival of the roadmap and further intensive efforts by
the Quartet and the parties concerned to bring the
peace process back on track. We welcome the meeting
of the Quartet principals in New York next week and
look forward to concrete and promising results from
that meeting.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
General Assembly has the obligation to discuss this
issue. The issue is certainly not outmoded. The General
Assembly should take a strong stand against any
actions that could further undermine the peace process.
It must give the signal that the international community
has not abandoned the Palestinian people. It must show
that the United Nations will continue to persevere in
the implementation of the road map and the realization
of the two-State vision. Our commitment to peace in
the Middle East must not wane.
On behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, I urge
members of the Assembly to give their overwhelming
support to the draft resolution before us this morning.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This emergency special session of the
General Assembly is taking place against the backdrop
of the tragic situation in the Palestinian territories.
Despite diplomatic efforts, Palestinian and Israeli
relations have been plunged into a vicious cycle of
violence, including terrorism and acts of retribution.
The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories has reached a critical point. We are
forcefully confronted by the question as to what
measures must be undertaken in order to finally
extricate the Middle East peace process from this
impasse. It is our conviction that this can be achieved
only through continuing to draw up a shared political
platform that would make it possible to ensure the
unconditional implementation by the parties of their

commitments under the road map drawn up by the
Quartet of international mediators. That means that the
terrorist raids against the Israeli civilian population,
which Russia firmly condemns, must be ended. They
undermine the prospects for the acquisition by the
Palestinians of their independent State and home. They
cannot be the means for achieving political objectives.
We call on the leadership of the Palestinian
National Authority to undertake immediate measures to
stop terrorist actions. The Israeli leadership must also
implement its share of obligations under the roadmap.
Once again, we emphasize the inadmissibility of the
practice of extrajudicial executions and the
disproportionate use of force and the need to refrain
from unilateral steps that predetermine the outcome of
negotiations regarding the ultimate status of the
Palestinian territories.
We reaffirm our position that the implementation
of the decision of the Government of Israel regarding
the so-called removal of the head of the Palestinian
National Authority, Yasser Arafat, would be a serious
political mistake, with the most negative consequences
for the regional situation, and would lead to an
uncontrollable course of events.
The Security Council’s lack of readiness to adopt
a resolution in connection with the exacerbation of
Palestinian-Israeli confrontation reaffirms the need for
more active international efforts aimed at surmounting
the present crisis. There is clearly a need to exert
greater pressure on the parties to implement their
commitments under the roadmap. All possible courses
of action must be agreed on by all of the parties
involved and international mediators who can ensure
control over the implementation of the roadmap.
The forthcoming meeting of the Quartet of
international mediators, to be held at the foreign
ministerial level, and including the Secretary-General,
in New York, will be very important. We are counting
on the fact that that meeting will conclude with specific
results.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the current session of
the General Assembly. I am confident that, under your
brilliant guidance, this session will achieve fruitful
results. The Chinese side fully understands and
supports the request by the League of Arab States and
the Non-Aligned Movement to resume this session. We

11

A/ES-10/PV.20

hope that our meeting will produce positive results on
the situation between Israel and Palestine.

behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by its Chairman,
the Ambassador of Malaysia.

The launch of the road map in June brought new
opportunities and hopes to the peace process between
Israel and Palestine. Recently, however, there have
been serious disagreements between Israel and
Palestine on the implementation of the road map,
leading to a high degree of violence and a stalemate in
the peace talks. The Chinese side is deeply concerned
and disturbed about the increased tension in the Middle
East. It is our hope that Israel and Palestine will
cherish the results of the peace talks since the launch of
the road map, put an end to the violent clashes and
refrain from taking any acts that will lead to further
deterioration of the situation.

It is early in your presidency, Sir, and already we
come before you to express ourselves on the situation
in the Middle East. Unless the international community
takes immediate measures to stabilize the situation, we
are heading for a serious catastrophe.

President Yasser Arafat is the legitimate leader
elected by the Palestinian people. Israel’s decision to
expel him will not help reduce the tension but will only
serve to deepen the hatred between the two sides. We
urge the Israeli Government to reconsider this decision.
In our view, both Israel and Palestine should adhere to
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002) and the principle of land for peace and
continue to engage in peace talks. It is the only way to
end the three-year violent cycle, remove the roots of
violent activities, appropriately settle disputes between
the two sides and realize peaceful coexistence.
The settlement of the Israel-Palestine issue bears
on peace and stability of the entire Middle Eastern
region and the whole world. The international
community should therefore make even greater efforts
to exert a positive influence and accelerate the Middle
Eastern peace process. As a permanent member of the
Security Council, China always upholds justice in this
question and has made active efforts to promote that
peace process at various stages. China, alongside with
the rest of the international community, is ready to
continue to play a constructive role in bringing longterm stability to the Middle East.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, my
delegation is proud to serve under you as President of
the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly. We
wish to extend our congratulations to you, our sisters
and brothers in the Caribbean, on the assumption of
this important position.
I also would like to bring to your attention that I
associate myself with the statement that was given on

12

It has been over a year since this emergency
special session of the General Assembly was last
convened. On that occasion we endorsed the remarks
contained in the Secretary-General’s report on the
massacre in the Jenin refugee camp concerning the
urgent need for the parties to resume a process that
would lead back to the negotiating table. But that did
not seem to change the situation at all.
The greatest difficulty we face is that the Security
Council has not succeeded in discharging its
responsibilities to address the Middle East issue. The
Security Council is mandated to deal with matters of
international peace and security. But when it comes to
the Middle East the Council has been unable to enforce
its own resolutions. This has left the Israeli military
with the mistaken impression that it has the green light
to take action against Palestinian civilians. At the same
time, it has allowed armed Palestinian groups to
retaliate against Israeli civilians. Failure by the
Security Council to act decisively has given those
opposed to a peaceful solution the mandate to
determine the agenda.
The Israelis and Palestinians cannot hope to
approach a solution for peace by continuing to kill each
other. The South African Government has always
stated that violence as a tactic or strategy will never
deliver the peace so dearly sought by the people of
Palestine and Israel.
More worrisome are the reports that the Israeli
Cabinet has taken a decision to expel and perhaps even
kill President Yasser Arafat, the democratically elected
leader of the Palestinian people. The fact that President
Arafat embodies Palestinian identity and national
aspirations has been lost in the hatred that has engulfed
the Middle East. The South African Government is on
record as condemning all acts of violence, particularly
against innocent civilians.
During the past year a clear opportunity to
advance the peace process presented itself in the form
of the Quartet’s road map. It brought the Palestinians

A/ES-10/PV.20

and the Israelis to the point where they could begin to
talk about a common and peaceful future. The road
map created opportunities for confidence-building
among the parties. This culminated in a ceasefire,
which raised the hope that the parties could make use
of the relative calm to advance the political process.
Tragically, that opportunity was lost. Mr. Terje
Roed-Larsen,
the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
explained in his statement before the Security Council
on 15 September 2003:
“The principle of parallelism, reciprocal
steps by both parties in all fields, is a core
concept of the road map. The weakness of the
past four months of half-hearted implementation
by both sides is that parallelism was not
emphasized. As a result, a single but essential
issue — security of the Israelis from terrorism —
became the sole focus of the road map
implementation.” (S/PV.4824, p. 5)
It seems that the only meaningful way out of this
dilemma is for international pressure to be brought to
bear on both sides to honour their commitments. The
Government of Israel has to immediately stop the
extrajudicial killings and dismantle settlements and the
separation wall, as well as to rescind its decision to
expel or even consider taking the life of President
Arafat.
If the Security Council is to be seen as remaining
seized with the Middle East, it should immediately
adopt a resolution under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter calling for a complete cessation of all
acts of violence, terror, provocation, incitement and
destruction. Such a Chapter VII resolution should also
demand that Israel, as the occupying Power, abide by
its obligations under international humanitarian law,
including the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War. In
particular, the Security Council needs to place on
record the fact that threats to deport or kill leaders of
the Palestinian people are unacceptable and illegal, as
is the construction of the separation wall on Palestinian
land. Furthermore, the Council should mandate the
deployment of an international presence to monitor the
implementation of the Chapter VII resolution by both
sides.
Such decisive action by the Security Council will
send a signal to all parties in the Middle East that the

international community is determined to stop this
threat to international peace and security.
As long as the Security Council passes
resolutions that are not enforced, the forces of violence
in the Middle East will always believe that they can
determine the agenda.
The role of the General Assembly is crucial in the
debate on the Middle East. This Assembly is the only
forum where Member States all have an equal
opportunity to speak out on the Middle East. We
believe that our presence here is extremely important.
We are speaking about people’s lives: Palestinian lives
and Israeli lives. Those lives are too important for us to
remain quiet.
The suggestion that this debate must be
quantified in terms of United Nations resources is
shocking to us. If the General Assembly cannot find
time to discuss the Middle East, what other issue of
global security and importance will we discuss? We in
South Africa are celebrating ten years of independence
next year because the General Assembly, for more than
46 years, gave time for the issue of apartheid to be
discussed. We will never agree that the General
Assembly must start quantifying debates on money,
especially on an important issue such as the Middle
East.
The struggle for self-determination by the
Palestinian people for a State of their own, existing
side by side with the State of Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, is what we are
committed to supporting. We are convinced that there
will never be peace in the Middle East until that
materializes. As my Government has stated many
times, the only way to achieve peace in the Middle East
is through dialogue and not violence.
For those reasons, my delegation urges that we
support the resolution before the Assembly, introduced
by the group of Arab States and endorsed by the NonAligned Movement.
Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): On
Monday, Security Council members and United
Nations Member States listened to the testimony by
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen and agreed with him that the
international community must take steps to revive the
road map. We all know the provisions in the road map.
But let me quote from three of them in particular:

13

A/ES-10/PV.20

“A rebuilt and refocused Palestinian
Authority security apparatus begins sustained,
targeted and effective operations aimed at
confronting all those engaged in terror and
dismantlement of terrorist capabilities and
infrastructure.”
This includes commencing confiscation
terrorist capabilities and infrastructure.

of

“This includes commencing confiscation of
illegal weapons and consolidation of security
authority, free of association with terror and
corruption.”
A second point:
“The Government of Israel takes no actions
undermining trust, including deportations, attacks
on civilians; confiscation and/or demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, as a punitive
measure or to facilitate Israeli construction;
destruction of Palestinian institutions and
infrastructure; and other measures specified in the
Tenet work plan.”
Those are all provisions contained in the road
map. A third and last point, to quote from the road
map:
“Arab States cut off public and private
funding and all other forms of support for groups
supporting and engaging in violence and terror.”
The United States delegation believes that we
have no other option at this time. We must devote our
efforts and energy to making the road map work.
Secretary Powell has stated that the United States
does not support either the elimination of Mr. Arafat or
his forced exile, and this remains our policy. In our
view, the draft resolutions we have considered at the
United Nations this week are flawed in their lack of
balance because they single out Israel and ignore the
groups whose aim it is to sabotage the road map. We
oppose these draft resolutions because of their
imbalance and omission of the elements that we have
spelled out: a condemnation of acts of terrorism, an
explicit condemnation of Hamas, the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, and a
call for the dismantlement of the infrastructure that
supports those terrorist operations.
It is particularly disheartening that this pattern of
one-sided recriminations at the United Nations has

14

begun again just days before the general debate and a
ministerial-level meeting of the Quartet, which is
scheduled to take place later this month. I regret that
the United Nations will not send a positive and unified
message to support the peace process at the start of the
fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly. That
polarization undermines our collective diplomatic
efforts to make some headway on these issues here or
with the parties on the ground. We have a
responsibility to try to convince both parties to return
to negotiations that will lead to peace in the Middle
East. We have already spelled out how this could work
in the road map. Instead of reflexively calling for
emergency special sessions, let us get down to the
business of working for peace.
Mr. Alcalay (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
Since this is my first statement, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the fifty-eighth session of the General
Assembly and wish you every success in all our
deliberations, and especially for a constructive
outcome to the Assembly’s deliberations in support of
the work of the United Nations.
The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela wishes to affirm before the Assembly that
the Government of my country has clearly expressed its
position with respect to measures of expulsion against
the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Yasser
Arafat. That position is expressed in the communiqué
that I shall now read out.
“The Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shares with
members of the international community, who are
committed to peace efforts in the Middle East, its
immense concern at the threat that the President
of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Yasser Arafat,
might be expelled from his natural and legal
environment for the exercise of his functions as
the legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people. It is our hope that in the name of lasting
peace and security of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples, such measures will not be implemented.
The exclusion or isolation of the parties to the
conflict is a step backwards in the efforts and
initiatives for peace and reconciliation.
“The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reiterates its position regarding the Palestinian
problem, respecting the rights of both parties and

A/ES-10/PV.20

supporting the efforts of the United Nations to
find a peaceful solution to the conflict and to
avoid violence, tension and political instability in
the region. The Government of Venezuela calls
for continuing the process of peace negotiations,
in implementation of the agreements already
reached: the road map.”

In the past several months, contrary to Israeli
commitments, the building of Jewish settlements in
Palestinian territory has not stopped, let alone been
reversed and the results of the policy undone. Instead,
the Israelis displaced a number of mobile homes in a
few newly-set-up outposts in the West Bank, while
continuing relentlessly with settlement building.

At the same time, I would like to reaffirm the
position taken by the delegation of Venezuela last year
during the meeting of the ministers for foreign affairs
of the Group of 77 presided over by Minister for
Foreign Affairs Roy Chaderton-Matos. On that
occasion we said,

Disregard and tokenism by the Israelis, as well as
a policy of deception, has applied in other areas, too.
The release of the Palestinian prisoners, the retreat of
the Israeli army from the Palestinian territory, the
ending of the strangulation policy of the populated
Palestinian areas and the easing of tight closures and
curfew regulations have yet to be carried out.

“In the context of globalization and growing
interdependence, we believe that only through
dialogue and cooperation will we be able to find
formulas to resolve international conflict. We are
concerned about the worsening of age-old
conflicts — conflicts that are no less urgent
because longstanding — which deserve our
fullest attention. In this regard, we would like to
reaffirm the provisions of Security Council
resolutions that invite the parties to establish a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East and to
recognize the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all the States of the
region and their right to live in peace within
secure borders, free from the threat or use of
force.”
Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): On
behalf of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) group in the United Nations, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having resumed the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly.
The announcement by the Israelis of their
intention to expel President Arafat from the Palestinian
territory is clearly the latest attempt on their part to
preclude any efforts aimed at restoring Palestinian
rights. A review of the trajectory of activities in recent
months reveals clearly that the current Israeli regime is
evidently intent on either nipping any new idea in the
bud or ensuring its failure during the course of
implementation. That is in line with Mr. Sharon’s long
and unwavering record of ferociously opposing any
kind of peace with the Palestinians that might lead to
the restoration of their rights, including the
establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State.

More importantly, despite the ceasefire declared
by the Palestinian groups, the Israelis never stopped
their armed aggression. Their bloody campaign against
the Palestinians, including their criminal policy of
extrajudicial executions, continued unabated. In that
way they tried wittingly to antagonize the Palestinians
and induce them to respond in kind, thus precipitating
the failure of the road map. The Israeli decision to kill
or expel President Arafat is a continuation of their
general policy aimed at defeating any peace initiative
and continuing to keep their grip on the Palestinian
land.
It is regrettable that once again last week — and
for the thirty-sixth time — the United States resorted to
the veto in order to block the passage of a draft
resolution, which would have criticized the Israeli
regime for its crime against the Palestinians and urged
the Israelis not to deport President Arafat. It is not
acceptable for the Security Council to become
paralysed with regard to a grave crisis that is at the top
of the list of international priorities. The whole
world — and especially the people in the Middle
East — is bewildered about the extent of the double
standard and the selectivity with which the different
issues on the agenda of the Security Council are being
dealt with.
The expulsion of the elected President of the
Palestinian Authority would be a flagrant crime. It
would plunge the area into another round of violence
and represent a deliberate attempt to strike another
blow at any hope for a genuine peace. The international
community, especially the Quartet, should live up to its
responsibility and prevent the Israelis from continuing
to flout its will. We believe that the General Assembly

15

A/ES-10/PV.20

should do whatever is in its power to prevent the
Israelis from carrying out their decision. In this respect,
the States members of the OIC support the draft
resolution before the General Assembly and urge States
Members of the United Nations to vote in favour of it.
Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your outstanding
election to preside over the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session. I would like to take this
opportunity to assure you of my delegation’s readiness
to cooperate with you, and to express our appreciation
to you for having organized this debate in plenary
meeting to discuss the serious and worrying events
taking place in the occupied Palestinian territories.
The acceptance of the road map by Israel and the
Palestinian Authority had given rise to the hope that
the region of the Middle East, and Palestine in
particular, would once again find itself on the road to
peace, stability and development. Unfortunately, the
respite was all too short. The decision in principle of
the Israel Cabinet to expel the President of the
Palestinian Authority from Ramallah, and even to
threaten his life, brought about a revival of the cycle of
violence, suicide attacks and reprisals that are once
again plunging the entire region into an abyss and
threatening to annihilate the Quartet’s peace plan.
My delegation feels that this decision is a serious
political error with unpredictable consequences and
that it cannot be tolerated. The international
community must act here and now to stop the
deterioration of the peace process and to work with
ever greater determination and unity to relaunch the
dialogue between Israel and Palestine. Action by our
Assembly must include the adoption of the draft
resolution submitted for our consideration. This is a
message of encouragement to peace and to respect of
commitments undertaken by the parties and by the
international community, within the framework of the
implementation of the road map.
My country, the Republic of Guinea, is concerned
about respect for international law and wishes to recall
that President Yasser Arafat is the embodiment of the
legitimacy of the struggle of the Palestinian people for
its self-determination. We also wish to reaffirm our
unshakeable conviction that the States of the region,
including the State of Israel and an eventual Palestinian
State, have the right to live in peace within secure and
internationally recognized borders.

16

Guinea will therefore continue to urge all the
parties and the international community to work for the
effective and rapid resumption of the peace process in
order to conclude a definitive and peaceful political
settlement. It is our hope that the meeting of the
Quartet planned for next week in New York will
contribute, through the adoption of vigorous decisions,
to providing a new impetus for the road map and to
promoting the swift advent of an era of peace, freedom
and prosperity in a spirit of unity in the Middle East
and Palestine.
Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Against the background of Israel’s escalated
military attack on Palestine, on 10 September the
Israeli cabinet adopted a decision to expel Palestinian
President Arafat and it was said that Israeli Prime
Minister Sharon instructed the military to work out a
detailed operation for his expulsion.
Israel’s decision to expel Arafat, the President
legitimately elected by the Palestinian people, is a
wanton violation of the sovereignty of Palestine and is
international terrorism defying international law and
practices. This rash act frustrated once again the
expectations of people the world over who long for a
peaceful solution of Palestinian question.
The responsibility, which again put the
Palestinian question at risk of being embroiled in an
evil cycle of violence, lies entirely on the side of Israel,
an occupying Power. The cause of Palestinian and
other Arab peoples of recovering their human rights
and right to self-determination is justifiable. The
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea hopes that Israel will revoke its decision to expel
President Arafat and pull out of the occupied territories
and that the cause of founding a Palestinian State
headed by Arafat will be achieved at an early date.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea also takes this opportunity to extend
its full support and solidarity to the struggle of Arab
peoples for a fair solution of the problem of the Middle
East.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, and the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey align themselves with
this statement.

A/ES-10/PV.20

The European Union expresses its deep concern
over the dangerously deteriorated situation. Our
priority is to call on the two parties to exert maximum
restrain, to stop the violence and to respect their
obligations to continue the implementation of the
Quartet road map.
The presidency and the European Union member
States express their strong condemnation of the
decision in principle by Israel to expel the Chairman of
the Palestinian Authority and rally their support for the
Security Council call on the Government of Israel
made on 12 September not to implement it. The
European Union has already clearly voiced its
opposition to any forceful action against the dulyelected President of the Palestinian Authority and
urged the Israeli authorities to refrain from any such
action. The European Union believes that the Israeli
decision is a serious mistake and adds further tension,
undermining any negotiated solution of the ongoing
conflict. The European Union regrets that the Security
Council was not able to adopt a resolution by
consensus.
The European Union condemns in the strongest
possible terms terrorist attacks against Israeli citizens.
Such attacks obstruct the efforts of the international
community to restore peace in the region and damage
the interests of the Palestinian people. The European
Union considers the authors of these acts to be enemies
of peace. It strongly urges the Palestinian Authority to
take all necessary concrete measures against those
terrorist organizations that are opposed to any political
dialogue and undermine every effort to restore hope
and to bring peace, security and better conditions of
life to the region.
It is in this context that the European Union has
inserted the political branch of Hamas into the
European list of terrorist organizations. The European
Union renews the call made by the Thessaloniki
European Council upon all Palestinian organizations to
declare immediately an unconditional ceasefire. The
European Union recalls also that the conclusions of the
Thessaloniki European Council called on Israel to
abstain from any punitive measures, including
extrajudicial killings, and to act in accordance with
international law.
The European Union reaffirms the strategic
importance of the Palestinian Authority as a partner for
peace. The European Union has strongly emphasized

that the new designated Prime Minister, Ahmed Qurei,
must rapidly form a new Palestinian Government that
is empowered to act decisively on the priorities of the
fight against terrorism, the efforts to relaunch the peace
process with Israel in the framework of the Quartet
road map and the continuation of the Palestinian
Authority’s political and economic reforms without any
further delay.
The European Union strongly believes that, in
order to achieve a lasting, just and peaceful settlement
of the conflict and a comprehensive peace in the
region, including Syria and Lebanon, there is no
alternative to the speedy implementation in good faith
by the two sides of the Quartet road map, which
contains clear timelines for the establishment of an
independent and viable Palestinian State, living side by
side with Israel in peace and security, and for the
normalization of Arab-Israeli relations.
It is in that regard that the European Union has
urged both parties to take the following measures. The
Palestinian Authority should form a new Government,
reorganize its security forces under the control of the
new Prime Minister, re-establish public order,
undertake visible efforts to dismantle terrorist
organizations, implement the reforms already started
and, in due time, organize free and transparent
elections.
The Israeli Government should withdraw its army
from autonomous areas, put an end to targeted killings,
provide relief to the Palestinian people by lifting the
roadblocks and the other restrictions imposed upon
them and freeze all settlement activities and the
building of the security wall, which is a course of
action that jeopardizes reaching a political solution to
the conflict.
The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
the peace process, in order that those measures be
effectively implemented. It also emphasizes the need
for determined and coordinated action by the
international community. The European Union is
maintaining close contacts with all the parties
involved. The Union believes that the upcoming
ministerial meeting of the Quartet in New York will, as
provided for in the road map, be the appropriate forum
to assess the performance of the parties vis-à-vis the
implementation of the plan, as well as to decide upon
the further steps needed to ensure effective and
credible monitoring in the field.

17

A/ES-10/PV.20

The President: At the request of delegations, it is
my intention to suspend the meeting for 15 minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and was
resumed at 1.55 p.m.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European
Union.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union.
After
intensive
and
very
constructive
consultations with the sponsors, whom I sincerely
thank for their flexibility and approach for the sake of
the common interest of peace and security, I would like
to propose, on behalf of the European Union, the
following amendments to the draft resolution entitled
“Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”. I will
read the third preambular paragraph, as amended. The
text should read as follows.
“Reiterating its grave concern at the tragic
and violent events that have taken place since
September 2000, which have caused enormous
suffering and many innocent victims throughout
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and in Israel”.
Furthermore, we propose to insert the following
new preambular paragraphs following the third
preambular paragraph. The new two paragraphs that I
will read will be the new fourth and fifth preambular
paragraphs. The fourth preambular paragraph reads as
follows,
“Condemning the suicide bombings and the
recent intensification, and recalling in that regard
that, in the framework of the roadmap, the
Palestinian Authority has to take all necessary
measures to end violence and terror.”

for the serious and fruitful effort it made during the
negotiations on this draft resolution. In a spirit of
compromise and common endeavour in this Hall, I
would like to say that we approve the amendments
proposed by the European Union.
The President: Before we proceed further, I
should like to consult the Assembly with a view to
proceeding immediately to consider the draft resolution
contained in document A/ES-10/L.12, as orally
amended. Since document A/ES-10/L.12 has been
circulated in the Hall only earlier in the day, it would
be necessary to waive the relevant provisions of rule 78
of the rules of procedure, which read as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be
discussed or put to a vote at any meeting of the
General Assembly unless copies of it have been
circulated to all delegations not later than the day
preceding the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that
the Assembly agrees to consider draft resolution A/ES10/L.12.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.12, as orally amended.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation of
vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to ten minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): We will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before the Assembly. We have
already aligned ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Italy on behalf of the European
Union, which emphasizes our shared concerns about
the dangerously deteriorating situation in the Middle
East.

“Deploring the extrajudicial killings and the
recent escalation, and underlining that they are a
violation of international law and international
humanitarian law and compromise the efforts to
relaunch the peace process and must be stopped.”

We have consistently denounced all acts of
terrorism and violence. We intensely believe that there
can be no rightful cause to justify terrorism. Yet,
dealing with terrorism should not lead to further
violence. It is now more urgent than ever that the
parties to the conflict should start sincerely fulfilling
the obligations they have undertaken under the road
map, which also addresses the eradication of terrorism.

Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am taking
the floor on behalf of the sponsors of the draft
resolution. I should like to thank the European Union

There is ample evidence that the process of
ensuring security cannot be decoupled from the
political process itself. This conflict should no longer

The fifth preambular paragraph reads as follows,

18

A/ES-10/PV.20

be allowed to force its yoke on the peoples of the
region. The tragic cycle of violence robs all
generations of a brighter future. Unfortunately, this
debilitating effect is being felt across the entire region.
It is therefore the responsibility of both parties and the
international community to regain the confidence and
trust that will open the way for a just and lasting
solution to this question. The deportation of an elected
leader will not serve the imperatives of that objective.
Mr. Clodumar (Nauru): Let me first convey my
delegation’s warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency. My delegation
looks forwards to working with you and your
administration over the next 12 months.
The delegation of Nauru will abstain in the vote
on the draft resolution under consideration. The
delegation considers that both parties to the conflict are
correct: correct in their desire for peace and security
for their people. But both are also wrong: wrong in the
ways and means they are deploying their efforts to
achieve their desired goals.
Hence, Nauru will not be placed in a position to
decide who is right and who is wrong. Our desire is to
see a peaceful resolution to the conflict, and both sides
must do what is necessary to allow the peace process
under the road map to take root so that it will grow into
a tree that will bear fruit for the children of Abraham in
the years to come.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.12, as orally amended.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Bangladesh, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and Morocco.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,

Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, Fiji,
Guatemala, Honduras, Kenya, Nauru, Nicaragua,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Tonga,
Tuvalu
The draft resolution, as orally amended, was
adopted by 133 votes to 4, with 15 abstentions
(resolution ES-10/12).
[Subsequently the delegations of Malawi and
Zambia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to ten minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

19

A/ES-10/PV.20

Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Chile has unequivocally condemned the
decision announced by the Government of Israel to
remove the President of the Palestinian Authority from
the occupied territories. Such a measure does not
contribute to peace in the Middle East. It is an assault
on the dignity of a people and its Authority,
legitimately constituted on the basis of a democratic
process.
Chile certainly condemns all acts of terrorism,
whatever their origin. The loss of innocent lives —
whether Palestinian or Israeli — deserves the same
degree of repudiation on our part.
We regret that the Security Council was not
united around the draft resolution in question. We
voted in favour of the resolution just adopted, given the
changes in the text that had generated broader support
within the General Assembly.
We believe that the Palestinian-Israeli problem
will be resolved only with perseverance and patience at
the negotiating table. Every effort must be made in the
days ahead with a view to resuming the peace
negotiations within the context of international legality,
in strict compliance with United Nations resolutions
and in accordance with commitments solemnly entered
into at the Aqaba Summit, so as to ensure the effective
implementation of the Quartet’s road map. The people
of Palestine and of Israel deserve to live in peace
within free, sovereign and secure States.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala): We join the appeal
of the international community for a halt to the
relentless cycle of violence into which the Middle East
has fallen. We deplore the deaths of so many innocent
people in Israel and in the occupied territories. We
consider terrorist attacks against civilians to be
repugnant. But neither can we sanction extrajudicial
executions as a method for responding to such attacks.
It is clear to us that specific, reciprocal and parallel
steps are required by both parties if they are to draw
back from the edge of the precipice to more secure
ground. We therefore support the efforts of the Quartet
to revive the road map, or whatever may take its place.
In order to avoid still greater polarization, however, we
abstained from voting on the resolution under
consideration today.
Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru is
strongly in favour of an end to all acts of violence,
including acts of terrorism, as set out in the resolution.

20

We also agree that acts of deportation cannot be
tolerated, and we support all efforts that the Quartet
might undertake to ensure that the parties to the
conflict comply with the provisions of the road map.
However, we abstained on the vote because the
resolution contained no clear-cut denunciation of
suicide attacks as acts of terrorism that should be
repudiated.
I should like to remind the Assembly that Peru
endured acts of terrorism itself. We should also like to
recall that — although it was not linked to the subject
of the resolution — it was a suicide attack that took the
life of Sergio Vieira de Mello and other United Nations
staff members barely one month ago.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): There is much in the
resolution that Canada supports, including the demand
on both Israel and the Palestinians to implement their
obligations in accordance with the road map. Canada
also shares the international community’s opposition to
the potential actions by Israel against the President of
the Palestinian Authority. Extrajudicial killings violate
international law and cannot be condoned. The
establishment and expansion of Israeli settlements and
the construction of a security fence within the occupied
Palestinian territories undermine the hopes of
Palestinians and prejudice prospects for a fair-minded
peace.
The resolution, however, does not proceed from a
fair or accurate assessment of the security situation
facing Israelis. Insufficient attention is paid in it to the
responsibility of the Palestinian Authority to take all
necessary measures to stop terrorism and incitement.
The Palestinian Authority must meaningfully and
immediately address the ongoing perpetration of
heinous acts of terrorism by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and others. Violence is not a path to a Palestinian
State. The resolution does not reflect that reality, and
for those reasons Canada abstained on the vote.
Mr. Haneda (Japan): Japan has been strongly
urging the Israeli Government not to go forward with
its decision to remove Chairman Arafat. At the same
time, it is our position that the Palestinian Authority
must take immediate action against the extreme
factions, and strengthen its security apparatus. While
the amended text does not include explicit language to
this effect, it implies, as a whole, such action by the
Palestinian side. We therefore voted in favour of the
resolution. It is of the utmost importance that both the

A/ES-10/PV.20

Israeli and Palestinian side restore calm to the situation
immediately, resume their dialogue and cooperation in
accordance with the road map, exercise the utmost
restraint and exert maximum effort in order to bring the
violence to a halt.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
voted in favour of the resolution just adopted because
we are convinced that the United Nations has a
responsibility to find a just and comprehensive solution
to the Middle East problem and to protect the
Palestinian people and its leadership against Israeli
attempts to remove them from their homeland.
Furthermore, we voted in favour of the resolution
because it sends a clear signal from the international
community that Israeli practices, foremost among them
the continuation of the occupation by Israel of the Arab
territories occupied since 1967, are the primary reason
for the current events in the region. The Israeli policy
of building colonial settlements in the occupied Arab
territories is also illegal under international law and
United Nations resolutions and must be brought to an
end.
Syria’s vote in favour of the resolution was also
based on the fact that the actions by the Palestinians
are merely a reaction to Israel’s continuing occupation
and practice of building colonial settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories; Israel’s committing of
war crimes and carrying out of State-sponsored acts of
terrorism. We regret that some did not mention that
form of terrorism as practised by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territories, its persistence in committing
war crimes on a daily basis by carrying out political
targeted assassinations of Palestinian leaders or its
continuing construction of the apartheid separation
wall.
This disappoints and frustrates the Palestinians
and robs them of any hope of achieving a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region. All
those who can see things for what they are can see that
Israel does not want peace in the region, which has
suffered for many decades as a result of this Israeli
racist
attitude,
tainted
by
colonialism
and
expansionism.
Syria’s vote in favour of the resolution does not
signal its approval of the references in the preamble
that condemn the Palestinian side while failing
adequately and clearly to condemn the Israeli practices.

Syria notes its reservations to those preambular
references. Syria reaffirms its commitment to the
achievement of a just and comprehensive peace on the
basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973); the Madrid terms of reference; the land for
peace formula; and the initiative adopted by the Arab
Summit in Beirut. Nevertheless, we stress that the
achievement of that goal will require Israel to cease its
practices forthwith; to demonstrate the genuine will to
achieve peace in the region on the basis of an end to its
occupation of the occupied territories; and to reverse
its current settler colonialist policy.
We look forward to receiving the assistance of
countries of the world in striving tirelessly to bring
Israel’s practices and its occupation of Arab territories
to an end. That is the only way to achieve peace, for
which all of us in the United Nations yearn and strive.
Mr. Mekel (Israel): Several days ago, after the
Security Council considered the draft Palestinian
resolution and rejected it, Mr. Arafat was quoted as
saying that such resolutions are of little importance
anyway. Today, no doubt, he will change his tune.
I will not repeat our comments in the debate
today, but I will say that the resolution adopted today
will not bring Israelis and Palestinians closer to peace
or enhance the role and reputation of the United
Nations.
This conflict is fundamentally about the refusal of
the Palestinian leadership under Mr. Arafat’s control to
recognize and accept the right of the Jewish people to
self-determination side by side with their Arab and
Palestinian neighbours. That is why no peace deal has
been or ever will be good enough for Mr. Arafat. That
is the message sent when innocent men, women and
children are blown to pieces in pizza parlours and cafés
and on commuter buses due to Mr. Arafat’s own acts
and omissions. To suggest that these horrific suicide
bombings should be equated with Israel’s defensive
actions against illegal combatants, as the resolution
effectively does, does not show diplomatic
evenhandedness. It exposes moral blindness.
Israel voted against the resolution because the
peace process and road map will not be advanced by
this kind of one-sided text or by coming to the defence
of a man who has done more than anyone else to bury
the chance for peace. We believe that many
representatives in the Hall know this and we regret that

21

A/ES-10/PV.20

some have not had the courage of their convictions to
vote with their conscience.
The Palestinian representative and his patron, Mr.
Arafat, have gained another peace of paper today. The
Palestinian and Israeli peoples, who yearn for and
deserve peace, have, I fear, gained very little. The
Palestinian representative spoke of insanity. What is
insane is that, rather than focus on improving the
reality on the ground and on fighting terrorism — as
the Assembly is legally and morally obligated to do so
that we can move towards peace — we are devoting
more time and resources to pandering to Palestinian
initiatives. In our view, the United Nations credibility
and the prospects for peace are only harmed by this
approach.
We, the State of Israel, look forward to better
days than this for the United Nations.
Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon): My delegation would
like to make the following statement in Arabic.
(spoke in Arabic)
Lebanon’s vote in favour of the resolution just
adopted was an expression of its support for the
legitimate demands of the Palestinians, a people whose
land is occupied and who are the victims of injustice at
the hands of the occupying Israeli forces. This vote
does not imply Lebanon’s agreement with certain
elements of the resolution’s preamble that fail clearly
and fully to condemn Israel’s daily crimes against the
Palestinian people.
The adoption of this resolution today, recalling
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, is yet
further proof of the international community’s
conviction that the principal obstacle to the
achievement of peace in the Middle East is Israel’s
ongoing occupation of the Arab territories.
Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Our
position on this matter is well known. We reaffirmed it
recently in the Security Council.
The resumption of violence compromises the
implementation of the road map, as do the myriad
threats against the elected President of the Palestinian
Authority and spokesman for the Palestinian people,
Yasser Arafat. We stress the need for all parties to
accept one another. Any solution that fails to recognize
the need for dialogue is a road to nowhere.

22

We therefore appeal to all parties to demonstrate
restraint and responsibility and to learn the lessons of
history and, finally, together, to build peace in the
Middle East. That peace requires the establishment of a
Palestinian State and its coexistence with an Israeli
State that must, in turn, enjoy secure and
internationally recognized borders and be able to live
in safety. We reiterate our appeal to both parties to
create conditions necessary to a resumption of a
constructive dialogue.
Cameroon, while believing in the need to protect
the physical and moral integrity of Palestinian
President Arafat, abstained in the voting earlier
because the amendments to the initial text, on which
we had received instructions, added a new dimension
to the draft on which we would have required further
consultations with our capital.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba
has a tradition of offering unrestrained support for the
legitimate positions taken by the Arab countries and by
the Palestinian Authority in particular. We believe that
the European Union’s imposition of its amendment,
whereby extrajudicial executions are merely deplored
but suicide bombings are condemned — an amendment
on whose inclusion the European Union’s support was
conditional — was an act of profound hypocrisy
reflecting one reason why there has been no progress in
the peace process.
The delegation of Cuba profoundly regrets that
the General Assembly should refer to such a criminal
act of State terrorism as extrajudicial killing merely to
deplore it. This also demonstrates the extent of the
hypocrisy in the global fight against terrorism.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I now call on the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
wish, on behalf of the Palestinian people and
leadership, to express our heartfelt thanks to the
Assembly for supporting today’s resolution and for
having adopted it by such an overwhelming majority.
Naturally, we give particular thanks to our brothers in
the Arab Group and the Non-Aligned Movement and to
the countries that sponsored the resolution and
submitted it to the General Assembly at its resumed
tenth emergency special session.

A/ES-10/PV.20

We also appreciate the efforts made by the
European Union and its presidency to arrive at an
agreement with the sponsors of the resolution. We feel
that the amendment proposed by the European Union
was insufficiently balanced, but in the current
circumstances we were nevertheless able to accede to
it. We reiterate our appreciation to the European Union
and its members.
Regrettably, it would seem that, for an extremely
limited number of Member States, the issue is not
about texts or language, but about other factors that,
quite frankly, we do not fully understand. The efforts
made and the fact that we managed to agree on the
amendments to the resolution demonstrate once again
that no serious effort to achieve a similar consensus in
the Security Council was ever made.
The main question before the General Assembly
is of extreme importance. It was necessary for the
international community, as represented by this
important Assembly, to take a clear position on this

subject. That is precisely what it did. We hope that the
Israeli Government will understand this clear position
and commit itself to it, despite the fact that the words
we heard a few minutes ago point to an unchanged
Israeli position, contemptuous of the international will
and rejecting the resolutions of the United Nations and
international law. It is our hope that the international
community will be able in the future to enforce respect
for its resolutions by the occupying Power.
I reiterate our thanks to you personally, Sir, and
to all the countries that have participated in this
meeting, in particular those that voted in favour of
today’s important resolution.
The President: The tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is now adjourned in
accordance with the terms of paragraph 4 of the
resolution adopted at the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 2.40 p.m.

23
