S/PV.8757

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8757th meeting

Tuesday, 15 September 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Cedano
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-23654 (E)
*2023654*

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

Now is the time for the parties to swiftly conclude
the negotiations and finalize the joint declaration. My
appeal at this time is very simple: choose peace; end this
conflict; work with us urgently on the joint declaration.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me this opportunity to brief the Security Council.
Earlier this year, I warned that Yemen was at a
critical juncture. I said that either the guns would be
silenced, and the political process would resume,
or Yemen would slip back away from that road to
peace. Unfortunately, this is exactly what seems to be
happening. Increased fighting, greater humanitarian
needs and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic are still taking their toll.
That does not mean that, together, we cannot turn
the corner and move back towards finding a solution
to this conflict, but it requires the parties to choose
and to decide. We all know what needs to be done and
what choices need to be made if Yemen is to emerge
successfully from this conflict.
Last week, I sent the two parties an advanced
draft text of the joint declaration that, as you know,
Mr. President, we have been negotiating over the past
six months. The draft document reflects and balances
the comments from prior rounds of the talks during
those months and, importantly, I believe, incorporates
inputs from civil society, women’s groups and other
components of Yemen’s voice for peace.
2/20

15/09/2020

Nowhere is the importance of this choice more
evident than in Ma’rib, the governorate to the
east of Sana’a. Heavy fighting continues to take
place — if anything it has increased — along its front
lines, including along the governorates’ borders with
Al-Jawf, Sana’a and Al-Bayda governorates. The
situation in Ma’rib is of concern in a number of different
ways — principally, the high degree of loss of lives and
the real threat to hundreds of thousands of people and
others in need. Ma’rib has played the role in this war of
a safe haven for those people displaced from other parts
of Yemen who came to Ma’rib for safety. And a battle
there, which is threatened, would tragically displace
them yet again, forcing them to move yet further from
their homes.
The political importance of Ma’rib must also not be
underestimated. Military shifts and consequences and
events in Ma’rib have ripple effects on the dynamics of
the conflict across Yemen. If Ma’rib falls, simply put,
this would undermine the prospects of convening an
inclusive political process that brings about a transition
based on partnership and plurality.
In Al-Hudaydah, meanwhile, reports of ceasefire
violations continue daily. The United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), led
by Lieutenant General Guha, continues to experience
restrictions that hamper the Mission’s operations.
You, Mr. President, will recall the tragic shooting in
March of Government of Yemen liaison officer Colonel
Al-Sulayhi, who later died of his wounds. UNMHA
is engaging with both parties to ensure such incidents
do not reoccur, and to pave the way for a return to a
functioning joint set-up overseen by the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. These steps should further
the implementation of the Hodeidah Agreement.
I am also deeply concerned about the humanitarian
consequences of fuel shortages in Ansar Allahcontrolled parts of northern Yemen. I want to emphasize
the importance of ensuring that civilians can regularly
and reliably access adequate supplies of fuel and other
essential goods. I know that Mark Lowcock will describe
this as a basic principle of humanitarian protection and
assistance. The flow of essential commercial imports,
including food, fuel and medical supplies, and their
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8757

distribution throughout Yemen to civilians are of course
of the highest priority.

inclusion in a future political process, which we hope
will not be long off.

I am also deeply concerned that Ansar Allah
recently announced the closure of Sana’a airport to
humanitarian flights. As I am sure Mark will discuss,
this has the potential to seriously impact the United
Nations operations, as well as the operations of other
humanitarian agencies in that part of Yemen providing
critical assistance, which may be thus prevented from
entering Sana’a.

Also, as part of these inclusion efforts, we are
organizing a skills-building workshop with the Yemeni
Women’s Technical Advisory Group — I think we have
discussed their role and significance in this Chamber
before — but we have also stepped up our engagement
with the Group of Nine women’s organizations to seek
their inputs in our joint declaration. In that regard, I
want to pay specific tribute here to the close relationship
that we continue to enjoy with UN-Women, for which
we are very grateful.

We, the Council and ourselves together, need to also
remain focused on ensuring the earliest possible arrival
of the United Nations technical mission to assess the
FSO SAFER oil tanker in the ports of Al-Hudaydah.
I know that we will be hearing more from Mark on
that issue.
I would also like to report that, if logistical
arrangements permitting, which are always complicated
in Yemen and even more so now at the time of the
pandemic, we expect to see the parties this week
in Switzerland to continue their discussions on the
implementation of prisoner exchanges, under the joint
auspices of my Office and the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to which I pay tribute for its work
on that project. The parties committed to releasing
conflict-related prisoners and detainees back in 2018
in Stockholm and furthered their discussions to fulfil
that commitment in Amman earlier this year. I hope
this meeting will actually result in the release of some
prisoners and some evidence of the implementation of
those commitments, particularly given the threat of
COVID-19 in places of detention.
I want to emphasize the vital role of Yemeni civil
society in demanding an end to the conflict. They truly
are champions of peace. Civil society has also vocally
advocated for measures to bring relief to the population,
including recently in a very marked way the release of
prisoners and detainees. Civil society’s role is central
in maintaining the pressure for a peaceful resolution
needed in every conflict, including in Yemen. It has
provided analysis, ideas and language on issues of
importance to Yemenis — from public service delivery
to economic reform to peacebuilding — not only to my
Office, but to all of us who are interested in improving
the circumstances and prospects of Yemen. We have
been engaging with various groups and will continue
with respect to the joint declaration negotiations, and
discussing in detail plans to ensure their meaningful

I want to close by emphasizing that, although, as I
have said perhaps rather boringly before, the situation
is very dire, the parties can choose to either continue
this trajectory of escalating violence or to make the
compromises necessary to revive the political process
and allow for a political settlement. These choices are
clear and evident and in the hands of the parties. The
United Nations and the members of the Council must
and, I am sure, will do everything possible to push for
and support the latter outcome. We play a supporting
role. The outcome lies in the hands of the parties. We
are there and we will watch with the people of Yemen to
see what choices they make and how they may swiftly
be implemented.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Two years ago, I warned the Security
Council that we were losing the fight against famine in
Yemen. At the time we identified five urgent priorities:
first, protecting civilians; secondly, humanitarian
access; thirdly, funding; fourthly, the need to support
the economy; and, fifthly, progress towards peace.
Progress was made. Donors swiftly allocated more
funds, meeting almost 90 per cent of our funding
requirements. With more money in the bank, food aid
beneficiaries increased from 8 million to 12 million
people a month. Health, education, water and other
programmes were also expanded. In parallel, Yemen’s
partners took steps to strengthen the economy. Foreignexchange injections stabilized the then-collapsing
Yemeni rial; that helped many more people afford food
and other essential goods, nearly all of which, as all
present are aware, have to be imported into Yemen.

20-236543/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

With Martin’s support, the parties signed the
Stockholm Agreement in 2018, which calmed the
conflict at a critical time and helped keep Al-Hudaydah
port open for essential imports. The results of all this
were clear: millions of lives were saved; there was no
large-scale famine. But today the spectre of famine
has returned. The risk has become so serious that we
have again notified the Council, as we are required to
do under the terms of resolution 2417 (2018), just as
we did two years ago. The same five priority actions
that worked then can work today. Unfortunately, those
who are in a position to help and who have a particular
responsibility to do so are mostly choosing not to.
Let us start with the protection of civilians. Conflict
has continued to escalate in recent weeks, particularly
in central Yemen. In August, more civilians were
killed across the country than in any other month this
year. One in four civilian casualties in Yemen are now
people who are killed or injured in their own homes.
Like Martin, I remain extremely worried about Ma’rib,
where more than 1 million people have sought refuge
since 2015. A major confrontation there would be
disastrous for civilians. So, I reinforce Martin’s message
to the parties to work urgently to agree a nationwide
ceasefire, including in Ma’rib. De-escalation played a
major role in averting famine two years ago; we need
similar steps now.
The second point is humanitarian access. In
the south, we continue to face challenges, including
insecurity and bureaucratic impediments. But those
challenges remain less severe than what we encounter
in the north. I am, like Martin, deeply concerned
that the Ansar Allah authorities have closed Sana’a
airport to United Nations and humanitarian flights.
The authorities attribute that decision to fuel shortages
in the north. Those shortages are having severe
humanitarian consequences, which I will come to in a
moment. But that does not justify closing the airport,
and I would emphasize that safe and reliable transport
for aid personnel is one of the basic conditions the
United Nations requires to work anywhere in the
world. A rapid solution is essential if aid workers are to
remain safely in the north and if we are to maintain the
operations on the necessary scale.
In the coming weeks, about 100 metric tons of
humanitarian cargo is due to fly into Sana’a airport,
including essential vaccines and other medical supplies.
We also need faster progress on the wider operating
environment for aid agencies. Over the last few months,
4/20

15/09/2020

we saw significant improvements on assessments,
project agreements and other issues, but it is now more
than a year since a plan was agreed to pilot biometric
registration of food aid beneficiaries. That pilot still has
not started.
You will be expecting another update from me,
Mr. President, on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. The United
Nations team has submitted a revised proposal for the
assessment and initial repair mission, and we have held
several rounds of constructive technical discussions
with the Ansar Allah authorities. Frustrating as the
endless delays have been, we are not giving up, and we
hope that the new proposal will be quickly approved so
that work can start.
The third point is funding for the aid operation.
Increased funding two years ago was the main reason
famine was prevented. This year we have received only
30 per cent of what is needed. Aid agencies with staff
in Yemen all agree that this is the biggest challenge
for their work today. Several donors, including the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait, which have a particular responsibility
that they have discharged in recent years, have so far
given nothing to this year’s United Nations plan. It is
particularly reprehensible to promise money, which
gives people hope that help may be on the way, and
then to dash those hopes by simply failing to fulfil
the promise.
More than 9 million people have been affected
by deepening cuts to aid programmes, including
food, water and health care. Continuing to hold back
money from the humanitarian response now will be a
death sentence for many families. So yet again I call
on all donors to pay their pledges now and increase
their support.
My fourth point is Yemen’s economy. The economy
has shrunk by 45 per cent since 2015. The Government
also estimates that remittances from abroad were
supporting half the population before the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). Those remittances have fallen
by up to 70 per cent in the wake of the pandemic. So,
Yemenis have much less money in their pockets to
feed their families or pay medical bills, and the money
they do have is worth much less. The rial has collapsed
again. In the south, it is trading at more than 800 to the
United States dollar; that is the lowest value that the
currency has ever seen.
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

This is pushing food prices even higher. Today
food is about 140 per cent more expensive than before
the conflict. Fuel costs in the informal market are
now more than double the official rate in many areas;
that is mainly due to the acute shortages in the north
that I mentioned earlier. Only about half the normal
value of commercial fuel has entered Al-Hudaydah
since June. Right now, because of the blockade, more
than three months’ worth of fuel is stuck outside the
port awaiting Government permission to enter. The
resulting shortages mean that water, sanitation and
health services are shutting down because they do
not have enough fuel to keep going. That directly
affect the services provided by humanitarian agencies,
too. A group of non-governmental organizations has
estimated that fuel shortages have so far reduced water
and sanitation assistance to at least 2.5 million people
and has disrupted food aid for at least half a million
people, with another 300,000 people at risk.
Resolving the dispute that is behind the fuel
blockade is essential to stopping Yemen’s drift
towards famine. I also want to reiterate my call on
Yemen’s partners to provide regular foreign-exchange
injections. Just as it did two years ago, that would bring
down basic commodity prices, and it would allow more
people to eat.
My fifth point is progress towards peace. Martin
has just briefed the Council on his efforts to secure a
nationwide ceasefire and resume and make progress in
the political process. That is more important than ever.
Data show very clearly that the worst hunger in Yemen
is mainly in conflict-affected areas.
This is the thirty-first time we have briefed the
Security Council on Yemen since I took up this role.
Every month I present the facts and figures, but there
is a tendency to forget that the facts and figures are all
about real people. On Sunday, two days ago, I spent a
few hours on the phone talking to people from all over
Yemen. I wanted to hear their concerns and ask what
message they had for powerful countries and people,
like all present here, who hold their fate in their hands. I
spoke to Jamila, a mother of five who fled the fighting in
Taiz. Her family have had their food aid cut in half. She
wants the Council to know that they cannot keep going
without its help. I spoke to Abdulrahman, in Sana’a. He
told me that his six children come crying to him every
day in hunger, and that he has even less to give them
now because the aid he was receiving has been cut.
His message to the Council is that Yemenis are human

S/PV. 8757

beings who deserve respect. He hopes the Council will
again support basic assistance for his family.
Samia, in Aden, told me life there has never been
worse. COVID-19 killed the main earners in her family,
and she says they now have no sources of income. She
is asking the Council to look at Yemen with compassion
and humanity, and at least offer food and medicine.
I also talked to Mohammed, who fled Sa’ada to
seek refuge in Sana’a after air strikes destroyed his
house and the bus he used to drive. His family had been
receiving aid every month, but it too has been cut back.
His children are now too hungry to go to school. Every
night, they ask him: “Daddy, where is the food? When
is it coming?” He does not have an answer for them,
and he is hoping the Council will do something to help.
He is worried the world has forgotten about people like
him or — worse — has decided to do nothing.
When one talks to people like this — and there are
millions just like them all across Yemen — and listens
to their articulate, human and emotional stories, the
main thing one learns is they are just like us, except
that they are victims of people and forces over whom
they have no influence or control. Their stories may be
hard to hear, but they are a lot harder to live.
Yemen is in the state it is because those with power
and influence have decided there are things more
important than the fate of these people. Is it not way
past time for a different decision?
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for their briefings. I would also like to
thank the Yemenis who today, through Mr. Lowcock,
have spoken to the Security Council. It is because the
situation is so desperate for Yemenis like those who
spoke that the Security Council and the parties on the
ground need to act.
We are extremely concerned that the humanitarian
situation in Yemen continues to plunge to new depths
as the country battles an economic crisis, an increasing
risk of famine and a major outbreak of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). While we assess that Yemen is
over the initial COVID-19 peak, we are concerned about

20-236545/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

the potential for new waves of infection and even more
deaths. It is vital that public health mitigation efforts
continue, and we call on all Yemeni parties to report
cases transparently, ensure unrestricted humanitarian
access and facilitate the response of the United Nations.
The indirect effects of COVID-19, including on
Yemen’s fragile economy, will have a far longer-lasting
impact. Yemen’s currency has collapsed to record
lows, leading food prices to rise by over 20 per cent
since January. Urgent external financial assistance to
the Central Bank is now needed to stabilize prices and
enable more people to afford food.
In the light of this economic crisis, recent food
security and economic data suggest that conditions in
Yemen already mirror, or are even worse than, those of
late 2018, when pockets of famine were last identified
across the country. As we have heard, famine is now a
realistic prospect in Yemen this year.
In addition to economic support, the key action
the international community can take to prevent
famine is to urgently provide significant funding to the
United Nations humanitarian appeal. With the General
Assembly high-level annual debate fast approaching,
the United Nations has received only $900 million this
year, as compared to around $2.6 billion at this point last
year. This funding gap is curtailing the humanitarian
response, and 7 million people will stop receiving food
if new funding is not in place by October.
In response to this funding crisis, the United
Kingdom’s Foreign Secretary announced £25 million
in funding for Yemen earlier this month, in addition
to what the United Kingdom has already pledged. We
welcome other countries’ announcements of extra funds
but call on all donors to play their part and urgently
provide funding to the United Nations appeal. We call
on all countries that have given money in previous
years to do so at the same level this year.
A political solution is needed desperately to
alleviate the humanitarian crisis and end the conflict
for good. As I have said repeatedly in the Council, the
United Kingdom fully supports the painstaking and
patient efforts of Mr. Griffiths. Today I urge the Yemeni
parties — by which I mean the Government of Yemen
just as much as the Houthis — to cooperate with him
and to agree to his proposals as soon as possible. The
window of opportunity to end this conflict will close. It
is in the hands of the parties to work with Mr. Griffiths
and reach an agreement. It is in their hands to act in the
6/20

15/09/2020

interests of their people. Are they ready to do so, or will
they act in their own self-interest?
I welcome Security Council unity on this issue here
and at the ministerial level. Later this week, we will
be co-hosting an event on Yemen, with the SecretaryGeneral and others, that will demonstrate our close
Council and international coordination. We must stay
united in our messages to the parties and our support
for Special Envoy Griffiths so that he can reach
an agreement.
The United Kingdom remains extremely concerned
about the situation in Ma’rib. The Houthi offensive is
not only leading to a distressing loss of life, but it also
threatens to derail the political process at this crucial
stage. We welcome and fully support the Special
Envoy’s strong statements on Ma’rib. I urge the Council
and the wider international community to send a strong,
unified message to the Houthis that they must cease
their offensive on Ma’rib and negotiate peace.
Finally, we must not forget the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, on which the Council has been briefed many
times, including in various meetings earlier this
summer. The tanker poses a significant environmental
and economic threat to the region. While I welcome
progress made in negotiations between the Houthis and
the United Nations Office for Project Services on the
scope of the assessment and repair mission, the mission
needs to happen urgently. The Houthis must follow
through on their promises by allowing the United
Nations experts to board the tanker to carry out their
work as soon as possible.
Time is running out. The parties need to
move quickly to agree a ceasefire and engage in a
comprehensive political process. If they do not, the
Council should be ready to take action.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their valuable briefings. I reiterate my country’s
support for their efforts.
Tunisia is following with great concern the
developments in Yemen and regrets the military
escalation and the return of infighting, which threatens
to further exacerbate the situation and increase
the suffering of the Yemeni people, in addition to
obstructing efforts to reach a political solution.
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

We stress that Yemen can emerge from this crisis
only by discarding military options, putting an end to
the escalation, initiating peaceful political dialogue,
positively engaging with the Special Envoy’s initiative
and returning to the negotiating table to reach a
political settlement based on the agreed terms of
reference — the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2215).
We stress that a military option can only plunge
Yemen deeper into the spiral of violence. United
Nations reports indicate distressing levels of loss of
life, destruction of infrastructure and humanitarian
tragedies — undermining opportunities to achieve a
political solution and restore peace and security.
We call on all Yemeni parties to a join a ceasefire,
put an end to the military offensive in response, inter
alia, to the Secretary-General’s appeal and resolution
2532 (2020), and prioritize the interests of the Yemeni
people in the face of the unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. We commend the efforts of Mr. Griffiths and
look forward to the Yemeni parties’ agreement on
the joint declaration as a first step towards more
comprehensive and direct negotiations and as a ray
of hope in the reform of the economic system and in
the improvement of the humanitarian conditions, with
the reopening of the Sana’a International Airport, the
payment of salaries and the facilitation of the entry of
imports into Yemen through Al-Hudaydah.
The conflict has contributed to deepening the
suffering of the Yemeni people, which has been
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease, a lack of
medical infrastructure and proper health facilities,
and deteriorating economic conditions. We would like
to mention the UNICEF report that warned against
a famine in Yemen that, as it worsens, will intensify
food shortages. Against the backdrop of the critical
humanitarian conditions, we stress the importance of
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid, and we
call on donor countries to support the Yemeni people.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we
reiterate the call to take the necessary measures
without delay or preconditions to facilitate the arrival
of a United Nations team of experts to assess the
situation and follow through with urgent steps to avoid
an unprecedented environmental crisis, which could

S/PV. 8757

have severe humanitarian and economic repercussions
in the region.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.
The United Nations is committed to promoting the
Yemeni peace process and improving the humanitarian
situation on the ground. China commends such efforts.
Over the past two years, the situation in Yemen
has experienced twists and turns. All parties have
suffered great losses, and the country’s people are
also suffering unspeakable misery. Facts have proved
time and again that military means will not solve the
country’s problems; wars lead only to tragedy. The
international community has never given up its efforts
to solve the Yemeni issue politically. Thanks to the
mediation of the United Nations and other countries
in the region, the parties to the conflict in Yemen
conducted talks and negotiations and achieved the
Stockholm Agreement and, subsequently, the Riyadh
agreement. The Security Council has adopted relevant
resolutions and deployed the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement to monitor the
ceasefire on the ground. Special Envoy Griffiths
has proposed a new peace initiative and is actively
conducting good offices. At the same time, we need
to recognize that the implementation of the existing
agreements is not yet satisfactory. The Stockholm
Agreement is at a stalemate, and the implementation of
the Riyadh agreement has been erratic. The parties to
the conflict have complicated, intertwined differences
and often move back and forth between the battlefield
and the negotiating table. Mutual trust is seriously
lacking, and the comprehensive political process stalls
time and again.
China believes that no matter what difficulties and
setbacks there are, the overall direction of solving the
Yemeni issue politically should remain unchanged, and
the sovereignty, unity and independence and territorial
integrity of the country should be respected and
maintained. To achieve a breakthrough in the political
process, all parties should make joint efforts.
First, all parties to the conflict in Yemen should
embrace a ceasefire and refrain from violence. At
present, several areas in the north and south of Yemen
have seen escalation in military actions. We urge the
parties to heed the ceasefire initiative of the Secretary-

20-236547/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

General and his Special Envoy and stop the use of force
so as to create conditions for the political process.
Secondly, the United Nations should hold in-depth
consultations with the parties and showcase the benefits
of negotiations and a truce through a detailed agreement
so as to encourage all the parties to sit down and have
a true negotiation. All the parties should consider the
interests of the Yemeni people as their priorities and
coordinate with the Special Envoy, while being flexible
and making the right choices.
Thirdly, the parties to the conflict should honour
their commitment and build mutual trust. China hopes
that the Special Envoy and the International Committee
for the Red Cross will accelerate the consultations
with the Yemeni Government and the Houthis on the
exchange of prisoners in order to realize a large-scale
prisoner exchange.
Fourthly, countries of the region and regional
organizations should play a constructive role, out of
the realization that peace, stability, development and
prosperity in Yemen are in the overall interests of the
countries of the region. We would like to encourage
these countries to exert positive influences on all
the parties to the conflict and promote negotiation
and peace.
With regard to the humanitarian situation in the
country, every briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock leaves us with a heavy heart. People in Yemen
are faced with a violent conflict, economic crisis, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), floods, locusts,
plague and many other challenges, and are quite mired
in a major humanitarian disaster. The international
community must help the country to make great efforts
to improve its humanitarian situation, with a special
focus on vulnerable groups, including women, children
and the disabled. Donor countries should honour their
commitments as soon as possible. The parties to the
conflict should facilitate the humanitarian actions
undertaken by United Nations agencies and ensure
access so as to save lives. The United Nations should
also facilitate forward-looking measures by parties
that have active control of the country’s regions to
fight against the pandemic. China has provided several
batches of supplies to Yemen to help the country with
its COVID-19 response and is willing to continue to
support and assist the Government and the people
of Yemen.
8/20

15/09/2020

With regard to access to the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, we have not seen any real progress yet, which
is disheartening. The engine room was flooded again
recently. The Council should urge all the relevant
parties to take concrete actions to ensure that the United
Nations technical team can carry out a safety assessment
and the repair of the tanker as soon as possible.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I want to thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for
their insightful but sobering briefings. Mr. Griffiths’
conclusion a gave heart-breaking human face to what
we are discussing today and the challenges that we
have been seeking to address for some time. In that
regard, I also want to make clear, as we have in each of
our monthly meetings, that the United States strongly
supports his and Mr. Lowcock’s efforts and will
continue to do so.
In that vein, the United States urges the Government
of the Republic of Yemen and the Houthis to work with
Special Envoy Griffiths towards agreement on the final
draft of the joint declaration. We regret that this process
has not yet made more progress. As we just heard so
clearly, the Yemeni people, struggling with an economic
crisis, food insecurity, fuel shortages, coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and an enduring conflict, deserve
such a step forward towards stability and security.
But as we well know, another destabilizing force
is felt through the Islamic Republic of Iran, which
holds little interest in fostering stability and security
in Yemen, or anywhere else in the region. Just the
opposite: Iran continues to send lethal aid to the
Houthis, fuelling the Houthis’ ongoing offense near
Ma’rib as well as the larger conflict. On 20 August,
the United States initiated the process that will restore
virtually all United Nations sanctions on Iran, which
had been lifted under sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 7
of resolution 2231 (2015). As Secretary Pompeo said on
that day, the United States will never allow the world’s
largest State sponsor of terrorism to freely buy and sell
planes, tanks, missiles and other kinds of conventional
weapons. These United Nations sanctions will continue
the arms embargo.
The arms embargo is an essential component in our
efforts to curb Tehran’s destabilizing actions in Yemen
as well as those it is taking against its neighbours. We
have said it before, and we will say it again today: the
Security Council is utterly failing in its mission to
maintain international peace and security by allowing
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8757

Iran to maintain and expand its destabilizing activity
in the region unhindered. The Houthis unconscionable
persistent cross-border aerial attacks that destroy
civilian infrastructure in Saudi Arabia, including
recently on Abha airport, are additional evidence of
the urgent need to maintain the embargo and push back
against further Iranian encroachment.

Yemenis. Let us be clear: the decrease in fuel imports
through Al-Hudaydah port in recent months was
caused by Houthi misappropriation of fuel tax and
customs receipts from the Central Bank of Yemen that
were supposed to have funded Government salaries in
northern Yemen. The current shortages would not exist
were it not for this inexcusable Houthi fraud.

We are encouraged by the resumption of the
cabinet formation discussions between the Southern
Transitional Council and the Government of the
Republic of Yemen, and we strongly urge both parties to
continue progress on the implementation of the Riyadh
agreement. In particular, swift cabinet formation is
urgently needed so that the Government can work as
a unified body to respond to the needs of the Yemeni
people and work the most effectively with the Special
Envoy on the political process.

We call on the Houthis and the Government of
the Republic of Yemen to expeditiously agree to the
Special Envoy’s request to hold discussions on fuel
imports and associated revenue disbursements. In the
interim, we thank the Government for facilitating the
entry of oil tankers into Al-Hudaydah port, including
two tankers earlier this month, despite the Houthis’
unfailing intransigence, so that Yemenis can get the
fuel they need.

Turning specifically to the humanitarian situation,
the United States shares the concerns expressed today
over the major funding gaps for aid operations this
year and the potential implications of the deteriorating
economic outlook regarding worsening food insecurity.

We also call on the Houthis to reverse their
announced decision to close the Sana’a airport to the
United Nations and other international relief aircraft as
a result of this crisis of their own making. This is simply
another example of Houthi extortion using international
assistance. Meanwhile, the Yemeni people continue to
suffer. This is inexcusable.

The Trump Administration has contributed
more than $1.3 billion in humanitarian assistance to
Yemen over the past two years. Even with this partial
suspension of certain assistance operations in Houthicontrolled areas of northern Yemen due to Houthi
interference, we remain the largest single donor to
Yemen’s humanitarian response this year.
We urge our partners and other donor nations,
including those in the region, to step up, contribute and
help fulfil the humanitarian response plan’s request.
We also urge donors that have not yet disbursed their
2020 pledges to do so expeditiously, as well as to
consider additional financial support to help stabilize
the Yemeni currency and allow continued flows of
essential commercial imports.
We reiterate our call on the Houthis to cease the
obstruction of, and interference in, aid operations. Our
partners must be able to independently assess needs
and respond in line with humanitarian principles. The
unhindered flow of essential goods into and throughout
Yemen is more vital than ever given the increasing food
insecurity plaguing so many Yemenis.
The United States notes with serious concern
the Houthis’ decision to manufacture a fuel shortage
in northern Yemen, choosing profit over the lives of

We urge the Houthis to cease their continuous
assault on religious freedom, and we demand the
immediate and unconditional release of the Yemeni
citizen Levi Salem Musa Marhabi. Mr. Marhabi has
been wrongfully detained by the Houthis for four
years despite a Houthi “court” ordering his release in
September 2019. His health continues to deteriorate
as he languishes in a Sana’a prison, where the threat
of contracting COVID-19 is all too real. Mr. Marhabi
is one member of an ever-shrinking community of
Yemeni Jews, who have been an important part of
Yemen’s diverse social fabric for thousands of years.
The Houthis must respect freedom of religion and
refrain from oppressing members of minority groups.
Finally, as other colleagues have highlighted, we
continue to monitor the FSO SAFER oil tanker and
the grave environmental, economic and humanitarian
dangers posed by a potential spill. We call on the
Houthis to approve once and for all the United Nations
mission plan for the FSO SAFER assessment and to live
up to their commitments and permit United Nations
technical teams immediate and unconditional access to
the deteriorating vessel.

20-236549/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

15/09/2020

Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings.

ensure the import of fuel and commercial items through
Al-Hudaydah port, which is critically important from
the humanitarian perspective.

The ongoing hostilities in Yemen, which show no
signs of de-escalation, are deeply worrisome, as they
result in a growing number of civilian casualties and
the exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis. The people
of Yemen have been suffering for far too long. It is
unacceptable to seek territorial gains and engage in
economic warfare at their expense.

Finally, we reiterate our call to the Houthi
authorities to take immediate and concrete steps without
preconditions to allow the United Nations mission to
access the FSO SAFER oil tanker in order to prevent a
large-scale catastrophe.

Maximum international efforts must be made for
the parties to cease fighting and engage constructively
with the United Nations Special Envoy. We call on the
parties to agree to the joint declaration without further
delay. This will make way for the start of the next phase
of the comprehensive political process, which is the
only means to finding sustainable peace.
We are also concerned about the continuous
tensions in the south. We urge the Government of
Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to
continue implementing the provisions of the Riyadh
agreement. That includes forming a joint Government,
which is crucial for moving towards a broader political
solution in Yemen.
We note the recently published report of the Group
of Eminent International and Regional Experts on
Yemen (A/HRC/45/6). It is appalling to read the report’s
finding that all parties to the conflict are responsible
for human rights violations, as well as violations of
international humanitarian law.
In that context, we remind all parties of their
obligation to take all necessary measures to protect
civilians, especially vulnerable groups, such as women
and children. We also stress the importance of taking
all measures to protect against sexual and gender-based
violence and violations of other fundamental freedoms.
Accountability for all violations and crimes must
be guaranteed.
We fully support the report’s recommendation
to the Security Council to integrate the human rights
dimensions of the conflict in Yemen more fully into
its agenda.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, we are
deeply concerned about the need to scale down
humanitarian operations due to a lack of funding,
especially considering the reported risk of famine. We
call for intensified efforts to find a long-term solution to
10/20

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings. We
welcome our colleague the Permanent Representative
of Yemen to the Security Council and look forward to
his statement regarding developments in his homeland.
South Africa reiterates its support to the Special
Envoy in his quest for a peaceful solution to the situation
in Yemen despite the escalating violence that persists
amid the unyielding coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. My delegation would like to reiterate that the
dire humanitarian situation in Yemen, aggravated by
the COVID-19 pandemic, is inextricably linked to the
political impasse. As such, my intervention will focus
on those two elements, namely, the humanitarian and
the political situation.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, South
Africa continues to express its concern regarding
the devastating impact on the people of Yemen, in
particular women, children, the elderly, internally
displaced persons and those with disabilities, South
Africa also expresses its concern over the suspension
by the Houthis of all United Nations humanitarian
flights into Sana’a and the response to the blockade by
the coalition’s commercial vessels in Al-Hudaydah, an
entry point for more than 70 per cent of Yemeni imports
of commercial goods.
We urge the parties to collaborate with the Office of
the Special Envoy to seek an urgent solution to ensure
the continued flow of commercial imports of food into
Yemen through Al-Hudaydah port. We note that, despite
ongoing humanitarian assistance, 14 million Yemenis
are food insecure, of which nearly 10 million are acutely
food insecure. The humanitarian situation in Yemen is
extremely fragile, and any disruption in the pipeline
of critical supplies has the potential to bring millions
of people closer to starvation and death. Currently,
only 25 per cent of humanitarian requirements have
been funded in 2020, as Mr. Lowcock just informed
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the Council. United Nations agencies are now forced
to reduce or close more programmes. We therefore
urgently call donors to adhere to their pledges made at
recent pledging conferences to avoid Yemen’s slipping
into famine.
South Africa calls on all parties to the conflict to
agree to a unified set of measures to contain the spread
of COVID-19, improve the delivery of humanitarian aid
and provide impetus to the overall political negotiations
to end the war in Yemen and alleviate the suffering of
Yemeni people.
We have consistently highlighted the importance
for all parties to abide by their obligations and
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and to take all
the measures necessary to end and prevent violations
against civilians.
On the political impasse, South Africa is concerned
about the recent drone strikes by Houthis against targets
in Saudi Arabia at the Abha International Airport,
Najran and Riyadh. At the same time, the escalating
military tension and continued clashes in Yemen’s
embattled Ma’rib and neighbouring Al-Jawf are also
of grave concern to South Africa. We urge all parties
to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities in line
with the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire
and resolution 2532 (2020), as well as to agree on
confidence-building measures, such as the payment of
civil servant salaries, the reopening of the Sana’a airport
and the lifting of commercial import restrictions.
We reiterate our position that a military response is
not a viable solution and call on all parties to approach
the resumption of the political negotiations with a spirit
of compromise, while placing the interests of Yemenis
at the centre of a negotiated political settlement. We
appeal to all parties to avoid the stance of gaining
absolute positions.
South Africa calls on all parties to engage in good
faith and without preconditions with Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths in order to reach a comprehensive
negotiated settlement to end the conflict, and that this be
done in parallel to efforts to agree on a joint declaration
to implement the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements.
South Africa also urges the Houthis to adhere to
the agreement to provide access to United Nations
inspectors to access and assess the FSO SAFER oil
tanker to avoid a man-made disaster in the Red Sea. We

S/PV. 8757

therefore hope that looming threat will be dealt with on
a purely technical basis and without politicization.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that the only
solution to the conflict in Yemen will be an inclusive
Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned political settlement that
delivers on the hopes of the Yemeni people for a strong
economic and political future. In this context, we also
call for the full and meaningful participation of women
in all aspects of an inclusive political process.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): We heard earlier that
this was the thirty-third briefing on Yemen and the
humanitarian situation, and I think that we have never
had a more sombre briefing than we had today. I have
hardly ever heard Martin Griffiths, who is the eternal
optimist, as down and frustrated as he was today.
Mark Lowcock described the humanitarian situation
as very dramatic. We must not get used to these kinds
of briefings.
On the political process, we offer full support to
what Mr. Griffiths has been trying to do. We fully
support his call for re-engagement in the political
process. I also commend him for his approach to the
involvement of women. That is key for us. We believe
that the joint declaration and the Riyadh agreement
processes must be inclusive and that the voices of women
and marginalized people have to feature in them.
Germany supports the political process. As
Ambassador Allen mentioned earlier, we will co-host
a conference with the involvement of the SecretaryGeneral on Thursday to find a way forward from the
political impasse.
Let me concentrate on the humanitarian situation.
The violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights by all parties is appalling. We
have heard about the harassment of aid workers, the
blocking of food and fuel imports and the closure of
the Sana’a airport for humanitarian aid. How negative
can one get? I appeal to the Iranians for once to do
something positive and put pressure on the Houthis
to allow humanitarian aid in, open the Sana’a airport
and finally allow an inspection and work to be done on
the FSO SAFER tanker. There continues to be sexual
and gender-based violence. We continue to witness the
repression of journalists, members of the judiciary and
human rights activists. There are ongoing air strikes,
which are disproportionate with regard to their impact
on civilians. I listened carefully to what Mr. Lowcock

20-2365411/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

15/09/2020

said about last month being the worst this year with
regard to the killing of civilians.

again the urgent need to agree on the outstanding issues
in the negotiations on the joint declaration.

With regard to the humanitarian funding gap — and
Mr. Lowcock said this very clearly — there is a serious
risk of famine. Germany pledged an additional
$150 million as part of its $450 million in humanitarian
aid to the country in 2020. We have disbursed 90 per
cent of that $450 million.

Belgium also remains deeply concerned by the
escalation of violence in Ma’rib and Al-Hudaydah,
which threatens the already fragile political process.
The only way to overcome the multiple crises in Yemen
is to put an end to the war and resolve deep-rooted
differences through dialogue. We urge all parties to
remain engaged in the peace talks, under the auspices
of the United Nations, and to implement the Stockholm
and Riyadh agreements.

I am appalled at what Mr. Lowcock very frankly
said, namely, that members of the coalition — the
United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia — have not
honoured their pledges. How cynical can one be, just to
quote Mr. Lowcock, to promise money and then dash
hopes? Continuing to hold this money back is issuing a
death penalty for civilians, to quote Mr. Lowcock again.
Therefore, I would like to end my short intervention
by appealing to those countries that have not honoured
their pledges to do so and urgently get the money to the
humanitarian aid organizations so that they can help
the people of Yemen, including those whose messages
Mr. Lowcock conveyed to us today.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their relevant and
thought-provoking briefings.
During my statement today I wish to focus on
three issues: recent political developments, the latest
report of the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts and the importance of accountability
in Yemen, and, finally, the ongoing saga of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker.
Belgium, like its partners in the European Union,
continues to support the efforts of the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, to secure a nationwide ceasefire,
implement confidence-building measures and restart
an inclusive political process. During our most recent
meeting, in late August, Martin stated that he feared
losing momentum for the joint declaration. Indeed, the
negotiations cannot go on forever.
Belgium is alarmed by recent reports of the
suspension of all United Nations and humanitarian
flights to Sana’a by the Houthis. The Houthis seem
to be drawing a link between that suspension and the
coalition’s continued blockade of ships transporting
fuel to the port of Al-Hudaydah, demonstrating once
12/20

In this war, as in so many others, it is civilians
who are suffering the most. The war in Yemen has
claimed the lives of tens of thousands of civilians.
Mark outlined the terrible humanitarian catastrophe
that is raging in the country. Famine is a real threat for
millions of Yemenis. In its third report, released last
week, the Group of Eminent International and Regional
Experts on Yemen found that all parties involved in the
conflict continue to commit violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
noting a consistent pattern of attacks against civilians.
This is occurring not only in the context of hostilities
but also far from the front lines, and such violations are
widespread. The report notes in particular the killing
of civilians, torture, cruel and inhuman treatment, rape
and other forms of sexual violence, the denial of a fair
trial and the recruitment of children under the age of
15 to participate actively in hostilities. Such violations
may constitute war crimes.
Belgium therefore strongly calls on all parties
to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians, in particular women and
children, and their obligations under international
human rights law. Ensuring justice for the perpetrators
of all violations committed in Yemen remains vital. The
importance of this has been underscored by the Council
time and again.
We have recently been informed of a new water
leak, similar to that in May, in the engine room of the
FSO SAFER oil tanker. Apparently, the leak has been
contained. But one day, and that day may come soon,
we will not be so lucky. That incident demonstrates
once again why it is crucial that a United Nations team
of experts have full and immediate access to the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. We urge the Houthi leadership to
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

stop delaying the process. We must avert an imminent
environmental, humanitarian and economic disaster.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Griffiths, and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for presenting
an overview of the political and humanitarian situations
in Yemen.
We continue to witness the developments in the
situation in the Republic of Yemen, where for the sixth
year running we are seeing an acute conflict that is
negatively impacting the security and stability of not
only the country but also of the region as a whole. We are
concerned by the fact that the hostilities are continuing
and that civilians are the main ones affected. Because
humanitarian issues and challenges are taking centre
stage, there must be an immediate reaction on the part
of the international community.
We are also concerned by the information from
the United Nations to the effect that because of
insufficient funding, basic assistance programmes
are being discontinued; this includes programmes
aimed at ensuring food security and access to water
and medical services. In these conditions, where the
national health system has been undermined by the
long-standing conflict, what is needed is collective
action to help Yemen in its fight against the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We call upon donors, including
from other countries in the region, to increase their
relevant support.
At the same time, we believe that humanitarian
assistance should be impartial in nature. One should
not classify the Yemenis as the “good ones” and the
“bad ones”. It will be possible to really improve the
humanitarian situation in the country only if a political
and diplomatic settlement to the conflict is found.
There is no possible military solution to the situation
in Yemen. However, so far, the implementation of the
Riyadh, Stockholm and Al-Hudaydah agreements has
not yielded the results that we want, namely, a countrywide ceasefire, and the relaunching, as soon as possible,
of an inclusive inter-Yemeni dialogue. The stalling of
those agreements could lead to further escalation. The
only entities that could profit from such a situation
are extremists and terrorists, who could use Yemen to
expand their influence far beyond the boundaries of
the country.

S/PV. 8757

We support the work done by Mr. Griffiths and
understand the difficulties he has to face when providing
mediation services. The most important thing here is
that the parties in Yemen are showing understanding
and general agreement with the fact that they need to
launch a nation-wide dialogue aimed at discussing the
future of the country. What is of vital importance here
is to ensure that the views of all political, social, ethnic
and religious groups in Yemen are taken into account.
We also understand that the devil is in the details,
and that is why it has not been possible to agree on the
plan proposed by Martin. One of the issues mentioned
is that of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We believe that
solutions to the tanker issue that would be acceptable
to all parties could be found provided that all of the
parties’ interests are duly taken into account.
Russia maintains contacts with all the Yemeni and
outside stakeholders and will continue to encourage
their search for compromise in support of the efforts
made by the United Nations and Mr. Griffiths himself.
We will continue to back the efforts made by the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement,
and we expect that our colleagues in the Security
Council and the international community as a whole
will do so as well.
The situation in Yemen is directly affecting
the Middle East, the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea
region. Whether or not the crises in the Middle East
are interlinked is an issue that could be discussed in
academic circles, but for us there should be no doubt
in that respect. We are convinced that all efforts to
settle the conflict in Yemen and other countries in the
region should be interlinked and undertaken in parallel
with other steps aimed at generally de-escalating the
situation in the Middle East.
We stand ready to work together on promoting
peace and stability in the Middle East as a whole,
including on the basis of Security Council resolution
598 (1987), which called on the Secretary-General,
together with the States of the region, to develop a
security and confidence architecture in the region.
We have proposed our own concept of collective
security in the Persian Gulf. There are a number of other
peace initiatives, and they have one main element in
common: the principle of inclusiveness. We oppose any
attempt to place the blame on one party or one country,
as was voiced here today, especially since the countries
in the region, including the country that was accused

20-2365413/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

again today, could play a positive role in generally
de-escalating the situation, including in Yemen. We see
that some countries in the region demonstrate readiness
to normalize relations, and we expect that they will
show the same constructive attitude towards their other
neighbours. We once again invite all interested parties
to launch a comprehensive dialogue aimed at creating
an atmosphere conducive to cooperation in the region.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
There is an urgent need to find a political solution
to the crisis in Yemen. We are concerned about the
continuing clashes there, particularly in Ma’rib. We call
on the Yemeni parties to put an end to all hostilities,
and particularly on the Houthis to stop attacks in Ma’rib
province. Attacks carried out by the Houthis in Saudi
territory must also cease immediately. We deplore the
ongoing clashes observed in the South. The Riyadh
agreement must be fully implemented. Discussions on
the formation of a new Government must be brought to
a successful conclusion, as it is an important step for
the resumption of political talks.
The Yemeni parties must urgently engage in
dialogue with the Special Envoy and reach agreement
on the draft joint statement he has proposed. That
should enable a ceasefire, in accordance with resolution
2532 (2020), confidence-building measures and the
resumption of negotiations to reach an inclusive
political agreement. In that context, it is also essential
that the Stockholm Agreement be fully implemented,
including with regard to the payment of wages, in the
light of the deteriorating situation in Al-Hudaydah.
The humanitarian situation, particularly the
worsening of food security, remains tragic. The spectre
of famine looms once again. The figures presented by
Mark Lowcock speak for themselves. In addition to the
ongoing conflict, the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the economic and humanitarian crises and the locust
crisis every day increase the number of people living
with food insecurity.
We must therefore do everything we can collectively
to avert such a disaster. Even as needs are increasing,
the humanitarian response plan remains underfunded
and many humanitarian programmes are on hold.
The humanitarian response must be commensurate
with the needs. All parties must ensure unhindered
humanitarian access to all vulnerable people. In that
14/20

15/09/2020

regard, the Houthis’ decision to close the Sana’a airport
to United Nations and humanitarian flights is totally
unacceptable. We call on them to reverse that decision.
With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we call
on the Houthis to authorize access, without delay or
preconditions, to the United Nations expert mission.
An oil leak would have catastrophic consequences.
Urgent action is therefore necessary.
Finally, we cannot repeat often enough that the
protection of civilians must be a top priority. Respect
for international humanitarian law is non-negotiable.
France will remain fully mobilized for a political
solution in Yemen. More broadly, the French authorities
are fully committed to the search for a solution that
would lead to regional de-escalation.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their updates.
Unfortunately, after months of hope, we are
confronted with heart-breaking indications of the
very direction we were trying to avoid. Nonetheless,
as long as there is political will on all sides, progress
is attainable.
Before I highlight three points that Indonesia
believes could save the future of Yemen, let me take
this opportunity to underline Indonesia’s support for
Yemen’s sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
independence. Those must be our guiding principles for
Yemen. My statement will focus on the humanitarian
impact arising from the conflict.
First, we would again like to stress that the Yemeni
crisis can be resolved only through a political process.
Sadly, each component of the conflict has become a
political bargaining chip for the parties, even as they
inflict greater suffering on the people of Yemen.
While Mr. Lowcock has alluded to the fuel
crisis in Yemen, Sana’a airport will be closed, even
to humanitarian assistance. This development will
further affect the availability of health and medical
supplies for humanitarian assistance. As clearly stated
by both Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock, we appeal
to those controlling the airport to open it for the sake
of humanity.
Indonesia therefore urges the Houthis and the
Government of Yemen to continue to work with the
Special Envoy, particularly with a view to reaching a
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

joint declaration and achieving a nationwide ceasefire.
We support the call of Mr. Griffiths to engage and
finalize a joint declaration. Failing to do so would mean
that instead of peace, the parties prefer war.
After years of conflict, it is clear that the military
approach has succeeded only in bringing further misery
to the people of Yemen. We therefore condemn the
continuous Houthi attacks, including on the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. We also call for the implementation
of resolution 2532 (2020), and in particular endorse
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
Indonesia fully supports the push of the Special Envoy
for an inclusive Yemeni-led and -owned peace process
facilitated by the United Nations.
Secondly, we must avoid a humanitarian catastrophe
as a result of the conflict in an era of depleted resources
and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Alongside
the economic and food insecurity crises, we all know
about the depletion of funding for humanitarian
assistance, the collapsing health-care system and the
impact of COVID-19. In the face of growing violence,
Yemen is on the brink of famine. Mr. Lowcock is
once again ringing the alarm on the spectre of famine.
These factors underline the depth of the crisis and the
precipitous danger facing Yemen at a time when there
is no movement on the three proposals made by the
Special Envoy. My delegation therefore again highlights
the wisdom of a political solution.
On the FSO SAFER oil tanker, two months have
elapsed since our previous Council meeting on this
issue (see S/2020/721) and we should continue that
discussion. It is disappointing that the tanker has not
yet been assessed and repaired, and my delegation
again urges the Houthis to expeditiously allow the
United Nations team to begin its work. We hope that
progress can be made on each and every element of the
five urgent priorities highlighted by Mr. Lowcock.
Thirdly, agreed commitments are the building
blocks to a broader political solution. All previous
agreements and the input of the Council remain relevant
in charting the political settlement to end the conflict.
We reaffirm the importance of the inclusiveness of all
relevant demographics and the implementation of all
previous agreements and relevant Council resolutions,
including resolution 2216 (2015). These are all legally
binding commitments. The Council should therefore
play the role of custodian. Parties should also abide by

S/PV. 8757

international humanitarian law and protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure.
In conclusion, I would like to once again quote
Secretary-General Guterres, who said that “the pursuit
of peace is a continuous process based on choices and
decisions we make every day”. It is therefore a matter
of choice of all parties as to whether they will allow
the worst thing to happen to their people and nation
or choose to pursue peace and save their people. I, for
one, choose peace for the people of Yemen for the sake
of every Mohammed, Jamila, Samia and Abdulrahman,
as well as all Yemeni brothers and sisters that have
yearned for peace for too long.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We begin by extending our gratitude to Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock, not only for their updates this morning, but
also for their continued commitment to the people
of Yemen.
The situation in Yemen demands urgent action, and
now, more than ever, we must maintain our engagement.
While the window of opportunity for peace has not yet
closed, it is quickly narrowing. I recall Mr. Lowcock’s
previous caution to the Security Council in which he
stressed that if we do not help now, Yemen may fall into
the abyss (see S/PV.8753).
We must act expeditiously to save Yemen and its
people, who have been affected by years of conflict and
now are assailed by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the threat of famine, torrential rains, economic adversity
and an underfunded humanitarian response plan. These
are the perfect conditions for the realization of UnderSecretary-General Lowcock’s grave warning. In this
regard, we urge all donors that have pledged funds to
make the necessary disbursements as soon as possible.
We recognize that humanitarian aid is not a solution,
but it is indeed an avenue through which we can provide
relief to the people of Yemen until a sustainable solution
can be achieved.
The security situation remains extremely tense
and volatile, and we reiterate the need for an inclusive
Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political process.
This point cannot be overstated. The only solution is
a political one, and there will be no durable political
solution unless it is inclusive of all people and groups,
regardless of gender, ethnicity, religious belief or other
demographic variables.

20-2365415/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

Of equal importance to sustainable peace is
accountability for all infractions of international
law, including human rights abuses. We encourage
the international community and all relevant actors
to support Yemen’s justice system through capacitybuilding to allow for the effective prosecution of these
crimes and to promote justice and reconciliation.
We call on all parties to take concrete steps to
address the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. To
this end, we make a resounding appeal to all parties
to prioritize the environment and the people of Yemen
and of the wider region. The threat posed by the FSO
SAFER oil tanker is avoidable, and inaction on this issue
can only be regarded as reckless. It is with a great sense
of urgency that we encourage actors with influence to
actively engage with the parties to make progress on
this issue. We reaffirm our support for Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths and his team, as we stand in solidarity
with the people of Yemen.
Finally, I must add that I am tired of saying the
same thing and hearing the same thing over and
over and over again in response to the reports of
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock of the fast-approaching
catastrophic point of no return. I am heartbroken and
frustrated. Last night on CNN, I was reminded of the
horrific inhumanity when I saw the painfully disturbing
images of emaciated children — countless children
sick and dying of starvation — and of helpless mothers
pleading for us to step up our efforts. Yes, where is our
compassion? Children are dying. People are suffering.
Famine in the twenty-first century is unacceptable and
will be an utter disgrace — a stain on the international
community. More must be done, and more must be
done now. Time is not on our side. I agree with what the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia just said: it is
time to make better choices.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings. In hearing about the growing deterioration of
the situation in Yemen, we share the immense concern
they have expressed today. Hostilities are increasing, and
the civilian population, especially women and children,
continue to be the innocent victims of indiscriminate
attacks. In addition, forced disappearances and sexual
violence and torture continue to be a common practice
during the conflict. The repression of journalists,
media collaborators and human rights defenders
is increasing, hindering their ability to report on
16/20

15/09/2020

violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law — information that can ultimately help to
protect the civilian population.
This is all very alarming, and the bleak picture on
the horizon is further marred by a lack of accountability.
There is a dearth of concrete legal procedures to hold
perpetrators accountable and provide remedies to
victims. The absence of the rule of law increases the
number of violations, thus perpetuating a vicious circle.
The suffering of the people of Yemen has been
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic
and the unsustainable economic situation and further
worsened by fuel shortages, especially in the north of
the country. We urge all parties to work constructively
with the Special Envoy to find an immediate solution to
this situation.
Even more threats are on the horizon, such as the
risk posed by the lack of access to the FSO SAFER
tanker and the imminent closure of humanitarian
assistance programmes due to lack of funds, which
could lead to a famine situation by the end of this year,
as Mr. Lowcock has already said. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
two years after the international community mobilized
to prevent a famine in Yemen, similar conditions are
now emerging, worsening key indicators beyond the
levels seen in October 2018. Intensified conflict and
limited access to affected areas also undermine efforts
to control desert locusts, further aggravating food
insecurity not only in Yemen but in nearby countries.
Overall, food insecurity has increased by 56 per
cent since the conflict intensified in 2015, and severe
acute malnutrition among children has increased
by 150 per cent. This situation is affecting at least
8 million people, some of whom are no longer receiving
assistance or are receiving much less than what they
were receiving before.
After five years of conflict, neither side can claim
victory. On the contrary, Yemen has been torn apart, and
its people are suffering the consequences. There is no
military solution to this war. Only a political agreement
can lead the way. That is why we urge all parties to
move without delay towards the adoption of the joint
declaration proposed by the Special Envoy as the
gateway to a definitive solution to this horrible conflict.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First of all, I would like to
thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

their informative briefings. I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Yemen to our meeting today.
Two months ago, Mr. Martin Griffiths informed
the Security Council that Yemen was experiencing
extremely difficult times (see S/PV.8753). It is
regrettable that the picture today is in no way brighter.
We are deeply concerned about the military escalation
in different parts of Yemen and the announcement
on 25 August by the Southern Transitional Council
on suspending its participation in the ongoing
consultations to implement the Riyadh agreement. The
political process in Yemen is again at risk of returning
to a stalemate.
We are also deeply concerned about the evidence
shown in a report of the Group of Eminent International
and Regional Experts on Yemen (A/HRC/45/6),
commissioned by the Human Rights Council, that
Yemeni teenagers have been recruited and exploited
for violence purposes, some of whom have even been
sexually abused in the past few years. All those behind
those immoral and unacceptable acts must be brought
to justice.
The economic crisis, the prolonged conflict,
floods, food insecurity, desert locusts, the fragile
health-care system and the coronavirus disease
pandemic have deepened the humanitarian crisis in
Yemen. In addition, there is no progress on the funding
for aid programmes in Yemen. The United Nations
aid programmes for Yemen are expected to be further
scaled back, or even closed, in the coming months if the
situation remains unresolved.
Moreover, humanitarian assistance work could
be disrupted due to the recent closure of Sana’a
International Airport in Yemen by the Houthis. The
airport represents very important access for the World
Health Organization, UNICEF and other organizations
to provide relief goods and vital medical supplies to
Yemen during the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
slow progress on the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue again
remains troubling. The United Nations technical team
has not been allowed to access the tanker. It is urgent
to take immediate action on the ageing tanker without
further delay. In that regard, I would like to make the
following points.
First, we urge all the parties concerned in Yemen to
stop the fighting and resume talks so that negotiations
on a nationwide ceasefire can restart. We also support
the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in

S/PV. 8757

working together with the Government of Yemen and
the Southern Transitional Council to ensure that the
peace process will not be derailed.
Secondly, we emphasize the need to provide safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance work.
We call on the Houthis to reopen Sana’a International
Airport so that United Nations aid supplies can be
brought to Yemen in a timely manner. We also call
for further efforts by the international community, the
United Nations and donors to find a way to fulfil their
commitments to Yemen.
In that vein, I would like to mention that, a few days
ago, two 6-year-old boys, Ayaan Moosa and Mikaeel
Ishaaq from east London, set up a lemonade stand to
raise money for the people of Yemen. We believe that
the Yemeni people, as well as we ourselves, are very
grateful for the good deeds of those two brave British
boys. We believe that that small act can set an example
for us and bring more hope to the Yemeni people.
Thirdly, it is urgent to address the issue of the FSO
SAFER oil tanker. We urge the Houthis to facilitate
the necessary procedures so that the United Nations
technical team can carry out its tasks on the tanker. The
life of Yemenis and others in the Gulf region are being
threatened every passing day. We need to act now if we
are to prevent a catastrophe in the region.
Fourthly, it is important for all parties to fully
implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh
agreement with United Nations mediation. The
meaningful participation of women in the political
process should also be ensured and further promoted.
Last but not least, we commend Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths and the United Nations team for
their tireless work and support their peace proposals
for Yemen.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.
I would like to thank Martin Griffiths and Mark
Lowcock for their excellent presentations. We heard
the heart-rending messages of Yemenis, who need
compassion, humanity and solidarity in these difficult
times. I think that Ms. King eloquently expressed
our feelings.
My country is following with great concern the
evolving situation in Yemen, marked by persistent

20-2365417/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

fighting, differences between the separatists in the south
and the Government with regard to the implementation
of the Riyadh agreement and the alarming deterioration
in the living conditions of a population trapped in a
conflict that has been ongoing for six years.
The conflict now seems to be turning into a real
quagmire, whose most worrisome trend is the widening
scope of the violence beyond Yemen’s borders. If that
trend were to continue, the conflict in Yemen would
clearly take on a new dimension that would risk serious
threats to peace and security in the region.
Despite the tireless efforts of the United Nations
since the beginning of this crisis, as well as the Special
Envoy’s many hopeful initiatives, including the
announcement of a nationwide ceasefire, our fervent
hopes for the return of peace in Yemen have been slow
to materialize. In addition to the military stalemate,
there seems to be an impasse in the negotiations due
to the increased intransigence over the terms and a
growing climate of mistrust.
My delegation is convinced that only a political
solution can lead to lasting peace in the country. We
also believe that no progress can be made in addressing
this crisis without a cessation of hostilities and the
commitment of the parties to making the necessary
concessions to move the political process forward.
We therefore call on all the parties to the conflict to
demonstrate responsibility and compassion by ending
the hostilities and resuming dialogue once and for all.
In that regard, I must say that the interest expressed by
the Yemeni Government and the Houthis in the Special
Envoy’s proposals is a glimmer of hope. We must do
everything possible to maintain that momentum and
use every opportunity to revive the peace talks.
In that regard, we call on regional actors and
Council members with influence over the parties
to the conflict to spare no effort in holding them to
their commitments under the Stockholm and Riyadh
agreements. The successful conclusion of a joint
declaration on a national ceasefire would also enable
the brave people of Yemen to close this dark chapter
in their history and again move towards the country’s
reconstruction and development.
Long before the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
humanitarian situation in Yemen was of the greatest
concern. Today it is even more worrisome, exacerbated
by a combination of factors, including the rapid spread
of the pandemic, the fragile health system, floods, food
18/20

15/09/2020

insecurity, the fuel crisis and obstacles to the delivery
of humanitarian aid.
To prevent a further deterioration of the situation, we
are appealing to the international community for more
funding to ensure continuing assistance programmes,
on which several million people now depend. I take this
opportunity to express our sincere thanks to all those
who are helping the people of Yemen and encourage
others, including the neighbouring countries, to do
the same.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
its concern over the situation concerning the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, which has been moored off the coast
of Yemen for several years. Our concern is all the
greater owing to its advanced state of disrepair. The
vessel could explode at any time, or dump its cargo in
the Red Sea. After the explosion on 4 August in the
port of Beirut and the oil spill in Mauritius, it is urgent
to act to prevent an environmental disaster in the Red
Sea. That is why we call on the Houthis to honour their
commitments by issuing the necessary authorizations
to the United Nations expert team as soon as possible
and to facilitate its mandate on the ground.
The Niger welcomes the commitment of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and his team and reaffirms its
full support for the efforts to restore peace in Yemen.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to wish you, Mr. President, every
success in presiding over the Council’s work this month.
I wish your delegation every success and all members
of the Council health and safety.
The Government of Yemen, led by His Excellency
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, reiterates
its eagerness to establish a durable peace in Yemen
based on the three agreed terms of reference: the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation
mechanism and the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference, especially resolution 2216 (2015), and
other relevant Security Council resolutions.
Over the past period, the Government has
demonstrated greater flexibility and has responded
more positively to all initiatives and proposals aimed at
achieving progress in the comprehensive peace process.
20-23654

15/09/2020

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate once again our support of the efforts
undertaken by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and our positive
engagement in all efforts aimed at reaching a ceasefire,
as well as humanitarian and economic measures, and
the resumption of the political process.
On the other hand, the Houthi militias are
undermining those efforts. They have continued their
escalation and war against the people of Yemen. They
are launching ballistic missiles and drones on Yemeni
cities, especially in Ma’rib governorate. Innocent
civilians, mainly women and children, are falling victim
to such attacks. This is a clear indication of their open
rejection of peace efforts. The Houthis are undermining
humanitarian action, stealing relief aid and assistance
and imposing levies, setting a dangerous precedent that
violates all principles of humanitarian action. They
target homes and houses of worship, exploit children
and force them into their absurd war, and detain and
assault women. They continue to undermine freedom
and use blackmail for their racist, factional project.
They exploit the suffering of the Yemeni people for
political gains, while committing other violations that
run counter to international humanitarian law and
human rights law.
The Government is committed to implementing
mechanisms aimed at accelerating the implementation
of the Riyadh agreement, in line with the instructions
of the President of the Republic. He is establishing a
new phase, uniting efforts to resist the Iranian-Houthi
project and put an end to the coup d’état, while restoring
State institutions and establishing the comprehensive
peace that the Yemeni people deserve. In this vein, the
President has issued decrees appointing a new Governor
and security director in the governorate of Aden.
The designated Prime Minister, Mr. Maeen
Abdulmalek Saeed, is undertaking consultations
with different political components to form a new
Government, in line with the text of the agreement. He
is outlining the priorities of the Government in different
economic and development reform areas in order to save
the national economy from collapse. He is trying to
normalize the situation in the respective governorates.
The new Government will comprise competent and
experienced officers able to face the current challenges
and adapt to new developments. They will work on
targeting the necessary reforms, eliminating sources of
corruption and reactivating State institutions, enabling
them to undertake the duties they owe to citizens. In

S/PV. 8757

this vein, we commend our brothers in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia who stood by the Yemeni people to
alleviate their suffering at the different stages to ensure
the implementation of the Riyadh agreement.
The Houthi militias continue to undermine the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, in
particular the agreement on the city of Al-Hudaydah,
which unfortunately has reached a new stage of
escalation, intensifying the conflict and aggravating
the suffering of Yemenis, owing to the negligence of
Houthi militias, who have shirked their responsibilities
in connection with the agreement. They have disrupted
the work of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement and constrained its movement.
The Mission has been unable to investigate the Houthi
militias targeting of the Yemeni liaison officer Colonel
Muhammed Al-Sulayhi, who supposedly enjoyed the
protection of the Mission. Not only have the militias
rejected the invitation, but they have also bombarded
the observation post where the targeting took place to
prevent any investigation by the United Nations.
The frequency of the militias’ violations has
increased, especially with the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah.
They have refused to demine the area, open
humanitarian corridors or allow United Nations patrols
to move inside the city. They have used Al-Hudaydah
as a base for air strikes using drones and booby-trapped
and remotely operated vessels. They have also violated
the agreement on Al-Hudaydah by mobilizing in the
governorates of Al-Jawf, Ma’rib and Al-Bayda. Facing
restrictions on movement and the undermining of the
work of the Mission, the Government is calling for
the transfer of the Mission’s headquarters to another
neutral place in Al-Hudaydah to safeguard its work in
line with the mandate of resolution 2452 (2019).
We want peace. We want to implement the
agreement signed between the Government of Yemen
and the Houthis. It should be a positive step towards
comprehensive peace, aimed at alleviating the suffering
of the Yemeni people.
What happened after the Stockholm Agreement
was reached? Why did the Houthis sign on to the
agreement? We were on the verge of liberating our
cities from Houthi control. However, in order to
comply with the international community and the
United Nations, we went to Stockholm to reach that
agreement. Who has undermined that agreement?
It is the Houthis, unfortunately. They are stealing

20-2365419/20

S/PV.8757

The situation in the Middle East

15/09/2020

the revenues of the ports, including oil revenues.
They are stealing humanitarian assistance. They are
mobilizing and escalating elsewhere in Yemen, such
as in Hadur, Al-Bayda, Al-Jawf, and today they are
threatening Ma’rib.

war against Yemen and the Yemeni people. They are
exploiting the suffering of the Yemeni people, in a
desperate attempt to cover up the theft of the proceeds
of oil derivatives, which would cover the needs of the
areas under militia control for almost seven months.

Who is trying to achieve peace? The Government
of Yemen looks forward to peace after the coup d’état
of 21 September 2014, which led to the Yemeni people
suffering the worse humanitarian crisis ever. That is
why we are calling on the international community
to bring pressure to bear on the Houthis to end their
escalation in Ma’rib and stop launching ballistic
missiles on civilians living in that populous city. They
have to stop launching missiles on the territory of the
brotherly country of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Allow me to make another point. The proposals
made by Mr. Griffiths, including the first draft of the
joint declaration on a ceasefire, confidence-building
measures related to economic and humanitarian
measures and the resumption of a political process,
have all been agreed upon by the Government of Yemen
without any reservations. Mr. Griffiths knows that full
well. But who rejected those proposals at the beginning?
It was the Houthis, and this begs the question: why?
Because they want to change the facts on the ground
and want continued suffering for the Yemeni people.

The Government of Yemen, Mr. Martin and the
Council might remember the Kuwait agreement, which
took 100 days to negotiate. In this vein, we would like to
thank Kuwait for hosting those consultations. Following
100 days of negotiations, the Government of Yemen
accepted the terms. It was the Houthis who rejected
them because they wanted the conflict to persist. They
are using the suffering of the Yemeni people to impose
an agenda of continued racial and factional project in
Yemen.
The Government of Yemen was anxious to facilitate
access of oil derivatives to the port of Al-Hudaydah,
although the Houthi militias violated the mechanism
agreed with the Office of the Special Envoy when they
withdrew more than 50 billion rials from the proceeds
of oil derivatives from the special account in the Central
Bank of Al-Hudaydah, which had been allocated to pay
the salaries of civil servants in Yemen. On 26 August,
we proposed a new initiative for access of oil derivatives
to the port of Al-Hudaydah, including giving access
to all vessels conforming to requirements, so long as
those proceeds are put into a new special account that
is not under the control of the Houthis, using a new
mechanism under which the United Nations would
guarantee that such revenues will not be used until
agreement is reached on their expenditure.
We must restore the money that was withdrawn
from the special account in the Central Bank and agree
on an expenditure mechanism for the money that was
collected previously and that will be collected later, so
that those revenues can be used to pay salaries based
on 2014 payroll records. Such revenues must not be
confiscated or used by militias to finance their absurd

20/20

The Yemeni Government has warned for almost
two years of a potential environmental and economic
catastrophe due to oil leakage from or the sinking
or explosion of the FSO SAFER oil tanker and of the
terrible repercussions of such an incident on Yemen,
the countries of the region and international navigation
in the Red Sea. Secretary-General António Guterres
also warned, in a letter to the Security Council, against
the continued delays and procrastination by the Houthi
militias, which are preventing United Nations technical
teams from reaching the tanker to assess the situation
and remove the oil.
The international community and the Council
have made every effort to prevent such a catastrophe,
the possibility of which is looming larger by the day.
Despite everything I have mentioned, the Houthi
militias continue to exploit this issue and use it for
political blackmail, proposing unrealistic conditions
to the United Nations with total disregard for all our
efforts. We call on the Security Council once again to
shoulder its responsibilities and adopt firm measures
to counter this intransigence and procrastination. We
must bring more pressure to bear on the militias to
prevent an imminent disaster.
In conclusion, we are concerned that the Council
might be holding its next meeting on the issue once
the disaster has happened and that we will then just be
discussing its repercussions. Such an outcome would
only magnify the suffering of the Yemeni people at the
hands of the Houthi militias.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

20-23654
