UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/36
23 August 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3691st meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 August 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council, on the eve of the planned visit to Baghdad by
the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission, strongly reaffirms its
full support for the Special Commission in the conduct of its inspections
and the other tasks entrusted to it by the Council. The Security Council
reiterates the importance it attaches to full compliance by Iraq with the
relevant resolutions of the Council. It underlines the important role of
the Special Commission’s inspection teams and demands once again that they
be given immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to any and all
areas, facilities, equipment, records and means of transportation which
they wish to inspect, and Iraqi officials whom they wish to interview, so
that the Special Commission may fully discharge its mandate.
"In this context, the Security Council remains gravely concerned at
the failure by Iraq to comply fully with its resolution 1060 (1996) of
12 June 1996 and with other resolutions of the Council dealing with the
Special Commission. The denial by Iraq, on repeated occasions, of
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to sites which they wished
to inspect and the attempts made by the Government of Iraq to impose
conditions on the conduct of interviews with Iraqi officials by the Special
Commission constitute a gross violation of its obligations under
resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991) and 715 (1991). The Council notes that
these actions also contradict commitments made by the Government of Iraq in
its Joint Statement of 22 June 1996 with the Special Commission, and urges
the Government of Iraq to respect these commitments. The Council reminds
the Government of Iraq that only full compliance with its obligations under
the relevant resolutions will enable the Executive Chairman of the Special
Commission to present his report in accordance with section C of resolution
687 (1991). The Council will continue to consider how best to ensure
Iraq’s full compliance.
"The Security Council requests the Executive Chairman to report to it
on the results of his visit."
----96-21671 (E)

230896
