UNITED

NATIONS

Distr.
GENERAL

SECURITY
COUNCIL

S/5298
29 April 1963
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL TO THE SECURITY COUNCIL CONCERNING
CERTAIN DEVELOPMENTS RELATING TO YEMEN
1.

Since the fall of 1962 I have been consulting regularly with the

representatives to the United Nations of the Goverrunents of the Arab Republic of
Yemen, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Republic, about certain aspects of the
situation in Yemen of external origin, with a view to making my Office available
to the parties for such assistance as might be desired toward ensuring against
any developments in that situation which might threaten the peace of the area.

I

have encountered from the beginning a sympathetic and co-operative attitude on
the part of all three representativ~ and their Governments.
2.

It was in this context that, after clearance with the respective Governments,

I asked Mr. Ralph J. Bunche to go to Yemen and the United Arab Republic in late
February and early March on a fact-finding mission primarily devoted to talking
with the Presidents of Yemen and the United Arab Republic, in that order, with
tb,e purpose of ascertaining tbeir views on the situation and wbat steps might be
taken to ease tension and restore conditions to normal.

It was left open 'i.hetber

Mr. Bunche would eventually go also to Saudi Arabia, but developments w2de tbis
unnecessary.

Mr. Buncbe carried out this mission and reported fully to me on

his talks, which I found encouraging.

Subse~uently, I

was informed that the

United States Government, on its own initiative, sent Mr. Ellsworth Bunker to
Saudi Arabia on a somewhat similar but unconnected mission.

Mr. Buru(er later

visited Saudi Arabia on two other occasions and also had extensive talks in Cairo

Mr. Bunker kept me informed on the results of his missions.
These talks in the end proved fruitful and from them emerged the agreed terms of

with President Nasser.

Mr. Bunker's efforts are much appreciated.
3. As a result of these activities, it is now possible for me to inform the
Security Council that I have received from each of the three Governments
disengagement.

-t'.

to

~I <'~ "~~,.• ~~'

/ ...

.

,"

8/5298

English
Page 2
concerned, in separate communications, formal confirmation of their acceptance
of identical terms of disengagement in Yemen.

The will of all three of the

interested parties to ease the situation has been the decisive factor, of course,
and they are to be commended for their constructive attitude.

4.

In substance these terms are the following:
nle Government of Saudi Arabia, on its part, will terminate all support

and aid to the Royalists of Yemen and will prohibit the use of Saudi Arabian
territory by Royalist leaders for the purpose of carrying on the struggle in
Yemen.

Simultaneously, with the suspension of aid from Saudi Arabia to the

Royalists, the United Arab Republic undertakes to begin withdrawal from Yemen of the
troops sent on request of the new Government, this withdrawal to be phased and
to take place as soon as possible, during which the forces would withdraw from
field activities to their bases pending their departure.

The United Arab Republic

has also agreed not to take punitive action against the Royalists of Yemen for
any resistance mounted by them prior to the beginning of their disengagement.
There would likewise be an end to any actions on Saudi Arabian territory by
UAR forces.

A demilitarized zone to a distance of twenty kilometres on each side

of the demarcated Saudi-Arabian~Yemenborder is to be established from which
military forces and equipment are to be excluded.

In this zone, on both sides,

impartial observers are to be stationed to check on the observance of the terms
of disengagement and who would also have the responsibility of travelling beyond
the demilitarized zone, as necessary, in order to certify the suspension of
activities in support of the Royalists from Saudi Arabian territory and the outward
movement of the UAR forces and equipment from the airports and seaports of Yemen.
The United Arab Republic and Saudi Arabia have further undertaken to co-operate
with the representative of the United Nations Secretary-General or some other
mutually acceptable intermediary in reaching agreement on the modalities and
verification of disengagement.

5.

In view of the provisions in these terms for a dernilitarized zone and

impartial observers, and with the consent of the parties, I have asked
Major General Carl Von Horn, Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization in Jerusalem, to proceed without delay to the three

I .. ·

S/5 298

English
Page 3
countries concerned for the purpose of consulting with the appropriate
authorities on details relating to the nature and functioning of United Nations
Observers in implementation of the terms of disengagement and to report to me with
his recommendations as to the size of the set-up that might be required to
discharge this responsibility.

My preliminary view is that the requirements of men

and equipment will be modest and will be needed for ,~ree or four months, at the
most.

I have been thinking in terms of not more than fifty observers, with

suitable transportation, aerial and ground, for patrol purposes.

A few helicopters,

possibly three or four, and a similar number of small aircraft such as Otters,
together with the required jeeps and lorries, should suffice.

6.

As to the financing of any such activity by the United Nations, I have it in

rnind to proceed under the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1862 (XVII).

7.

I intend to make a further report to the Security Council with particular

reference to the question of United Nations Observers after General Von Horn
has reported to me on his discussions on this subject with the parties concerned.
