S/2007/306

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 May 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 22 May 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 11 May 2007,
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-35701 (E) 050607

*0735701*

S/2007/306

Annex
Letter dated 11 May 2007 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach a report on operations of the International Security Assistance Force
covering the period from October 2006 to February 2007. I would appreciate your
making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

07-35701

S/2007/306

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the United Nations on the operations of
the International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
By resolution 1510 (2003) the Security Council requested the leadership of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports on the
implementation of its mandate. This is the twelfth such report by NATO and it
covers the period from October 2006 to February 2007.
2.
As of February 2007, ISAF has 33,891 personnel from 26 NATO countries and
625 from 11 non-NATO countries.
ISAF status
3.
ISAF has expanded its presence and now assumes responsibility for providing
security assistance across the whole of Afghanistan. ISAF also maintains a
cooperative and mutually beneficial relationship with the United States-led coalition
operating in Afghanistan which is known as “Operation Enduring Freedom”. The
coalition forces that have not been transferred to NATO continue to maintain
freedom of movement throughout Afghanistan to allow for the development of the
Afghan National Security Forces and counter-terrorism operations.
4.
Prosecution of Operation Oqab began on 28 October 2006 to ensure that the
opposing militant forces were kept off balance throughout the winter, while
maintaining ISAF freedom of movement, in particular along Highway 1 from Kabul
to Herat, and ensuring security for the establishment and expansion of Afghan
Development Zones in volatile regions. Operation Oqab marks an important
milestone for progress in the planning and execution of combined pan-theatre
operations with the Government of Afghanistan.
5.
Staggered transition across Afghanistan to the second phase of Operation Oqab
was completed in mid-January with Regional Command South. This phase
particularly emphasized operations along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border in order
to deny the insurgents the ability to reconstitute and focus their operations, by
disrupting and interdicting insurgent sanctuary areas, infiltration and supply routes
throughout the winter.
6.
The transition from headquarters ISAF IX to a composite multinational
headquarters ISAF X took place from November 2006 to February 2007. It
culminated on 4 February 2007 with the change of command from General David
Richards to General Dan McNeill.
Overall security situation
7.
The activity of the opposing militant forces has been concentrated in the south
and east during this reporting period. There was no pre-winter surge in activity this
year as there has been in previous years.
8.
The opposing militant forces have concentrated their efforts on a campaign of
low-risk, high-impact attacks, supported by a robust propaganda effort designed to
undermine the credibility of the Government of Afghanistan and ISAF. Of special
concern is the fivefold increase in suicide attacks in 2006 compared to 2005. In

07-35701

3

S/2007/306

2005, there were 25 suicide events (18 attacks, 7 incidents), and in 2006 there were
130 suicide events (92 attacks, 38 incidents). The opposing militant forces also
showed indications during this period of an increasing trend to deliberately target
Afghan and foreign civilians, and to engage ISAF forces with the express intent to
cause collateral civilian damage.
Regional security assessment
9.
In Regional Command Capital, there has been a significant decrease in the
number of insurgent attacks. This is mostly due to increased counter-insurgency
operations by the Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF, including the
disruption of improvised explosive device cells of the opposing militant forces, both
within Regional Command Capital and the bordering provinces, the increased
security posture around Kabul Centre and key Government of Afghanistan
installations, effective outreach to traditional and tribal leaders and well coordinated
use of available reconstruction and development funds by Regional Command
Capital. This activity appears to have forced the insurgents to switch their
operational focus towards perceived “softer” targets of the Afghan National Security
Forces and the Government of Afghanistan within the less effectively controlled
outlying districts of Kabul.
10. Incidents in Regional Command North were at a level comparable to the same
reporting period last year. Effective, intelligence-driven counter-insurgency
operations resulted in reduced activity throughout most of the region. Attacks
against the Afghan National Security Forces have decreased slightly in comparison
to last year, and attacks on international and non-governmental organization
personnel, while rare, still occur. Most attacks on international
organization/non-governmental organizations are conducted by criminal elements,
but involvement of the opposing militant forces cannot be ruled out in some cases.
Attempts by influential political figures to gain a foothold in this region by allying
with each other could become a serious threat to the influence of the Government.
11. The security situation in Regional Command West has remained relatively
stable as the opposing militant forces continue to focus on Farah Province and
primarily on key lines of communication. Attacks have been both direct and
asymmetric. Insurgent and criminal activity has continued to affect much of
Regional Command West, including Herat and Badghis Provinces.
12. Regional Command South has been the focus of the Taliban insurgency over
the reporting period. The isolation of Kandahar is still assessed as a primary
objective of the opposing militant forces, evidenced by the concentration of
numerous Taliban fighters west of Kandahar City. Following Operation Medusa,
insurgents re-infiltrated Panjwayi and Zhari Districts. The subsequent Operation
Baaz Tsuka severely disrupted Taliban command and control in western Kandahar.
Insurgent efforts in Zabul have focused on interdicting Highway 1 with improvised
explosive devices and small-arms fire ambushes. Opposing militant forces activity
in Uruzgan has been mainly reactive as insurgents attempt to secure their deep
sanctuary areas within the province. Effective counter-insurgency operations,
combined with close coordination with the existing tribal and traditional structures
in Uruzgan, and the non-governmental organizations operating there, has
contributed to a calming effect in those parts of the province frequented by the

4

07-35701

S/2007/306

Dutch-led provincial reconstruction team. Deteriorating weather this winter has also
reduced the ability of the opposing militant forces to conduct attacks.
13. Activity of the opposing militant forces in Regional Command East followed
the overall pattern and was concentrated around Paktika, Paktya, Khost, Nuristan,
Nangahar, Kunar and Ghazni. The crossing of insurgents from Pakistan’s federally
administered tribal areas remained a concern in the provinces of Paktika, Paktya and
Khost. ISAF operations have had a significant effect on insurgent activity, pushing
the activity of the opposing militant forces away from the interior and into the
border regions and reducing the effectiveness of attacks. The onset of winter was a
factor on opposing militant force activity, also.
Security arrangements
14. Over the reporting period there has been implementation of various local
security arrangements between affected parties. Diverse arrangements were signed
in Helmand and Khost Provinces. In addition to the accord with tribal leaders signed
by the Government of Pakistan in September 2006, tribes on both sides of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan border in the Kunar and Nuristan regions signed a crossborder security arrangement in December 2006. Finally, early in January 2007, the
newly appointed Helmand provincial Governor, Assadullah Wafa, outlined a set of
security protocols as guidance to local tribal leaders for future efforts to establish
and maintain a secure environment. It should be noted that there are significant,
substantive differences between the various security arrangements.
Disbandment of illegal armed groups
15. In general, the progress of disbandment of illegal armed groups has been
disappointing so far with, again, no significant developments since the last report.
Nevertheless, the Government of Afghanistan has initiated a strategy review of the
structure and methods of disbandment, in which the international community and
ISAF are participating. The Afghan leadership acknowledged that the continued
presence of individuals linked to illegal armed groups in influential and highly
visible positions contributed to insecurity in Afghanistan. President Karzai endorsed
the strategy review, and a resulting action plan, which highlights a number of key
issues at the macro/strategic level that need to be urgently addressed if the
programme is to move forward in accordance with the agreed conditions of the
Afghanistan Compact. These issues include stronger political support from the
Government of Afghanistan at all levels and the introduction of appropriate
legislation to support disbandment of illegal armed groups. Some successes in
Takhar and Kapisa Provinces as well as bottom-up approaches with Governors
having to provide lists of complying and non-complying illegal armed groups may
also reinvigorate the process.
16. Driven by the personal commitment of Professor Mujadeddi, the programme
Takhim-e-Sol (Strengthening Peace) has expanded to 11 field offices and handled
over 3,000 reconciliations despite a serious lack of funding. ISAF involvement in
the programme consists mainly of support at the provincial reconstruction team
level. ISAF will continue to encourage the international community and
international and non-governmental organizations to support this Government
programme. Although disbandment of illegal armed groups and the programme are
not formally linked, members of both the disbandment of illegal armed groups Joint

07-35701

5

S/2007/306

Secretariat and the programme Commission have suggested that a two-way
information exchange would be beneficial and that greater synergy would assist
both processes.
Counter-narcotics
17. Following the 59 per cent increase in 2006 in poppy cultivation, the need to
improve implementation of the Afghan National Drug Control Strategy remains.
There is increasing evidence of a link between the insurgency and poppy growing.
Considerable improvements in the capacity of the Government of Afghanistan to
tackle narcotics have been made through encouraging initiatives sponsored by both
the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and the Ministry of the Interior. The National
Drug Control Strategy is being implemented across the country and, from January
2007, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics has established a functional Afghan
Eradication Coordination Cell from where centrally directed eradication operations
are being coordinated. Centrally directed eradication by mechanical and manual
means is taking place in Helmand Province from January to March 2007 and is then
likely to progress on to Badakhshan or Balkh Province from April 2007, for a
further three months.
18. Governors from the 12 major poppy-cultivating provinces appear to be
supporting the efforts of the Government; some are forging ahead with their own
Governor-led eradication campaigns. ISAF is endeavouring to liaise closely with
provincial Governors on security matters related to eradication.
19. A civil public information company is employed by the Government of
Afghanistan to run the counter-narcotics information campaign. ISAF is not
involved in eradication operations.
Afghan National Army
20. Complicated by poor retention, the strength of the Afghan National Army is
well below the current authorized goal of 70,000, but is continuing to develop. It has
been estimated that approximately 15,000 combat troops are present for duty, that is,
available for operations, at a given time, in an Afghan army that has engaged in
nearly continuous combat for several years running. However, the Afghan National
Army is performing well in combat, especially with embedded assistance.
21. The Combined Security Transition Command Afghanistan is providing most of
the training, mentoring and equipping of the Afghan National Army, and is working
closely with the Ministry of Defence to improve retention and expand recruitment
and training. There remains a need for additional training, mentoring and
operational liaison support, such as that which is provided by ISAF operational
mentoring and liaison teams. The Afghan National Army also lacks some combat
enablers, and offers of such combat-enabling equipment. NATO has recently taken
on the responsibility of assisting the Combined Security Transition Command in
equipping the Afghan National Army.
Afghan National Police
22. The Afghan National Police still suffers from serious shortcomings which need
to be addressed as a matter of priority as development of the National Police is
fundamental to meeting the security needs of Afghanistan. Greater international

6

07-35701

S/2007/306

assistance in police training under the auspices of the European Union is under
active preparation. NATO has been asked to lend logistical support to the mission,
mainly through provincial reconstruction teams. NATO is currently working on the
modalities for the necessary support to the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan.
23. The challenge of building and reforming the Afghan National Police is very
different from that of creating the Afghan National Army mainly because a large
part of the reform work has to deal with the existing institution, whereas the Army
was newly created. The number of patrolmen serving in the Afghan National Police
has not been adequately confirmed by the Ministry of the Interior or the
international community. The Combined Security Transition Command intends to
conduct an audit to establish actual Afghan National Police numbers on the ground.
Criminality and corruption are an impediment to the establishment of the rule of law
and must be rooted out at all levels. The President’s personal involvement in
removing corrupt and incompetent police officials has been and will continue to be
essential. Better and more reliable payment, combined with improved training and
additional equipment, will reduce the perceived benefits of corruption.
24. Pragmatic solutions to security problems are achieving some degree of
success. The Afghan National Auxiliary Police are now serving in 15 provinces
across Afghanistan. An increase of 700 Auxiliary Police for Kandahar Province has
been approved and, in January 2007, the Policy Action Group agreed that training of
Auxiliary Police should commence in Regional Command East and Herat with the
proviso that the overall Auxiliary Police numbers of 11,271 not be exceeded. Longterm solutions to the training, equipping, paying and sustaining of Auxiliary Police
forces and their command and control relationships with the central government and
the local authorities are still under development.
25. The Afghan National Civil Order Police is a newly formed force that will
eventually grow to a total of 5,000. It will replace the Afghan Standby Police and
will perform as a high quality, more mobile, better equipped and responsive element
of the national police force. It will provide an urban SWAT/riot-control capability,
and a more viable police presence in higher threat rural areas. The Combined
Security Transition Command will man, train, equip and field an initial operational
capability by 10 May 2007 for the Civil Order Police.
Judicial reform and rule of law
26. From an ISAF perspective, the slow progress of the international effort in this
area remains extremely problematic as it undermines efforts to improve security.
However, there has been a revitalized international effort in this arena. The
international community has been meeting on a monthly basis since October in the
International Coordination Group for Justice Reform, co-chaired by Italy and
UNAMA. The United States chaired a rule of law conference on Dubai in
December, and Italy and the United Nations will be co-chairing a high-level rule of
law conference in Rome in July. These mechanisms have reinvigorated the interim
Afghan national development strategy process in the justice sector. Interim
strategies now exist for the Ministry of Justice Supreme Court and the Attorney
General’s Office. These will be further refined after the 5th meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board, on 1 May, in time for the Rome conference.
Italy has hired a consultant to help integrate the strategies in time for the Rome

07-35701

7

S/2007/306

conference, which will guide future donor assistance. Significant results remain to
be seen.
27. There have also been some military-driven achievements in this reporting
period. ISAF is working closely with Combined Security Transition Command with
a view to continuing current initiatives, and to improving provincial assessment of
justice sector status and activity.
28. In partnership with the rule of law team of the Combined Security Transition
Command, ISAF will continue to promote coordination of military efforts in this
area. Engagement of key leaders will continue and will include utilizing links and
contacts of the Combined Security Transition Command within the Afghan justice
community as well as the maintenance and strengthening of relations with the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission. There is resolve by ISAF and the
Combined Command to approach this project in a united manner.
Neighbouring countries
29. A concerted international effort is under way to improve cooperation between
Pakistan and Afghanistan and to encourage them to find mutually beneficial
solutions to the many issues they face. In support of the efforts at improving
bilateral relations, ISAF has played a leading role in the Tripartite Commission
(Afghanistan-Pakistan-ISAF). The Commission continues to build military-tomilitary collaborative efforts and forms the most significant forum for successful
coordination with the Pakistan military along the border. Effective cross-border
relationships are essential to controlling and limiting the effectiveness of the
opposing militant forces throughout the organization’s layers of command and the
Tripartite Commission will continue to play a critical role in this respect. Beyond
the Tripartite Commission’s military-to-military efforts, a complementary civilian
effort to address the situation on both sides of the border and to deprive freedom of
movement to the opposing militant forces is essential. In addition, a comprehensive
international effort to improve the living conditions of all residents of the border
regions, to create employment opportunities, to improve educational options, and to
address tribal and ethnic grievances needs to be implemented as part of an effective
comprehensive counter-insurgency strategy for the border area.
30. Other regional relations have improved, as demonstrated by the investment
plans of India and China in Afghanistan.
Capacity of the Government of Afghanistan
31. The Policy Action Group, led by President Karzai and strongly encouraged by
the international community, in particular the Commander of ISAF, is proving to be
an effective forum in which to maintain the impetus behind various presidential and
Government of Afghanistan-led initiatives in volatile regions. ISAF will continue to
strongly support and nurture the Policy Action Group to ensure its longer-term
relevance and effectiveness.
32. At a subnational level, and in line with traditional systems, local arrangements
are being increasingly made to deal with local issues. The Government of
Afghanistan supports the arrangements under the motto “Local/tribal solutions for
local problems”, as long as the community benefits and these arrangements do not
undermine the Government’s legitimacy. This also gives an Afghan lead in finding
solutions.

8

07-35701
