290

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

4. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee to take into account
the suggestions and proposals of Member States submitted
to the Secretary-General on the subject and the views and
comments expressed at the thirty-ninth session of the
General Assembly during the debate in the Sixth Commit­
tee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad
Hoe Committee;28
5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working groups;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its fifth session a topical sum­
mary of the discussions which took place in the Sixth
Committee during the thirty-ninth session of the General
Assembly and any up-to-date and relevant documentation
on the subject;
1. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it
may require for the performance of its work;
8. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
fifth session for four weeks, from 8 April to 3 May 1985;
9. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to make every
effort to complete its mandate at its fifth session and to
submit a draft convention to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Report of the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Drafting of an International Conven­
tion against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries".
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984
39/85. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-sixth session,29
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations30 and to give increasing importance to its role in
relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and draft­
ing questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
which might be submitted to the International Law Com­
mission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contributions to the
progressive development of international law and its
codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed inter­
est for the contemporary international community, may be
suitable for progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the
future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
28 fbid., Thirty-ninth Session, Sixth Commillee. 49th-57th and 64th
meetings.
29 Ibid., Thiny-ninth Session, Supplement No. JO (A/39/10).
30 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-sixth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the com­
ments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the Interna­
tional Law Commission should continue its work on all
the topics in its current programme;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusions and
intentions of the International Law Commission con­
cerning its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in
paragraphs 385 to 397 of its report; 29
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the
increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
documentation of the International Law Commission;
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to
international organizations to respond as fully and expedi­
tiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments, observations and replies to
questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work:
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Com­
mission continue to enhance its co-operation with inter­
governmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
progressive development of international law and its
codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly31 and to
prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984
39/86. United Nations Conference on the Law of
Treaties between States and International
Organizations or between International
Organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/112 of 16 December 1982,
by which it decided that an international convention
should be concluded on the basis of the draft articles on
the law of treaties between States and international organi­
zations or between international organizations, adopted by
the International Law Commission at its thirty-fourth
session,32
Recalling also its resolution 38/ I 39 of 19 December
1983, by which it decided that the appropriate forum for
the final consideration of the draft articles should be a con­
ference of plenipotentiaries to be convened not earlier than
1985 and agreed to decide at its thirty-ninth session upon
the question of the date and place for the r.onvening of the
United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties
between States and International Organizations or
JI See Official Records ofthe General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session. Sixth
Commillee, 33rd-47th and 55th meetings.
32 Jhid.. Thirty-seventh Session. Supplement No. JO (A/37/10), chap. II,
sect. D.
