S/2015/899

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 November 2015
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 13 of Security Council
resolution 2241 (2015), by which the Council requested me to submit, within
45 days, an assessment of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), in the light of the political and security situation in South Sudan,
and to provide recommendations, including resource requirements, for UNMISS to
fulfil its mandate and support the implementation of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Pursuant to paragraph 15
of the resolution, the report includes an assessment of action by UNMISS and other
partners in support of the South Sudanese national police to date, with
recommendations for a course of action for additional support to the national police
and the joint integrated police envisaged in the peace agreement, on the basis of
lessons learned. The assessment of security planning in Juba and recommendations
on the role of UNMISS in securing key infrastructure in order to protect freedom of
movement requested in paragraph 14 of the resolution are set out in my letter dated
23 November 2015 to the President of the Council ( S/2015/903).
2.
For the preparation of the present report, a strategic review of the support
requirement for the peace process was conducted through a process jointly led by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNMISS, in close consultation
with the South Sudan integrated task force and the United Nations country team,
and partners on the ground. The assessment was conducted in two phases. The first
involved the development of a current conflict analysis, wh ich assessed the factors
contributing to the continuing hostilities and the likely threats to the implementation
of the peace agreement and the consolidation of peace. The possible roles and
priority objectives for UNMISS, both in terms of supporting the i mplementation of
the agreement and creating a conducive environment for the peace process, were
then reviewed and developed to address those threats.
3.
In the second phase, a technical review was conducted by a joint team
consisting of representatives of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Field Support, the Department of Political Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Safety and Security, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNMISS and the United Nations
country team, led by the Mission. The technical review identified the tasks and
15-20265 (E)

241115

*1520265*

S/2015/899

resources required for UNMISS to achieve the priority objectives articulate d in the
strategic review. It was undertaken through consultations held with a cross section
of South Sudanese stakeholders, including the Government, the opposition, other
political parties, local government officials, internally displaced persons, women,
young people and civil society representatives, as well as representatives of the
diplomatic community, donors, the country team, the humanitarian country team and
international and national non-governmental organizations. It was also based on
critical planning assumptions, including the commitment of the parties to fully
implementing the peace agreement, freedom of movement in line with the UNMISS
status-of-forces agreement and the support of key United Nations, regional and
international partners for the programme of transition.

II. Findings of the strategic review: conflict analysis
4.
The peace agreement mediated by the Intergovernmental Authority for
Development (IGAD) provides a framework for the parties to end hostilities and,
over a 30-month transitional phase, begin key governance reforms designed to put
South Sudan back on a path to sustainable peace and recovery. The conflict analysis
produced for the strategic review, however, identified a complex set of political,
security and institutional challenges that, if not closely monitored and addressed,
could undermine the transition and adversely affect the timely and effective
implementation of the agreement.
Political challenges
5.
Breaches of the ceasefire and the failure of the parties to meet the initial
deadlines articulated for the preparatory phase of the implementation of the peace
agreement call into question their commitment to the peace process and their
political buy-in with regard to implementation.
6.
The transitional period is likely to see additional delays in the implementation
of the peace agreement, relating to disputes over interpretations of the provisions, as
each party calculates the benefits to and costs incurred by its constituencies and
attempts to increase its gains in the run-up to the elections. The transitional
institutions are likely to become a new political battleground between
representatives of the Government, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) and the former detainees, making it
extremely difficult for democratic and governance reforms to be conducted and new
institutional arrangements to be implemented effectively.
7.
At the state level, the continued centralization of power around the Presidency
during the transition and the continued mismanagement of state resources could lead
to political alienation, stoke discontent and give rise to fragmentation. Already,
Establishment Order No. 36/2015, for the creation of 28 states, is fuelling fears of
marginalization among some minority constituencies and could trigger additional
local conflicts during the transition.
Security challenges
8.
Owing to the aforementioned lack of political buy-in among the major national
and local actors, the continuation of direct confrontations between the parties and
the multiplication of security incidents involving semi -autonomous elements of

2/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

their respective coalitions are likely. The atrocities committed during the 20 months
of conflict and general collapse of State authority in the gr eater Upper Nile region
and some parts of the greater Equatoria and greater Bahr el-Ghazal regions imply
that revenge killings and increased intercommunal violence will also be major risks
during the transition period. The continuation of hostilities, in b reach of the
permanent ceasefire, could further erode public trust in the transition and provoke
additional political blockages.
9.
Weak command and control of elements of the forces is already having a
negative impact on the security situation. Should there be a further dissolution of
command within both coalitions, the transition is likely to see an increased number
of armed actors negotiating their integration into the peace process through the use
of force, thereby undermining the positions of the main parties. Delays in the
integration of forces and the transformation of the army into a professional, unified
and ethnically diverse entity, separate from political interests, will be a key security
challenge to sustaining the peace process over the medium to long term.
10. The deep divisions among communities, in conjunction with the high levels of
brutality that have characterized the violence throughout the crisis, could lead to a
pattern of revenge killings, in particular if human rights perpetrators are not held
accountable. Retribution along these lines would probably become highly
politicized, lead to large-scale loss of life and contribute to a continuing cycle of
violence. There is a risk that organized forces of the parties could become involved,
creating an even more lethal environment for civilians and ultimately undermining
the credibility of the peace process.
11. Intercommunal conflicts over access to land, grazing rights and water have in
the past been exacerbated by the mobilization of militia s and organized forces.
Increasing tensions along these lines are evident in the greater Bahr el -Ghazal
region and especially in Western Equatoria and Central Equatoria States, which
have seen growth in the organization of community defence forces to prote ct local
populations, and could escalate to unmanageable proportions, especially in the light
of the widespread availability of small arms and the breakdown of traditional
conflict mitigation mechanisms. While the conflicts do not pose a direct threat to t he
transition, they are easily manipulated to sow discord among communities and are
also easily exploited by those with a political agenda.
Institutional challenges
12. While the Government is, in the first instance, responsible for the provision of
safety and security and basic services to its citizens, the country’s legacy of war and
the weak capacity of State institutions have rendered it virtually incapable of
discharging those basic responsibilities, even before the outbreak of the crisis.
These institutional weaknesses will also affect the ability of the transitional
institutions to carry forward their transformative agenda.
Human rights and rule of law
13. The current conflict has exacerbated the human rights situation. The parties
have engaged in deliberate and targeted killing of civilians and extrajudicial and
other unlawful killings, arbitrary arrest and detention, enforced disappearances, ill treatment and torture, the use of indiscriminate explosive weapons such as cluster

15-20265

3/18

S/2015/899

munitions and the destruction of property. Civilians have been targeted on the basis
of their ethnicity.
14. Conflict-related sexual violence remains a key feature of the conflict. Rape,
gang rape, abduction, sexual slavery, forced abortion and mutilation of women’s
bodies have been perpetrated by all sides. Similarly, grave violations against
children continue, including the recruitment and use of children, killing and
maiming, rape and other forms of sexual violence, attacks on schools and
abductions. Civil and political rights have also been severely restricted by the
Government, with representatives of the political opposition, civil society and the
media particularly affected.
15. The collapse of already-weak rule of law institutions in the context of the
national crisis, the resulting absence of an effective police force and functioning
judiciary and a weakened formal and customary justice system are likely to become
one of the most daunting challenges to overcome and risk contributing to a relapse
into conflict if impunity remains entrenched and basic law and order services are
not restored. During the transitional period, a genuine investment in the ability of
national law enforcement structures and the justice system to deliver justice will be
an important peace dividend for South Sudanese citizens. If not, it could risk
undermining the peace agreement.
Humanitarian crisis
16. Even before the conflict erupted, reliable basic social service provision was
largely non-existent and, in some areas, frequently disrupted by intercommunal
fighting. Since December 2013, the high-intensity conflict has generated
humanitarian needs of a new scale and depth. The combination of conflict,
inadequate rainfall, the deteriorating economy and the exhaustion of coping
mechanisms has caused rapidly increasing food insecurity. According to the most
recent Integrated Food Security Classification Phase report, an estimated 3.9 million
people are classified as severely food and nutrition insecure. There is a specific risk
of famine occurring between October and December unless urgent humanitarian
access is granted to the most affected areas.
17. As a consequence of the conflict, education and health facilities have been
destroyed. To date, access to education for more than 400,000 school-age children
has been interrupted. An estimated 127 health facilities are not operational owing to
looting, damage, destruction and the flight of staff. Consequently, South Sudan has
some of the world’s worst health indicators, including the highest maternal mortality
rate (2,054 per 100,000 live births). Malaria has already reached epidemic levels in
four states and has surpassed acute respiratory infections as the leading cause of
morbidity among internally displaced persons. If the deepening human itarian crisis
is not redressed, those vulnerabilities will undermine public trust and investment in
the transition, and the ability to support it, driving further displacement inside and
outside the country.
Economic stresses
18. The macroeconomic outlook during the transition is of serious concern,
marked by falling oil prices and production, high inflation, currency depreciation
and dwindling hard currency reserves at the central bank. The dramatic escalation of
market prices is also causing a severe downturn in household incomes and

4/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

livelihood opportunities, even in communities not directly affected by the conflict.
If the economic situation does not improve during the transition, widespread
dissatisfaction could lead to unrest and, ultimately, viole nce. Likewise, any failure
to pay the salaries of members of the security forces could also lead to increased
crime and violence and a fragmentation of their chain of command.

III. Priority objectives for the Mission in support of the
peace process
19. In view of the above conflict analysis, and the expectation that the transition
will face considerable political and security challenges, further displacements,
exacerbated food insecurity and humanitarian needs in the near to medium term, it
is recommended that the future UNMISS mandate be based on the priority
objectives set out below. The objectives take into account the requirement for the
Mission to continue to take forward the core pillars of its existing mandate, while
according priority to supporting key provisions of the peace agreement that are
essential for the agreement to gain traction over the coming two years.

A.

Political support for the implementation of the peace agreement
Provide good offices, advice and support to the Transitional Government of
National Unity and other partners to enable the implementation of the peace
agreement at the national and subnational levels
20. To support the consolidation of the peace process and carry out the
responsibilities of the United Nations articulated in the peace agreement, my Special
Representative and the Mission should use their good offices with the parties and
other South Sudanese stakeholders to assist in resolving deadlocks over the
implementation of the various aspects of the agreement. The participation of my
Special Representative in the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission would
be one of the principal vehicles through which the good offices function would be
used, in support of the Chair, Festus Mogae. Concurrently, UNMISS cou ld engage
with the national, state and local authorities to support the formulation of national
policies, based on transparency, participatory and accountable decision -making, and
facilitate the inclusion and participation of women at all levels of governa nce.
21. At the regional and international levels, my Special Representative will engage
with the members of the “IGAD-plus” group and other partners to ensure effective
coordination and encourage sustained and unified political engagement with the
parties throughout the transition to ensure the full and timely implementation of the
peace agreement.
Assist in the establishment, reconstitution and maintenance of institutions and
mechanisms for the implementation of the peace agreement
22. The peace agreement provides for dedicated institutions and mechanisms that
must be made operational for its implementation. Through its representation in the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, UNMISS will be able to assess the
progress and assist, if needed, in the establishment and reconstitution of those
bodies, and provide support to them, in accordance with the priorities set out below.

15-20265

5/18

S/2015/899

Support the Transitional Government of National Unity in making constitutional
and legislative adjustments, as articulated in the peace agreement
23. Constitutional processes are inherently political. Before the crisis, UNMISS
provided technical and advisory services to the national authorities and coordinated
international support for the constitutional review process. It also engaged
extensively with key government actors, the National Legislative Assembly and
related national institutions in support of the related country -wide civic education
programme. In accordance with the request for assistance from regional and
international partners contained in chapter VI of the peace agreement, UNMISS, in
coordination with the United Nations country team and other partners, should
re-establish its support for the constitutional review process, including through
extensive engagement at the political level. On the basis of lessons learned, the
Mission could also support the coordination of international partner support for the
process.
Assist the Transitional Government of National Unity in the planning of credible
national elections
24. While electoral support would be included among the medium -term to longterm priorities of the United Nations in South Sudan, in view of the expected
limited capacity of a reconstituted national election commission to organize
elections, the scale of support required to ensure a credible electoral process and the
specific request for United Nations support in chapter I of the peace agreement, it is
strongly recommended that the United Nations offer to provide technical electoral
assistance as soon as the commission has been established, and no later than
24 months before the election date. The assistance would be delivered in an
integrated manner under the leadership of UNMISS and include advice with regard
to the review and drafting of relevant electoral legislation, including the electionrelated provisions of the Constitution, the Political Parties Act and the National
Elections Act. Politically, the Mission would, through its good offices, contribute to
preventing and resolving disputes that could accompany the electoral process. It
would also contribute to electoral security through the use of its police and military
assets.

B.

Contribution to the improvement of the security situation
25. In accordance with the requirement for support from the United Nations and
other partners to make operational the ceasefire and transitional security
arrangements, as provided for in chapter II of the peace agreement and the
associated annexes, it is recommended that UNMISS provide the support set out
below.
Support the monitoring, investigation, verification and resolution of violations of
the ceasefire through the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism, including the monitoring of the separation, assembly
and cantonment of forces
26. Upon the entry into force of the permanent ceasefire, the IGAD Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism, established as part of the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement of 23 January 2014, began its transition into the Ceasefire and

6/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. Once made
operational, the Mechanism will be responsible for monitoring compliance and will
report directly to the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission on the
implementation of the permanent ceasefire and transitional security arrangements.
As detailed in the peace agreement, the responsibilities of the Mechanism will be
significantly greater than those ascribed to its predecessor, given that it will be
tasked with monitoring and reporting on the full co mplement of security
arrangements set out in the agreement, including the separation, assembly and
cantonment of the forces of the signatories and the implementation of the security
provisions relating to Juba.
27. UNMISS is already supporting six IGAD monitoring and verification teams
deployed in Bor, Bentiu, Malakal, Melut, Nassir and Juba through the provision of
force protection and logistical and technical assistance. In view of the additional
responsibilities assigned to the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism, the current IGAD Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
is planning to expand its operations to include up to 12 teams. It is proposed that the
Mission work to extend the current force protection and logistical a nd technical
assistance arrangements to the additional teams, which will also be located within
existing UNMISS bases. Additional support could also include using United Nations
military liaison officers to work with teams in specified areas of operations,
providing assistance with threat assessments and situational awareness information,
engaging in patrol planning with the teams, supporting reporting on ceasefire
violations and monitoring of cantonment sites and supporting the ratification of the
implementation matrix of the ceasefire master map.
28. In the absence of the final ceasefire master map, which identifies the
signatories’ planned cantonment locations, it is assessed that cantonment sites of
high operational significance will be located in Upper Nile and Unity States. To
enable sufficient force protection for the activities of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism in the greater Upper Nile area, an
augmentation of the force by one company in Malakal is proposed within a
relatively short time frame. That increase can be taken forward incrementally, as the
signatories prepare for the separation, assembly and cantonment of their forces.
29. To make operational the initial Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism assessment visits and registration and
screening of personnel and weaponry in cantonment sites, force protection
movement will be conducted through a mixture of air movements and ground
operations or through the force marine unit in advance of the arrival of the
monitoring and verification teams, as resources permit. To support the continued
monitoring of the cantonment sites, UNMISS is reviewing the practicality of
establishing a patrol pattern of approximately one visit to some 5 0 cantonment sites
every 7 to 10 days.
Provide advisory support and specialized capacity-building for the deployment
and operations of the joint integrated police units
30. Before the outbreak of the crisis, and in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1996 (2011), UNMISS invested heavily in the institutional transformation
of the national police. Since the crisis, however, and with the reprioritization of its
mandate pursuant to resolution 2155 (2014), UNMISS has limited its engagement

15-20265

7/18

S/2015/899

with the national police, subject to the human rights due diligence policy on United
Nations support to non-United Nations security forces, to operational coordination
aimed at enhancing the protection of civilians under threat of violence, including
those in UNMISS sites for the protection of civilians and in areas of potential
return.
31. Since late 2014, engagement with the national police has included supporting a
confidence and trust-building policing strategy. The strategy, currently in a pilot
phase, is aimed at fostering a secure environment for internally displaced persons in
Juba by identifying and securing areas of voluntary return. Subject to the human
rights due diligence policy, the Mission coordinated workshops to raise the
awareness of 104 (60 men and 44 women) national police officers with regard to
civilian protection principles, including human rights and community -oriented
policing. UNMISS, UNDP, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women and bilateral partners jointly provided technical support
and basic equipment in support of the strategy. In addition, UNDP provided
training, equipment and technical support for the issuance of identificat ion cards for
police officers participating in the project. An emergency call centre for Juba was
also set up with the support of UNDP and bilateral partners. The first groups of
trained police officers are operating in the Khor William neighbourhood of Ju ba, to
which some 150 internally displaced families have returned to date. The strategy is
also being piloted in two other neighbourhoods in Juba.
32. As the primary mechanism currently envisaged in the peace agreement for the
provision of security in Juba, Bor, Bentiu and Malakal, the formation and
deployment of the joint integrated police should be supported by the United Nations
and other partners. According to the outcomes of the follow -up meeting to the
workshop on the permanent ceasefire and transitional security arrangements, held in
Addis Ababa from 21 October to 3 November, the parties have agreed that the joint
integrated police in Juba will number 3,000 officers, while 2,400 officers will be
deployed in Bor, Malakal and Bentiu.
33. The officers will require training and equipment to carry out their tasks
appropriately and professionally. On the basis of lessons learned from supporting
the confidence and trust-building policing strategy, a joint UNMISS and UNDP
programme is proposed to support the establishment and initial operations of the
police through training support and advisory assistance and the rehabilitation or
establishment of police facilities, with an initial focus on areas in which UNMISS
protection sites are located. UNMISS support for training on community-oriented
policing, investigations, including into sexual and gender -based violence, and
professional ethics and human rights would be complemented by UNDP and partner
efforts to support institutional capacity-building, training facilities and basic office
equipment and furniture to make the police units operational in the areas in which
they will be deployed. UNMISS could also support a needs assessment, strategy
development and operational planning with the police secretariat. The Un ited
Nations police personnel required for these additional tasks would be sourced
through an increase of up to 100 specialist individual police officers, the
redeployment of officers from the United Nations police headquarters and the
closure of county support bases. The Mission would also provide technical advice
on setting up oversight mechanisms and other mitigation measures in compliance
with the human rights due diligence policy.

8/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

34. Long-term institution-building will be addressed through a multi-year joint
United Nations rule of law programme, at the appropriate time. In that context,
UNMISS could focus on providing assistance with regard to the eventual
establishment of an integrated, democratic, accountable and responsive police
service.
Support the parties in the establishment and operations of the Joint Operations
Centre to help to coordinate and reduce conflict among security operations
in Juba
35. The establishment of the Joint Operations Centre is foreseen as a means to
coordinate the movements of and reduce conflict among the forces authorized to
remain in Juba. It will be staffed by representatives of the national security forces
and the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism.
As at 3 November, the parties had agreed to allow 4,380 members of security forces
to remain in Juba, in addition to the previously agreed 3,000 joint integrated police
officers.
36. Within those planning parameters, proposed UNMISS support to the Joint
Operations Centre, subject to human rights due diligence policy considerations,
would include the deployment of six staff officers to the Centre, the provision of
technical advice for the initial establishment of the Centre and the provision of
support to the Centre in its efforts to coordinate the security actors in Juba.

C.

Protection of civilians
Protect and deter violence against civilians, including in areas of origin and
of displacement
37. Since the crisis broke out in December 2013, the Mission’s physical civilian
protection activities have largely been centred around the provision of security to
the some 180,000 civilians currently seeking protection at UNMISS protection sites.
That resource-intensive endeavour has challenged the Mission’s ability to provide
physical protection for civilians outside the sites. Its efforts have been further
undermined by movement restrictions imposed by the Government and the
opposition, poor infrastructure, a lack of security for the use of UNMISS air assets
and troop reluctance to regularly project beyond the perimeters of the sites.
38. The challenges notwithstanding, it is assessed that more can be done to extend
protection beyond the sites. A detailed review of current military troop -to-task
arrangements has identified an opportunity to rescale the perimeter security
provided by the military so that a portion of the resources can be diverted to achieve
greater projection to areas of displacement, return and resettlement. This would, of
course, be preceded by a thorough security and threat analysis of protection sites
and be based on conditions. Military reinforcement in the form of quick -reaction
elements would remain at the sites to support strengthened formed police units,
should the scale or complexity of the threat exceed United Nations police capacity.
39. Forces relieved of some static site security tasks would be used to pilot
temporary austere operating bases in areas of particular concern and expand the
conduct of short-duration and long-duration patrols and dismounted foot patrols.
Integrated patrols, leveraging not only the UNMISS force and police components

15-20265

9/18

S/2015/899

but also involving human rights, protection of civilians, child protection, civil
affairs and women protection advisers, would also be increased to bring to bear the
full range of physical and other protection tools at the Mission’s disposal.
40. The deployment of unarmed and unmanned aerial systems and other related
forms of technology should also be expedited to strengthen the early warning and
early response mechanisms used by the Mission in order to deliver on its mandate to
protect civilians.
Maintain public safety and security of and within protection sites
41. To date, protection sites have succeeded in protecting civilians from the threat
of physical violence. UNMISS is currently providing physical protection to 178,906
internally displaced persons residing in six sites, including 99,930 in Bentiu, 47,791
in Malakal and 27,950 in Juba. Increasingly, however, overcrowding and complex
ethnic and intercommunal tensions between displaced communities are threatening
the internal safety and security of the sites. As at September 2015, the Mission had
recorded and responded to more than 2,900 security incidents at the sites, varying
from the minor to the serious, including killings, sexual violence , crime and attacks
against United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
42. UNMISS is in need of additional police personnel to control access to the
sites, provide sufficient police patrols and presence, respond to criminal incidents in
a timely manner, ensure public order during humanitarian distributions and provide
security for UNMISS holding facilities. Additional formed police unit capacity is
required to provide protection to individual police officers and United Nations and
humanitarian personnel, conduct crowd control and respond to security incidents
within the sites.
43. In line with the above analysis, it is recommended that 500 additional formed
police unit personnel be deployed to Juba (160), Malakal (70) and Bentiu (270).
Individual police officers made available by the closure of county support bases and
the restructuring of the police component will be used to focus more on protection
tasks. Posts currently used for managing holding facilities under the police ceiling
would be returned to the police component and 78 dedicated government-provided
corrections personnel with the appropriate skills to perform the function would be
separately deployed to the sites in Juba, Malakal, Bentiu and Bor. Given that the
tasks assigned to unarmed individual police officers entail a certain degree of
physical enforcement, including apprehension and preventive search, a minimum
level of personal protective equipment is required. Further security infrastructure,
including video surveillance and emergency call po ints, could be introduced to
facilitate a more preventive environment.
44. In the light of possible bureaucratic impediments and the Mission’s limited
absorption capacity, a phased deployment of additional police units may be achieved
by either generating new units or expanding the current formed police units through
immediate surge.
Support the strengthening of local conflict resolution and reconciliation
mechanisms to prevent, mitigate and manage intercommunal violence
45. UNMISS, together with United Nations partners, will need to continue to
accord priority to efforts to mitigate intercommunal violence. This will include

10/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

facilitation of grass-roots and state-level forums in partnership with local leaders,
including women leaders, faith-based groups and agencies to promote dialogue and
reconciliation. The Mission will assist national peace and reconciliation platforms to
implement their activities across the states, facilitate intercommunal conflict
management activities between communities in conflict, including dialogue between
pastoralist and farming communities, promote the coordination of conflict
management activities of international actors throughout South Sudan through a
regular forum and engage in regular joint activities with UNMISS public
information officials and Radio Miraya to promote news of peace and reconciliation
activities.
46. UNMISS should also continue to work with traditional community leaders to
strengthen their role as arbiters and mediators within dialogue processes, an
essential element of conflict transformation, restorative justice and reconciliation.
Furthermore, the Mission will conduct a state-wide mapping of active and dormant
local conflict resolution mechanisms and engage with partners to activate or
strengthen those forums in accordance with human rights standards.
Foster a secure environment for the eventual safe, dignified, voluntary and
informed return and resettlement of internally displaced persons and refugees
47. The cessation of hostilities and implementation of the peace agreement will be
the single greatest contribution to the creation of a secure environment for returns of
internally displaced persons and refugees and other durable solutions. Efforts by the
UNMISS force to project outwards and provide security in areas of return can only
complement a secure environment built by the signatories. The Mission’s support to
the Transitional Government of National Unity in establishing the various bodies
envisaged in the agreement, including those mechanisms desi gned to build
confidence between the security forces and internally displaced persons, such as the
joint integrated police, will gradually help to shape a more protective environment
in which civilians can resettle or return to their homes. To this end, in ternally
displaced persons need to be fully informed of conditions in areas of potential return
or resettlement in order to ensure the voluntary nature of any movement, which will
require dedicated outreach by the Mission and humanitarian partners.
48. A robust landmine and unexploded ordnance clearance capacity, such that
existing minefields and contaminated areas will be cleared, will help to facilitate the
return or resettlement of internally displaced persons or refugees without fear of
explosive hazards. The United Nations Mine Action Service would focus on high priority road verification and clearance to facilitate freedom of movement for
civilians and safe access for the Mission and humanitarian partners.

D.

Human rights
Monitor, investigate, verify and report on violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, with a particular focus on gross violations,
violations against children and conflict-related sexual violence
49. UNMISS should continue to accord priority to monitoring, investigating,
verifying and regularly reporting on the human rights situation, including in relation
to the implementation of the peace agreement. This should be done with a view to:

15-20265

11/18

S/2015/899

(a) Identifying early warning signals and trends of persons at risk to feed
into and inform the Mission’s responses with regard to the protection of civilians;
(b) Increasing the Mission’s capacity to investigate human rights violations,
including conflict-related sexual violence, in order to enhance regular reporting and
support accountability processes;
(c) Identifying challenges to the protection of human rights and engaging
United Nations agencies, UNMISS substantive sections and the relevant
government institutions in facilitating action to tackle those challenges throu gh
advocacy, law reform, policy change, training, awareness-raising and capacitybuilding;
(d) Issuing regular public reports to inform national and international
political processes, support accountability processes and support advocacy efforts.
Support the Transitional Government of National Unity in ensuring the
compliance with international human rights standards of the foreseen new
constitutional and legislative frameworks mandated under the peace agreement
50. The human rights mandate of the Mission should enable it to provide
immediate technical assistance and advice to the Transitional Government of
National Unity vis-à-vis the enactment of the institutional and legislative reforms
foreseen in chapters I, IV and VI of the peace agreement. As far as the constitutional
review process is concerned, this will include the provision of technical assistance
and advisory services to ensure that the new constitution provides adequate
protection of human rights and that the development of new legislation i s in
accordance with applicable human rights standards. In the medium term, UNMISS
would advocate and assist in the harmonization of statutory and customary legal
frameworks in accordance with international legal and human rights standards to
avoid the recurrence of unaddressed grievances and conflict.
Support the national authorities, civil society and victims in combating impunity
and establishing transitional justice mechanisms, including by supporting the
development of the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing, judicial
processes and a reparations framework, in compliance with international human
rights standards
51. In the immediate term, the Mission’s Human Rights Division would monitor
and provide advisory support to the transitional j ustice processes, as stipulated in
chapter V of the peace agreement, to ensure that those responsible for human rights
violations, including conflict-related sexual violence and grave violations against
children, are prosecuted without delay and tried in accordance with international
fair trial standards. As appropriate, the Division would also provide technical advice
to the national authorities and support the participation of victims in the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms, in compliance with international
human rights standards. The Division would support the Transitional Government of
National Unity and where appropriate, international mechanisms, in the conduct of
investigations into human rights violations and abuses and support and mo nitor
prosecution processes, as appropriate. Through its presence at the national and state
levels, the Division would also continue to engage with national authorities and
institutions, seeking accountability and redress for verified human rights violatio ns,

12/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

while ensuring that adequate protection mechanisms were in place for victims and
witnesses.
52. Should the transitional justice mechanisms provided for in chapter V of the
peace agreement be established, significant resources would be needed to support
national consultations, the establishment of the Commission for Truth,
Reconciliation and Healing and the Compensation and Reparation Authority and the
provision of expert advice to the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, if required. This
should be carried out with other relevant UNMISS components and the United
Nations country team, notably with the support of the global focal point for police,
justice and corrections areas arrangement.
Support civil society and national human rights institutions to ensure
accountability for human rights violations
53. Supporting human rights defenders, the media and groups for victims and
survivors should be accorded priority. To empower civil society, enhance its
capacity to combat impunity and strengthen people’s rights to justice, truth and
reparation, the Mission’s Human Rights Division would develop specific
programmes and strategies to support access to justice for victims and strengthen
capacity to monitor and report on violations. Such programmes should include
training on standards, support for the development of protection mechanisms and
the empowerment of victims to gain access to justice for past violations.
54. In addition, there should be specific emphasis on providing technical
assistance to the South Sudan Human Rights Commission to enhance its capacity to
monitor, verify and promote human rights.
Human rights due diligence policy
55. Support for several security provisions in the peace agreement, including the
joint integrated police and the Joint Operations Centre, requires strengthened
capacity in the Mission to adequately implement the human rights due diligence
policy.
Conflict-related sexual violence
56. The level of conflict-related sexual violence remains high, as does the threat of
further violence against women and girls. Accordingly, UNMISS should continue to
work towards the implementation of resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013) by
monitoring, analysing and reporting on patterns and trends of conflict -related sexual
violence and by strengthening internal capacity in that regard through training,
prevention and efforts to address accountability. UNMISS and United Nations
agencies would undertake activities relating to advocacy, mainstreaming, training
and capacity-building and raising awareness inside and outside the Mission on
conflict-related sexual violence concerns to enhance prevention and response. The
Mission would also continue to coordinate the conflict -related sexual violence
mandate, provide senior-level engagement with and technical support to the parties
to the conflict with regard to the implementation of their joint communiqués and
advocate the integration of prevention and accountability with regard to such
violations into security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and justice reform processes.

15-20265

13/18

S/2015/899

Child protection
57. Grave and widespread violations against children continue to be committed by
all parties to the conflict. UNMISS should continue to emphasize the monitoring,
verification and reporting of the six grave violations against children, in line with
the Security Council’s mandate on children in armed conflict. The Mission should
also continue to advocate that the Government fully and immediately implement its
revised action plan to end and prevent grave violations committed against children,
and support it in doing so. Similarly, it should also help SPLM/A in Opposition to
immediately act on its commitment to end grave violations and abuses against
children, and support it in doing so.
58. Provisions relating to child protection in the peace agreement, notably with
regard to assisting the separation of children from armed forces and armed groups
through the screening of cantonment sites, will require prioritized engagement from
relevant UNMISS, United Nations country team and humanitarian country team
actors.

E.

Creation of the conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
Contribute, in close coordination with humanitarian actors, to the creation of
security conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance so as to
enable, in accordance with humanitarian principles, the rapid, safe and
unhindered access of relief personnel and assets to all those in need and ensure
the security of the installations and equipment necessary for the implementation
of mandated tasks, as appropriate
59. To support humanitarian efforts to reach the most vulnerable and prevent a
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation, UNMISS will be required
throughout the transitional period to contribute, in close coordination with
humanitarian actors, to the creation of security conditions conducive to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.
60. To expand the reach of humanitarian access to previously inaccessible
conflict-affected communities, UNMISS vehicle patrols will be needed to project
further along routes commonly used by relief personnel. The establishment of
forward operating bases and foot patrols will be required in areas in which
humanitarian and protection needs are high in order to secure them for the safe
delivery of assistance. The continued risk of violence targeting humanitarian
personnel and the looting of humanitarian supplies will, where required, necessitate
the continuing co-location of humanitarian facilities and offices inside some
UNMISS bases and humanitarian hubs. Ethnic tensions and crime in some of the
protection sites also pose a serious threat to the humanitarian staff working within
those areas. UNMISS will continue to be required to provide safety, as appropriate,
and in close coordination with humanitarian agencies, during humanitarian
operations.
61. Owing to the poor road conditions, which create bottlenecks in supply lines,
the UNMISS contribution, alongside the humanitarian country team, in assi sting in
the maintenance of key infrastructure (roads, airfields, river ports, etc.) will be
essential for the timely delivery of humanitarian assistance.

14/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

F.

Rule of law and security institutions
62. The peace agreement provides for United Nations investment in the rule of law
and security sector transformation. To this end, it is recommended that UNMISS
accord priority to the provision of strategic and technical advice in support of
elements of the peace agreement that will enhance respect for the rul e of law and
pave the way for future institution-building initiatives, generate popular trust in rule
of law institutions by demonstrating the commitment and capacity of national
institutions to hold accountable those who have committed serious crimes, inc luding
atrocity crimes and crimes that fuel conflict, and deliver security through improved
policing, penitentiary services, security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
Assist the parties in promoting the rule of law, including by supporting national
investigative and prosecutorial processes and legislative reform and coordinating
support for police, justice and correctional institutions
63. A modest justice and corrections advisory capacity is proposed to work
alongside other UNMISS components. It would:
(a) Support the coordination of international support for rule of law
institutions in accordance with the global focal point arrangement;
(b) Liaise and engage in advocacy with national rule of law institutions (the
judiciary, prosecutors, the Ministry of Justice and the prison authorities) on the
relevant aspects of the peace agreement and protection of civilians;
(c) Provide advice and technical support to the legislative reform process
outlined in the peace agreement in the areas of police, justice and corrections;
(d) Provide advice, mentoring and technical support, through a small
prosecution support capacity, including five government -provided justice personnel,
to nationally led efforts to investigate and prosecute serious crimes attributed to
State actors, security forces or members of armed groups, including atrocity crimes
and crimes that fuel conflict;
(e) Provide an assessment of the state and composition of the rule of law
institutions throughout the country, the impact of pre-conflict initiatives to
strengthen those institutions and the recommended approach to any Mission
engagement in further capacity-building;
(f) Support the United Nations police component in curriculum development
for the joint integrated police.
64. The rule of law capacity will provide corrections services capable of taking on
the challenge of managing the holding facilities located at the protection sites in
Juba, Malakal, Bor and Bentiu and judicial advisory expertise to ensure foll ow-up
on cases handed over to the national authorities. This includes the management of
78 government-provided corrections personnel, ensuring adequate material
standards and management of detention case files with regard to detainee rights.

15-20265

15/18

S/2015/899

Support the planned strategic defence and security review towards the
development of a road map for security sector transformation that includes the
development of national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform strategies
65. Security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
at the core of the permanent ceasefire and transitional security arrangements set out
in chapter II of the peace agreement. In both areas, UNMISS has a comparative
advantage in monitoring and evaluation, coordination and the provision of advice
and expertise, including in the development of specific plans and strategies.
66. In view of the current political, security and economic situation, however, the
feasibility of launching either security sector reform or disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration is limited. Moreover, given the limited appetite among traditional
security sector reform and/or disarmament, demobilization and reintegration donors
based in Juba to fund large-scale programmatic efforts, it is recommended that
United Nations assistance in these areas be provided in a sequenced manner, with
the achievement of specific benchmarks a prerequisite for additional support.
Furthermore, it should follow the overall principle o f national ownership centred on
inclusive participation in the formation of professional security services. Pending
credible progress in the security sector reform process, UNMISS may consider
scaling up its security sector reform and disarmament, demobili zation and
reintegration capacity to provide enhanced advisory, technical and capacity -building
support at a later stage.
67. Bearing this in mind, it is recommended that UNMISS establish a small
advisory security sector reform capacity to support politica l agreement on security
sector reform provisions through advice to my Special Representative. If requested,
the capacity would also provide technical advice and expertise to inform the future
security sector transformation.
68. Similarly, a small disarmament, demobilization and reintegration capacity
should be established to provide technical advice, planning and coordination
support. Clear benchmarks should be established to measure progress on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and enable the s caling up of the
capacity in the future, if needed.

III. Mission support considerations
69. To take forward support for the implementation of the peace agreement, as
articulated above, together with the operational adjustments required to improve the
implementation of current mandated tasks, a minimal increase in the number of
substantive staff will be required. In addition, a moderate increase in the number of
troop and police personnel would enable the Mission to take forward new tasks
without diverting resources already being used for mandated tasks.
70. The troop and police ceiling would each be raised to accommodate an
additional 500 and 600 personnel, respectively. A total of 78 government -provided
corrections personnel would also be required to manage holding facilities within
UNMISS protection sites, as would five government -provided justice personnel to
support national criminal investigations and prosecutions.

16/18

15-20265

S/2015/899

71. To support additional tasks and to enable the introduction of new military and
police personnel, the Mission would also require additional force enablers,
including an engineering company to be located in Bentiu, up to 13 additional air
assets, a level II medical facility, also to be positioned in Bentiu, to support more
than 1,600 uniformed personnel and civilians, and the replacement of the existing
level II facility with a level III facility in Juba, which would be critical to providing
essential emergency medical services to the increased number of uniformed
personnel deployed since the surge.

IV. Observations
72. The recommendations contained herein are premised on the assumption that
the signatories to the agreement will make the compromises necessary to enable the
operationalization of the security arrangements and commit themselves
unreservedly to the peace process.
73. To help the peace agreement to gain traction during this critical early phase of
its implementation, and given the requirement that the Mission continue to
implement its current mandated tasks, I recommend that the Security Council
structure the future mandate of UNMISS around the priority objectives outlined
herein. Doing so will enable the Mission to provide support to the Transitional
Government of National Unity and other institutions of the transition a nd make the
operational adjustments required to enhance the delivery of existing mandated tasks.
74. My Special Representative has consulted a number of government
stakeholders on the findings and recommendations presented herein, including the
Minister for Cabinet Affairs, the Minister of Defence and Veterans’ Affairs, the
Minister of Justice, the Minister of the Interior and the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs. She has also consulted actors in Addis Ababa, including the leaders of
SPLM/A in Opposition, representatives of the former detainees, the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union and the Office of the IGAD Special
Envoys for South Sudan. All those stakeholders said that UNMISS support for the
implementation of the peace agreement would be necessary.
75. For the most part, the Government has expressed the view that UNMISS
should be granted a wide-reaching institutional capacity-building mandate that
includes providing comprehensive support to the joint integrated police and the
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes,
but should not assume any direct responsibility for security matters. SPLM/A in
Opposition requested UNMISS assistance in ensuring that the ceasefire was
respected and that the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission was able to
fulfil its role. The former detainees underscored the need for UNMISS peacekeepers
to step up their activities to protect civilians.
76. Meanwhile, the Chair of the IGAD Special Envoys emphasized the need for
UNMISS support in monitoring the ceasefire and identifying those responsible for
any violations. They also highlighted the need for future assistance in the
coordination of electoral support and good offices towards the holding of credible
and transparent elections. The Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union highlighted the need for UNMISS to support the Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission pending the establishment of an African
Union mission in the country. Both voiced support for the idea of a flexible and
phased approach to the review of the Mission’s mandate, so that it would be able to
adapt to the evolving political and security environment.

15-20265

17/18

S/2015/899

77. The priority objectives recommended herein broadly address t he needs
identified by the stakeholders. I urge the Security Council to consider the
recommendations in their deliberations on the UNMISS mandate. To take forward
the priority objectives and related tasks, I recommend the authorization of an
additional 500 troops, 600 police personnel and 83 corrections and justice
government-provided personnel. Additional air assets and a minimal increase in
substantive expertise will also be necessary.
78. Partners within the United Nations system, in particular the Unite d Nations
country team, will have important roles to play in many of the areas identified
herein. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have a comparative
advantage with regard to supporting several provisions of the peace agreement.
Close coordination between the Mission and the country team will be important to
develop a coherent United Nations effort in support of the implementation of the
agreement. The contribution of the country team to the current mandated tasks of
UNMISS has been vital thus far and will need to continue in the coming mandate
period. Likewise, the engagement of other stakeholders, in particular IGAD and the
African Union, will be critical for the successful implementation of the peace
agreement. Both organizations have leading roles to play in this respect, and close
collaboration with them will be essential.
79. UNMISS is not in a position to deliver all the support necessary to ensure the
success of the peace process. Substantial resources will be required to take forward
the framework for democratic transformation, good governance, justice and
reconciliation, reparations and healing and early recovery provided for in the peace
agreement. Technical and financial assistance must be provided to the Transitional
Government of National Unity in support of peace. I would encourage donors to
support the implementation of the programme of transition in a coordinated manner.
The dire humanitarian situation in the country must not be forgotten. I appeal to
donors to continue to fund the humanitarian effort, as long as needs persist.
80. Given the fluidity of the political and security situation on the ground, I
recommend that a flexible and phased approach be taken to defining the Mission’s
engagement in South Sudan. The political dynamics and progress towards the
implementation of the peace agreement should be reassessed regularly to ensure that
the Mission’s mandate and capabilities reflect the requirements of the operating
environment. A period of one year should be allowed to implemen t the
recommended mandate changes and assess their impact.
81. Owing to the delays in the implementation of the pre -transition provisions of
the peace agreement, several planning assumptions that informed the review need to
be refined. Once the Transitional Government of National Unity has been formed,
and the joint integrated police command and the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism have been established, an in -depth
consultation will have to be held to clarify the priori tization of their tasks, develop
their operational plans and further assess the support needed to progressively scale
up their operations.
82. Lastly, a number of the recommendations included herein fundamentally rely
on the commitment and improved cooperation with the national authorities. I call
upon the parties to take all action necessary to allow UNMISS to operate freely, in
accordance with the provisions of the status-of-forces agreement, during the
transition.

18/18

15-20265
