TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
rd
MEETING:

NEW

19 JUNE 1968

YORK

CONTENTS
. .. , .. . ,. , . . .. , .. .. ,, . . ... .. . .

Page
1

,. . . . ., . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . .. . .. ,. . ... . .. . .

1

Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent Representatives of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America addressed to the President of the
, . . . . . .. . . .. . .. . . .. . .. . .. .. . ... . . ..
Security Council (S/8630)

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1433)

Adoption

of the agenda

SJPV. 1433

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

i

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-THIRD

MEETING

eld in New York on Wednesday, 19 June 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Arthur J. GOLDBERG
(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1433)
I.

Adoption of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8630).
Adoption of the agenda

of retaining only those likely to be of ephemeral advantage
to us. Now more than ever, when contingent needs threaten
the whole concept of international life, support for the
principles of the Charter should be a duty for us all.
4. If the sponsors wanted to secure the approval of the
United Nations, it would have been better for them to refer
to all the relevant provisions of the Charter instead of just a
few.
5. But how could they do otherwise when the intention is
that a universal organization Iike the United Nations should
endorse new machinery of a discriminatory nature? For
example, the resolution provides for sanctions on a worldwide basis, whereas the benefit of nuclear “protection”
accrues only to the signatories of the Treaty. In view of the
bias in the draft resolution-and we have shown only one of
its most regrettable features-the United Nations would be
endorsing a treaty not in conformity with its principles and
at the same time would be assuming the serious responsibility for creating machinery giving rise to many misgivings.
What exactly is this machinery?

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 12 June 1968 from the Permanent Representatives of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8630)

*

1. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
proceed with its consideration of the question before it, in
the expectation, as I indicated yesterday, of concluding the
discussion and proceeding to a vote on the draft resolution
submitted by the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and
the United States of America [S/8631].
2. Mr.
BOUATTOURA
(Algeria)
(translated
from
French): The declarations made to the Security Council by
the three Powers and the draft resolution they have
submitted constitute, in the view of the sponsors and of
those who have affirmed their faith in the non-proliferation
treaty, a necessary supplement to that Treaty.
3. My delegation has already stated at some length its
position of the problem of security guarantees. We shall not
repeat all the criticisms we have already made but shall
mention only a few of them. My delegation would simply
point out, to begin with, that when it subscribed to the
principles of the Charter it intended to abide fully by its
obligations. Those obligations form an integral whole and
we do not see how it can now be possible to make a
selection among the fundamental principles for the purpose

6. For a start there is the fact that the draft resolution
gives the Treaty the character of a collective security pact
under which only the signatories can benefit from the
security guarantees.
7. Then there is the fact that it is quite unprecedented for
the Security Council to act as guarantor for any treaty.
8. Furthermore, up to now the preservation and maintenance of peace has depended, within the framework of
the United Nations, upon the agreement of the five
permanent members. The new machinery, however, will
require the agreement of only three of those members, thus
upsetting the balance arrived at with such difficulty when
the Security Council was established.
9. One of two things must happen. Either the members of
the Security Council who are sponsoring the resolution will,
in the event of a dispute, be able to secure the support of
the other two permanent members, in which case why
should that not be done immediately so as to forestall an
abstention by France or the exclusion of China? Or,
alternatively, it will prove impossible to obtain such
support and the draft resolution will, in effect, amount to
stripping the Security Council of’ its prerogative in respect
of the maintenance and safeguarding of nuclear peace.
10. Is there any need to point out that the adoption of
such machinery through this draft resolution, is tantamount
to an indirect alteration of the Charter?

-

11. On this point there is sure to be some astonishment
regarding the ambiguity in paragraph 1. If one acceptsthat
the permanent members are the only Powers to possess
nuclear weapons, sooner or later it will be necessaryto take
that elementary and fundamental fact to its logical conclusion. If, on the other hand, one yields to the temptation to
adopt the view that the nuclear Powers are not only those
which, under the Charter, and in their capacity as permanent members, have assumed a special responsibility in
respect of the maintenance of peace, then it would clearly
be necessary to amend the Charter. Either the United
Nations will have to contemplate two categories of maintenance of peace or it will have to make a proper amendment
to Article 23.
12. As a means of overcoming these differences, we
recommended the adoption of certain principles, which
have not been taken into account. During the debate in the
First Committee,’ we pointed out that the draft resolution
appeared to be prejudicial to one of the five permanent
members of the Security Council, namely, the People’s
Republic of China. We did not fail to point out that the
absence of the People’s Republic of China from the United
Nations was one of the most serious drawbacks to the draft
resolution and that no draft resolution of that character
could be really effective so long as such an ostracism
persisted. In our opinion, the restoration of the legitimate
rights of the People’s Republic of China in the United
Nations is the ultimate criterion for the effectivenessof the
draft resolution.

commitments like those entered into by the three other
permanent members of the Security Council.
17. My delegation would like to expressthe wishthat the
present stage, now drawing to a close, will provide vahiable
lessonsfor the future. Indeed, the draft resolution threatens
to create a dangerous precedent because it might be said
that it revives the concept of protectorates. The community
of nations cannot be launched upon the arduous path
leading to disarmament by the revival of such antiquated
ideas. Only discussions based on the sovereign equality of
States and in accordance with the principles set forth in the
Charter will be productive. The Council will understand
that, until this happens, my delegation will not be in a
position to endorse the draft resolution before us.
18. Mr. President, our natural desire to strike a balance
leads us to qualify what we have just said by offering you
the only assurance within our power, namely, that, although our points of view appear to conflict, we had the
impression, during all the discussions and negotiations, that
basically your views do not necessarily run counter to what
we advocate, sometimes forcefully and often with
enthusiasm.
19. In order to soften the friendly reproach addressedto
those who had expressed the hope that this discussion
would come about normally and in due course,we would
say that our anxiety to prevent any haste in the matter was
to some degree due to our desire to have the benefit and
enlightenment of your personal qualities right up to the last
moment, when we shall have to assume the responsibility
which has been yours during the current month. This
anxiety was all the greater because your departure coincides
with that of Mr. Nesterenko, the Under-Secretary-General.
You will understand that one of your two successonmight
have felt some anxiety about the void thus created,Weare
saddened by this simultaneous withdrawal-not that we
would be tempted to attribute it to some secretmanoeuvre,
but quite simply because the departure of both of you has
emphasized a formidable moral responsibility. We take
great comfort from the fact that the presenceof
Mr. Kutakov, a colleague who has become a partner and
who is an advocate of the self-discipline of power, will
ensure a smooth transition.

13. We also emphasized the discriminatory nature of the
draft resolution, which creates two categories of States: on
the one hand, the signatories, who will apparently have the
benefit of nuclear protection, and, on the other, those
against whom, it would appear, acts of aggression are
virtually being sanctioned.
14. In this context, we are seriously concerned by the fact
that the only States which would in practice be able to
launch a nuclear attack are, in theory and by virtue of the
draft resolution, exonerated from any possible sanctions.
More specifically, it seems to us that the draft resolution as
a whole fails to answer the only question requiring a
definite reply in the present situation: namely, what use do
the nuclear Powers intend to make of their stockpiles of
nuclear weapons?
15. In that connexion, it is worth mentioning that China
has repeatedly proclaimed that at no time and in no
circumstances will it be the first to use nuclear weapons.

20. If, Mr. President, as someone has said, you have a
French mind and the determination of a Turk, we shall be
long in the dark about the origin of certain differencesof
opinion unless we adopt the philosophy of the Algerian
proverb to the effect that your enemy is he who hasthe
same waysas you.

16. We know, too, that the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics is in favour of the prohibition of nuclear
weapons. Furthermore, we know that France does not
contemplate the offensive use of its nuclear arsenal, These
last observations present us with the following alternatives:
either these assurances are superfluous, since the two
nuclear Powers which are not parties to the Treaty have
adopted the positions that we have just described, or they
Ire inadequate because, apart from the Soviet Union, the
two other Powers do not appear to be willing to enter into

21. I cannot conclude without paying a tribute to’ the
distinguished representative of the United Kingdom, whose
advocacy is respected as much by his Government asby the
Council for the obvious reason that he is able to take an
objective view of his duties in acting as representativeof the
Council in the United Kingdom and in his dealingswith the
Council as a person long since won over to the plilOsophy
of the Charter and strongly imbued with its spirit,
22. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to thank Ambassador
Bouattoura for his contribution to our debate and to thank
him very much for what he had to say about me. The

1 See Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, First Committee, 1571st meeting,para.78.
2

I

the total absence of nuclear weaponsin their respective
territories.”

Ambassador and I have enjoyed very amicable relations. I
have always admired the way he has represented his
country in all of the organs of the United Nations, and
indeed one of my most pleasurable experiences wasserving
under his Chairmanship at the meeting of the Economic
and Social Council two summers ago.

29. However, not all the nuclear Powers which voted in
favour of this treaty of non-proliferation have signed the
second additional protocol of the Treaty of Mexico.

23. When he was giving his quotation I was worried that
he was going to give the one from the great British
statesman Disraeli, when he said: “A practical politician is
one who practices the airs of his predecessors”. I have tried
to walk in the way of my distinguished predecessor. He
made no errors, but I suspect that I wasguilty of many.

30. Hence it seems that the draft resolution presented to
this Council by the three nuclear Powers refers to a new
system of guarantees which, strictly speaking, was not
shaped in accordance with the same principles and criteria
which give form to the systems of guarantees of the Charter
of the United Nations and of the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America.

24. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): First of all, I
should like to associate my delegation with those which
have praised Lord Caradon for the skilful manner in which
he presided over this Council during the month of May. I
also wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the expression of
the regret of my delegation at your departure from this
Council and from the United Nations. For many years our
two delegations have worked closely together in this
Council and in other organs of the United Nations, often
during crises which menaced world peace and security. On
those difficult occasions I learned to admire your outstanding qualities as a statesman, jurist and negotiator. You have
represented your great country with remarkable distinction
and effectiveness. You have served the cause of the United
Nations and of world peace with courage, intelligence and
skill. We shall miss you for years to come.

31. Moreover, the Council is certainly aware of the
position taken by the Brazilian Government during the
debates in the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament
and more recently in the Political and Security Committee
of the General Assembly. On both those occasions we
expressed our conviction that the draft treaty did not
conform to the relevant principles laid down by General
Assembly resolution 2028 (XX) and, more specifically, that
it failed to establish an acceptable balance of obligations
and responsibilities between nuclear and non-nuclear countries, including the question of security guarantees to be
given the latter.2 The system currently proposed also fails
to meet this objective.
32. The draft resolution before us should be regarded as a
collateral measure and a consequence of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Indeed, its first
preambular paragraph, which haa no direct bearing on the
question we are now discussing, reproduces the substance
of the terms of articles I and II of the Treaty.

25. In connexion with the draft resolution before us, I
have been instructed by my Government to make the
following declaration of vote.
26. Today the matter before the Council is not a
particular crisis or an isolated incident, but a political
question of a broader nature, pertaining to world peace and
to the very system of collective security established in the
Charter of the United Nations which is of vital importance
to the existence of this Organization.

33. Bearing those considerations in mind, and taking into
account our abstention in the vote on the General
Assembly resolution commending the non-proliferation
treaty, my delegation, although appreciating the reasons
which inspired its co-sponsors,is compelled to abstain in
the vote on the draft resolution before us.

27. The Charter of San Francisco sets up a universal
security machinery which includes, without any exception,
all Members of this Organization. However, the guarantees
referred to in the draft resolution now before us, unilaterally offered by only three of the five existing nuclear
Powers, would be applied only to those Member States
which become party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Moreover, while the Charter establishes juridical obligations, the draft resolution and the
unilateral declaration of the three great Powers are not but
statements of intention. The draft resolution therefore falls
short of assuring the guarantees against all kinds of
aggression already contemplated in the Charter of the
United Nations.

34. The PRESIDENT: I thank you,. Ambassador de
Car&ho Silos, for your contribution to our debate and for
your very kind remarks concerning me. You have correctly
recalled our common experience in many crisis situations
during the past three years. If I may analogize, the United
Nations is a university in crisis management; and in that
university, you, Mr. Ambassador, representing your great
country, have earned your degree. I thank you very much.
35. I should say to the members of the Council that
before we adjourn, asAmbassador Bouattoura has indicated
it would be only appropriate to say some additional words
about Under-Secretary-General NeSterenko. With the Council’s permission, I hope to do so on behalf of the Council
before we conclude our debate.

28. I would also like to mention. the special importance
that my country-as well as all other Latin American
countries-attaches to the system of guarantees established
by the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Article VII of the nonproliferation treaty provides that

36. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): As the
Security Council concludes its consideration of the draft
resolution on security assurancessubmitted by the United
States of America, the Soviet Union and the United
2 Ibid., 1560th meeting, para.65.

“Nothing in this Treaty affects the right of any group
of States to conclude regional treaties in order to assure
3

under the Charter of the United Nations, so that the
organized international community could meet better and
more effectively the exigencies of the atomic age, There is
no question, in our view, of establishing yet another
competing collective security system on the sole behalf of
those States accepting the non-proliferation treaty,

Kingdom, it becomes important that we give due recopnition to the true significance of the pledge that we have
reaffirmed to one another in this vital organ of the United
Nations.
37. It may well be that, to a very large extent, the future
working of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons will itself depend on the sense of confidence that
these assurances made here will generate, and on the extent
to which they will create an atmosphere conducive to
greater international understanding and co-operation.

43. Under the United Nations Charter, all Member States
have accepted a treaty obligation to help the victim of
aggression in accordance with the determination and the
decisions of the Security Council. Moreover, under the
Charter all the permanent members-l
repeat: all the
permanent members-of
the Security Council assume a
decisive role in the Council’s primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. AS a
confirmation of that great responsibility, the Charter not
only grants those Powers the status of permanent member.
ship but also allows them the right and privilege whereby
no decision will be taken by the Council without their
concurrence. Thus, at the time the Charter was draftedthat is, before nuclear power came into the world power
structure as a decisive security factor-the Charter already
contained a mutual balance of rights and obligations as
between permanent members of the Security Council on
the one hand and the other Member States of the United
Nations on the other.

38. For, although not organically linked with the text of
the non-proliferation treaty so overwhelmingly commended
to all States, for their adoption, by the General Assembly,
the assurances that have now been given in the Security
Council fall within the purview of that treaty and, as such,
constitute a vital part of the mutual undertakings which
serve as the stimulant for the further limitation and
eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
39. While we are, of course, aware that the declarations of
three of the permanent members have not introduced
anything new in the assurances they have given in other
forums and on previous occasions, we nevertheless appreciate the fact and consider it significant that those
declarations were made in the Security Council, the United
Nations organ primarily responsible for international peace
and security.

44. The addition of atomic weapons to the war arsenalsof
States could not have changed, and cannot now change,this
mutual balance of rights and obligations within the framework of the collective security system established by the
United Nations Charter. The fact that aggression is committed by means of atomic weapons or that the use of
atomic weapons against another State is threatened cannot
change the character of the obligations Member States of
the United Nations have assumed under the Charter. All the
permanent members of the Security Council, like all other
Member States of the Organization, are under the Charter
obligation to come to the assistance of a victim of
aggression.

40. Rarely has the Security Council been engaged in such
a task of constructive diplomacy in peace-building as in the
opportunity provided by the present discussion of this vital
question. For too long and all too frequently, and much to
the detriment of its other vital duties, the Council has been
called upon to exercise functions which can be characterized only as those of a fire-brigade hastily summoned
to put out a brush-fire that has suddenly erupted. But in
these momentous discussions now under way, the Council
has been called upon to fulfil a function which the drafters
of the Charter and the founders of the Organization
envisaged for it, namely, that of peace-building and of
providing effective guarantees for international security.
That that function is being exercised in an atmosphere free
of contentious debate is a matter the significance of which
should not be lost on us. We can only hope that the present
undertaking and the experience gamed from it will further
encourage the Members of our Organization, and more
particularly the permanent members of this Council, to
expand their efforts in the vital task of building and
maintaining world peace.

/

45. That is how we understand the assurances and
declarations that have been submitted by three of the
permanent members of the Security Council, and it is with
those considerations in the back of our mind that WChave
studied all related problems with great care and attention.
46. With regard to the draft resolution submitted by three
of the permanent members of the Council and the
respective declarations they have made before the Council,
my delegation’s views are no different from those that I had
occasion to express in the First Committeca when the draft
Treaty on the Non-Profiferation of Nuclear Weapons was
being discussed there.

41. It iS dS0 a matter of the utmost importance and
significance that the problem of security assurances should
be posed and answered in its correct perspective and its
appropriate
context. This is particularly necessary, in the
view of my delegation, as the discussions that have taken
place SO far on this problem in other forums seem to have
encouraged the assumption that a treaty on non.
Proliferation
of ntdear
weapons would, somehow, establish
new obligations and rights for Member States of the United
Nations outside of the Charter. My delegation does not
accept this to be the case.

47. My Government has always maintained and continues
to maintain that the signing of a convention on the
prohibition of the use of nuclear and thermonuclear
weapons would be the best means to ensure the security of
all nations against the threat or use of nuclear arms.
48. Even if that should prove difficult to attain at the
present time, there is in our view no reason why, pending

42. Essentially, the question of security assurances is one
of readapting the collective security system established

3 Ibid.,

4

1561~1

meeting.

the signature of such a treaty, the nuclear-weapon countries
cannot make a clear undertaking not to use atomic weapons
in any circumstances against States that do not possesssuch
weapons. We regret to note the absence of any such pledge
in the present drafts. We feel that such a pledge should be a
cardinal ‘principle of the assurances to be given by the
Security Council and by those States that have atomic
weapons in their arsenals.

Assembly adopted by such an impressive majority. In the
same spirit, and in spite of the many limitations and
shortcomings that we see in the draft resolution contained
in document S/8631, my delegation will vote for the
adoption of that draft submitted jointly by the delegations
of the United States of America, the Soviet’ Union and the
United Kingdom. We do so in the hope that the treaty,
coupled with the security assurancesgiven here in the
Security Council, will help to usher in a new era of mutual
effort for the peace and well-being of all mankind.

49. In this connexion I wish to mention, in particular, that
neither in the declarations that the sponsors of the draft
resolution have made before us nor in the draft resolution
itself is there any mention of General Assembly resolution
2153 (XXI), which called upon all nuclear-weapon Powers
“to refrain from the use, or the threat of use, of nuclear
weapons against States which may conclude” nonproliferation treaties. That, in our view, is an unfortunate
and unjustified omission.

54. In conclusion, I wish to take the opportunity of this
meeting, which will probably be the last one that you will
attend before you depart, Mr. President, to express to you
once again the assurancesof my highest consideration, and
my very best wishes.
55. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Makonnen for
his remarks, and I in turn reaffirm to him that our
friendship will endure long after my departure from these
halls.

50. It is also to be noted that operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution only welcomes the expression of the
“intention . . , by certain States that they will provide . . .
assistance, in accordance with the Charter”. It seemsto my
delegation that the use of the word “intention” in this
context is somewhat ambiguous. As I stated earlier, with or
without this resolution, the permanent members, like all
other Member States of the United Nations, have by signing
the Charter entered into the legally binding obligation to
come to the assistance of a victim of aggression, in
accordance with a decision of the Security Council. That
being the clear position of the Charter, we fail to
understand the hesitancy in the expression used.

56. Mr. LIU (China): It wasby an overwhelming majority
that the General Assembly commended the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. My delegation supported the resolution in the General Assembly in the belief
that the Treaty, like the partial test ban treaty of 1963, is a
significant step in the interest of international peace and
security.
57. A non-nuclear-weapon State, as soon as it becomes a
party to the treaty, renounces all rights, to receive,
manufacture, or otherwise acquire any nuclear weapon or
other nuclear explosive devicesor even to have control over
such weapons or devices directly or indirectly. This
renunciation is a far-reaching one. A non-nuclear-weapon
State party to the non-proliferation treaty cannot under
any circumstances alter its present status. It is tantamount
to renouncing the right to defend itself with nuclear
armament even if it should itself be victimized by nuclear
aggression or the threat of nuclear aggression.

5 1. And finally I wish to reiterate the point I raised earlier
in my remarks regarding the applicability of United Nations
security assurances.We wish to affirm the principle that the
collective security guarantee inherent in the United Nations
Charter must be applicable to Member States without
discrimination. At the same time we wish, of course, to see
all Member States adhere to the experiment we have started
together. Indeed, we appeal to all those Member States that
have so far not found it possible to do so to join the
overwhelming membership of the United Nations in the
initiation and successfulimplementation of the vital experiment that the non-proliferation treaty will put into motion
so that, united in a purposeful effort, we may all march
together towards our goal of disarmament and peace.

58. Now the Powers sponsoring the Treaty have proposed
to safeguard the security of the non-nuclear-weapon States
in conjunction with their adherence to the Treaty. In the
draft resolution [S/8631] before us they undertake to
assure the non-nuclear-weapon States that aggression with
nuclear weapons or the threat of such aggression
‘6. . . would create a situation in which the Security
Council, and above all its nuclear-weapon-State permanent
members, would have to act immediately in accordance
with their obligations under the United Nations Charter.”
This has been elaborated in the identical declarations made
by the Governments of the Soviet Union, the United
Kingdom and the United States.

52. These are some of the shortcomings and limitations
that we recognize in the draft resolution and the texts of
the declarations proposed to us. These are considerations
which we do not intend to gloss over or ignore. But at the
same time we believe, after careful consideration, that the
non-proliferation treaty, coupled with the benefit to be
derived from the assurances,however incomplete, given in
the Security Council, represent an over-all positive gain for
the international community. However weak and faltering
it may be at this stage, the present non-proliferation treaty
could serve, in our view, as the key in the ever-urgent need
for general and complete disarmament.

59. It would seem that neither the draft resolution nor the
declarations add anything radically new to what has already
been provided for in the United Nations Charter. Article 1
of the Charter, as we know, calls for: “. . . effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of
aggression . . .“. As my delegation sees it, aggression is
aggression, no matter what weaponsare used. It is true that
in the present context we are dealing with a specific type of

53. It is that compelling consideration, more perhaps than
any other, that impelled my delegation to vote in favour of
the draft resolution commending the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons which the General
5

aggression-aggression accompanied by the use of nuclear
weapons. Such aggression, we are told, would “create a
qualitatively new situation”. Yet the procedure of dealing
with such a situation is no different from that already
provided for in the Charter. From this point of view, it
might have been doubted whether the draft resolution is at
all necessary.
60. The criterion of any system of security assurances
must be the degree of its effectivenessand credibility. The
record of the Security Council with respect to the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace and for the
suppression of acts of aggression has unfortunately not
been such as to inspire the confidence or dispel the fearsof
those non-nuclear-weapon States which live in the shadow
of nuclear threat.
61. In a world as torn by rival ideologies and conflicting
interests as ours is today, it is not alwayseasyto foreseethe
circumstances in which aggression with nuclear weapons
would occur or the forms such aggressionmight take. The
difficulty is compounded by the virtual impossibility of
arriving at a consensus on what constitutes aggression,
nuclear or otherwise. If experience is any indication, even
the most obvious and most flagrant form of aggression
could be the subject of interminable debate. Given the
speed and destructiveness of nuclear weapons,a delay of a
few hours, nay, even of a few minutes, could afford the
aggressor time enough to make short work of his intended
victim.
62. However, my delegation is not unaware of the fact
that no system of security guaranteescan be watertight and
absolute. The system of security guarantees embodied in
the draft resolution is no exception. If it falls short of
perfection, it is still better than none at all. The least we
can say about it is that it affords the nonnuclear-weapon
States more protection than they would otherwisehave.
63. Moreover, the willingness of the three major nuclearweapon Powers, which have long been divided by political
and ideological differences of a seemingly irreconcilable
nature, to reaffirm jointly their obligations under the
United Nations Charter in the present historical context is
in itself a matter of great political significance. It may be an
exaggeration to say that by so doing they have revitalized
the collective security system provided for in the Charter. It
would be even more extravagant to claim that the cooperative spirit thus manifested presagesthe transformation
of the balance of terror into an international nuclear
deterrent within the institutional framework of the United
Nations. There is none the less reason to believe that the
sponsors of the draft resolution have now come to the
realization that it is in their national interests to make a
collectiv.: effort to safeguard the security of the nonnuclear-weapon States. Inasmuch as they command the
overwhelming preponderance of nuclear-weapon power in
the world today, what they have solemnly pledged to carry
out cannot fail to have a deterrent impact,
64: My delegation attaches great importance to the fact
that both the draft resolution and the declarations have
reaffirmed the inherent right of individual and collective
self-defence, recognized under Article 51 of the Charter, if
an armed attack, including nuclear attack, occurs against a

Member of the United Nations. This is vital to all those who
have relied on regional arrangements or other multilateral
or bilateral arrangements for their national security.
65. It is in the light of these considerations that my
delegation will cast its vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
66. Before concluding, may I be permitted to make a very
brief observation on the oft-repeated assertion that the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is
vitiated by the fact that the Communist regime on the
mainland of China remains outside it. As a matter of fact,
in the eyes of the Chinese Communists in Peiping, the treaty
is: “A big fraud and a big plot hatched by the American
imperialists and Soviet revisionists in their counterrevolutionary. global’ collusion against the peoples of the
world who are struggling for independence and freedom.”
This view was reiterated only a few days ago by Peiping’s
so-called Foreign Minister in a speech on 11 June, and even
more vehemently elaborated by the People5r Daily
-Peiping’s official mouthpiece-in an article published and
broadcast on 13 June.
67. Through the years the Chinese Communists have made
it clear that they are unalterably opposed to the control
and reduction of armaments until the victory of communism, presumably Mao’s brand of communism, is
achieved on a world-wide scale. It is evident that nothing
could have induced them to be a signatory to such a
document.
68. If I may end on a personal note, Mr. President, I
believe that my personal sentiments and my high regard for I
you and for your distinguished predecessor in the Chair
need no reiteration. But I should like to take this
opportunity to associate my delegation whole-heartedly
with the tributes that have been expressed around the table.
69. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank you, Ambassador
Liu, for your comments and for your personal remarks. I
admire very much the dignity, ability and dedication with
which you, Ambassador Liu, have served your country and
the United Nations, and I value your continuing friendship.
70, Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): During the debate in the First
Committee on the non-proliferation treaty a great number
of non-nuclear-weapon States, while commenting on its
provisions, carefully analysed and evaluated the wording of
the joint draft resolution in document S/863 1, which had
originally been submitted to the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament by the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the United Kingdom and the United.States.4
71. Many of these non-nuclear-weapon States have expressed dissatisfaction with ,that text. A question of such
supreme importance as the provision of security from
nuclear aggression or the threat of nuclear aggression
requires the most careful consideration by all non-nuclearweapon States. It was the hope of the Pakistan delegation
that the adoption of a resolution by the Security Council
on security assurances would be deferred until after the
conclusion of the forthcoming conference of non-nuclear4 Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement
for 1967and 1968, document DC/230 and Add.1, annex II.

weapon States. What assurances would be considered
adequate by the generality of these States is a question
which will be discussed by that conference. My delegation
would not wish to prejudge its conclusions.

nized by the Charter of the United Nations, exists
independently of the Charter and does not and cannot limit
a State’s option in the matter of obtaining assistance to
prevent or counter a nuclear attack.

72. However, the Security Council has already become
seized of the matter. My delegation will, therefore, confine
itself at this stage to certain preliminary observations on the
joint draft resolution and the declarations made by its
co-sponsors.In making these observations we shall bear in
mind the statements made in the First Committee by a
large number of non-nuclear-weapon States.

79. ;rhs paragraph-that is, the third operative paragraph-makes it possible for the three nuclear Powers,
acting individually, to deter or suppress a nuclear attack,
before the Security Council can act or if it is unable to act.
At the same time, few of the non-nuclear-weapon States
primarily affected other than those that are members of the
NATO or Warsaw Pacts or even those States which are
beneficiaries of firm unilateral guarantees outside the
framework of the United Nations can entertain realistic
expectations that the possibility will in fact become an
actuality.

73. First, these assurances relate to aggression accompanied by the use of nuclear weapons or a threat of
aggression in which nuclear weapons are used against a
non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty. It was
pointed out during the debate in the First Committee that
the draft resolution would have been a better instrument if,
instead of mentioning “aggression’‘-which has so far
neither been defined nor in <practice determined-it had
related itself to the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
74. Second, as the protection is offered essentially within
the framework of the Charter, the possibility that the
Security Council could not be able, because of the use of
the veto, to take the necessary action makes the protection
uncertain.

80. The element of deterrence to a would-be aggressor and
the assurance of protection to its victim would both have
been strengthened if it had been made clear, in the
declarations of the three nuclear Powers, that they would
respond to the request of any non-nuclear-weapon State so
threatened, with effective assistance, regardless of whether
that State was aligned in a military alliance or nonaligned.
Already certain States have received, such guarantees. In
view of the present state of international relations the
unilateral nature of the guarantee does not detract from its
credibility.

75. Third, the second operative paragraph of the joint
draft resolution makes it clear that the identical declarations of the three nuclear Powers are only statements of
intention. In the debate in the First Committee several
non-nuclear-weapon States expressed their dissatisfaction
over that fact and called for a binding treaty guarantee to
provide immediate assistance to any non-nuclear party that
would be a victim d nuclear attack or of a nuclear threat.

81. Seventh, the provisions of Article 51 of the Charter
are no longer adequate to the requirements of the right of
self-defence in an age of nuclear weapons. Such a right can
hardly be restricted to the actual occurrence of a nuclear
armed attack. There are very few non-nuclear-weapon
States that will be able to survive a nuclear strike and
exercise their right of self-defence.

76. Fourth, it seems only just and equitable, if nonnuclear-weapon States forswear the acquisition and production of nuclear weapons for their own defence, that the
nuciear Powers should, in return, renounce the use of such
weapons against those States.

82. The three nuclear Powers in their declarations have
stated that aggression with nuclear weapons or the threat of
such aggression against a non-nuclear-weapon State “would
create a qualitatively new situation”. Such a situation was
not anticipated when the Charter was framed. Therefore
Article 51 is inadequate to meet the perils of the age of
nuclear weapons.

77. Fifth, the first paragraph of the draft resolution
recognizes that under the Charter protection against nuclear
aggression or the threat of nuclear aggression is available to
a non-nuclear-weapon State, A State’s adherence to the
non-proliferation treaty is not made conditional. However,
in the second paragraph of the ‘draft resolution, the Council
is required to welcome the intention expressed by certain
States that they will provide or support immediate assistance, in accordance with the Charter, to any nonnuclear-weapon State party tc the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons that is a victim of an act
or an object of a threat of aggression in which nuclear
weapons are used. When the two paragraphs are read
together we find there a certain ambiguity.
78. Sixth, the third operative paragraph of the draft
resolution and paragraph 7 of the declarations made by the
three nuclear Powers reaffirm the inherent right, recognized
under Article 51 of the Charter, to individual and collective
self-defence. I may say in this context, if only by way of
parenthesis, that the right of self-defence, which is recog-

83. As the resolution is at present formulated, we fear,
that it provides*only very few States of the world with any
real assurance of security against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons, apart from the non-nuclear-weapon States
that are members of the NATO or Warsaw Pacts or those
who are protected by the unilateral guarantees outside the
framework of the United Nations. No doubt a substantial
number of non-nuclear-weapon States are so geopolitically
situated that, regardless of guarantees, they do not expect
to be the object of nuclear attack or threat. There are also
some others that may feel assured that in the context of the
prerent world situation and its likely evolution, the joint
draft resolution provides an adequate formula to meet any
possible danger to their security that may arise in the
foreseeable future. On the other h‘and, there are many other
States which are not in those privileged categories and
which feel more exposed. What of them?
84. The question may be asked: what, then, is to be
done? Is a more dependable security system for the

”
j

I

:

were manufactured in France only for strictly defensive
purposes and France did not intend to use them either to
threaten or to attack anybody. The People’s Republic of
China has also made a solemn declaration that in no case
will it be the first to use nuclear weapons.

non-nuclear-weapon States practicable in the present political context of the world?
85. Speaking at the 1546th meeting of the First Committee, on 13 May, I said:
“The question arises why the possibility of envisaging a
system of universal collective security which would be
free from the built-in limitations of the United Nations
and its present composition should be inconceivable.“5

90. Perfect security for all States against the peril of
nuclear weapons will not of course be possible until, as the
representative of France has pointed out, there is complete
nuclear disarmament and destruction of nuclear weapons.
We must perforce accept a security system which is less
than perfect and short of the ideal. At the same time, if we
ignore the other facts of life we do so at our own peril. As
long as nuclear stockpiles are not physically dismantled, as
long as the non-proliferation treaty is not universally
adhered to, the possibility of a treaty breach will always
remain, of the emergence of other Powers which will have
acquired nuclear weapons, and even, in the unforeseeable
future, of an existing nuclear Power changing its policies. It
is such possibilities, which are more than theoretical, that
we need to guard against.

We must not forget that the Charter was conceived and
concluded before the qualitatively new situation that would
arise from the perils of the nuclear age could be foreseen.
To inspire general confidence, security guarantees in our
time must be based on a fuller recognition of the
imperatives of this new reality.
86. The framework of the Charter would have to be
reinforced by undertakings which would compensate for
the weaknesses in the structure of collective security. If
unilateral guarantees outside the framework of the Charter
can be given without derogating from the authority of the
United Nations, security assuranceswhich are freesfrom the
built-in limitations of the Charter are not inconceivable.
These assurancesmust be designed to meet not only the
exigencies of the present political and power relations in
the world but also the foreseeable developments in the
future. The duration of the non-proliferation treaty will be
twenty-five years. The formulation of these assurancesmust
also take into consideration that time element. They must
meet the security needs of the world, not only for today,
when there are five nuclear Powers,but also for tomorrow,
when there may be a greater number, should the restraint
of the treaty not become universally operative and nuclear
weapons not prohibited and destroyed.

91. We are not persuaded that what the formula in the
joint draft resolution on security assurances offers to
non-nuclear-weapon States is all that can now be devised to
deter the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
92. For all those reasons Pakistan will not be able to
support the joint draft resolution of the three nuclear
Powers.
93. Finally, Mr. President, may I associate myself with the
warm tributes that have been paid by you and other
distinguished colleagues to your predecessor, Lord Caradon.
Last month the Council adopted some important resolutions. One of them was historic. The lion’s share of the
credit for that achievement, as for so many other resolutions and important actions of the Council, undoubtedly
belongs to Lord Caradon, who in generosity of spirit and
statesmanship embodies the great traditions of his great
country.

87. Furthermore, the security assurancesas formulated in
the draft resolution beg the question whether in the
context of the present realities of international life and the
policies of the nuclear Powers they are likely to be universal
in their practical operation, either as regards the source of
the threat or as regards the victim.

94. At the last meeting of the Council in May [142&h
I had the opportunity to pay my sincere tribute
to you, Mr. President, for your outstanding services to the
United Nations over the last three years. I sincerely reaffirm
everything that I said on that occasion, You have set us all
an example in human relations.

meeting],

88. It is true that there is a wide diversity of eecurity
interests in the world and that assurancesmust not be
limited as regards time. If on this account the formula for
security must be cast in general terms, there is no reason
why it cannot be indicated that the protection offered is
universal, without preference or exclusion.

95. On Monday [143&h
meeting]
you gave us the
assurancethat you would leave us after the conclusion of
the Council’s pending business. Let me say to you plainly
that my delegation did not in the slightest welcome your
assurance. We shall greatly miss you and wish you all
successin your endeavours.

89. The joint draft resolution is based on the assumption
that the nuclear-weapon States permanent members of the
Security Council are not likely to commit or threaten
aggression with the use of nuclear weapons. The Pakistan
delegation fully shares this assumption in regard to the
commitments, policies, restraint and responsibility of the
Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United Statesand also of France and the People’s Republic of China. We
cannot overlook the pledges of the latter two nuclear
Powers. The representative of France stated in the General
Assembly at the 1672nd meeting that nuclear armaments

96. I should not let this occasion pass without mentioning
the dedicated services of the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Nesterenko, who is shortly leaving us-the servicesthat
he rendered to the United Nations and, in particular, to the
Security Council.
97. Before taking up his present post in the Organization,
he was the Ambassador of his country to Pakistan. It gives

S~Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, First Committee, 1566th meeting, para. 191.
8

me great pleasure to recall the outstanding role he played in
improving and strengthening relations between his country
and mine. My delegation extends to him its best wishes for
the future.

States lies in nuclear disarmamentwhen nuclear weapons
shallhavebeencompletelyeliminated.
10.5. It is, however, obvious that action in this field of
genuineand lastingsecurity will take time and will have to
be soughtthrough stages.Until suchtime, andpurely asan
interim measure-that is, so long as nuclear weapons
continue to remainin the armouriesof a few countries-the
nuclear-weaponStateshave a definite obligation to assure
the non-nuclear-weapon
States that their security will not
in any way be endangeredby the use or threat of use of
such weapons,and alsothat suchweaponswill not be used
asan instrumentof pressure,intimidation or blackmail. It is
in this context that we have to considerthe question of
security assurances.

98. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Shahi for his
contribution to our debate and for his very kind remarks, I,
in turn, reaffirm what I had to say about him. I have
enjoyed very much our relationship together, and the
assurance that I gave the Council was intended to supplement the security assurances that it is adopting.
99. Mr, PARTHASARATHI
(India): Mr. President, at the
1428th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 May, I
had occasion to pay you a heartfelt tribute. It is a matter of
great gratification for my delegation to find that the
Council is still privileged to be presidedover by a personof
your distinction and acknowledgedability. I shouldlike to
take this opportunity to reiterate the warm appreciationof
my delegation for the prudent, impartial and diligent
manner in which you have conducted the formal and
informal consultationsof the membersof the Council, not
only on the important issueunder considerationtoday, but
also on all other issueson which we have had the happy
experienceof beingin contact with you.

106. My Governmentwould welcomeany stepsthat might
be taken by the nuclear-weaponStatesin concert with
non-nuclear-weaponStates to increasethe effectivenessof
the role of the United Nationsfor the purposeof providing
security. The hopesof mankind rest on this, The obligations cast by the Charter on Member States, and more
particularly on the permanentmembersof the Security
Council, to ensurepeacein the world, makeit necessaryfor
them to dischargetheir responsibilities
in strict conformity
with the Charter.

100. Once againI should like to wish you every success
in
the important new fields in which you will find yourself
and to expressthe hope that the closepersonalfriendship
that hasdevelopedbetween us will be maintained in the
years to come.

107. I should like to emphasizethat any security assurancesthat might be offered by nuclear-weapon
Statescould
not and should not be regardedasa quid pro quo for the
signatureof a non-proliferationtreaty. A non-proliferation
treaty shouldbejudgedby itself andon its own merits.As I
101. I should also like to refer to the characteristic have already stated, the threat of nuclear weapons to
efficiency and the persistentdevotion to duty displayedby
non-nuclear-weaponStates arisesdirectly from the possesLord Caradonwhen he presidedover our deliberationslast
sion of such weaponsby certain States.That threat has
month. It is a great tribute to him that his painstaking nothing to do with the signatureor non-signatureof a
efforts and statesmanlikeapproachbrought the prolonged particular non-proliferation treaty. That threat hasexisted
consultations on the difficult question of Southern Rhoin the past and will continue to remain, even after a
desiato a successfulconclusion.
non-proliferation treaty has been concluded, until such
time asthe nuclearmenacehasbeeneliminatedaltogether.
102. It is a matter of great regret to my delegationthat we
The assuranceof security to non-nuclear-weapon
Statesis
are shortly to be deprived of the able services of
an obligation on the nuclear-weaponStates, and not
Mr. Nesterenko,the distinguishedUnder-Secretary-General somethingwhich they could or shouldoffer in return for
for Political and Security Council Affairs. I have had the
the signature by non-nuclear-weaponStates of a nonprivilege of knowing him for the past six years and have proliferation treaty.
valued him both asa colleagueand asa friend. I shouldlike
to place on record the deepappreciation of my delegation 108. The basisfor any action by the Security Council for
the maintenanceof international peaceand security is the
for the exemplary efficiency and integrity with which
Mr. Nesterenkohasdischargedhis important functions. We Charter of the United Nations. Any linking of security
wish him all success
in his new appointment.
assurances
to the signatureof a non-proliferation treaty
would be contrary to its provisions,becausethe Charter
doesnot discriminatebetweenthosewho might adhereto a
103. We are now approaching the end of our current
particular treaty and those who might not do so. Under
deliberationson the vital question of assuringthe security
of non-nuclear-weaponStates againstthe threat or the use Article 24 of the Charter, the Membersof the United
of nuclear weapons.This question has been widely dis- Nationshave conferredon the Security Councilthe primary
responsibility for the maintenanceof international peace
cussedboth within and outside the United Nations for
years. The Government of India attaches the highest and security, and haveagreedthat, in carryingout its duties
under this responsibility,the Security Councilacts on their
importance to the solution of this problem.
behalf. Article 24 then goeson to saythat in dischargingits
duties the Council shallact in accordancewith the purposes
104. In the view of the Government of India, the problem
of the security of non-nuclear-weaponStatesagainstthe use and principles of the United Nations. The purposesand
principlesare containedin Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter.
or the threat of use of nuclear weaponsarisesfrom the
One of the cardinalprinciplesis that of sovereignequality,
possession,the continued stockpiling and the further
that is, the equality of rightsandbenefitsunder the Charter
sophistication of nuclear weaponsand the meansof their
delivery. The real hope of security for non-nuclear-weapon for all Membersof the United Nations. The second,and
9

resolution sponsored by the delegations of the Soviet
Union, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America. Nevertheless, we are reassured by the fact that all
the rights and benefits enshrined in the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security continue
to be available to all States Members of the United Nations.

equally important, principle is that all Members shall fulfil
in good faith the obligations assumed by them in accordance with the Charter, It would thus be clear that, while the
permanent members of the Security Council have a special
obligation and responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, they are precluded from
adopting a discriminatory approach in situations involving
the security of States, including that arising from the threat
or the use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon
States.

112. Before I conclude, I deem it necessary to reiterate
the policy of the Government of India in the nuclear field,
It is our national decision to use nuclear energy exclusively
for peaceful purposes. This policy has time and again been
reiterated by the Government of India and hasbeen fir&Y
adhered to.

109. Unfortunately, it is precisely such a discriminatory
approach that is adopted in the draft resolution contained
in document S/863 1, particularly in the second preambular
paragraph and the second operative paragraph. The Security
Council is being asked to take into consideration the
concern of only certain of those States which have
expressed a desire to subscribe to the non-proliferation
treaty, I submit that this concept is contrary to the
purposes and principles of the Charter. When the Security
Council is called upon to make a determination in
accordance with Article 39 of the Charter, it does not first
enquire as to whether or not a certain State has subscribed
to a particular treaty. Its findings, recommendations and
decisions are to be guided solely by the objective of
maintaining or restoring international peace and security.
The Charter is clear that the assistance of the Security
Council should be available in equal measure to all States.
Some nuclear-weapon States that are also permanent
members of the Security Council intend, however, to
provide or support immediate assistanceby way of collective self-defence only to those non-nuclear-weapons States
which are parties to a particular treaty.

113. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador PafZhasaratK
for his contribution to the debate and for what he has again
said about me. He knows, without my saying so again, my
deep feelings of affection and respect for him.
114. There are no other names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
115. In the absence of objections, I shall now put to the
vote the joint draft resolution ~lti~h is sponsored by the
delegations of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and
the United States and which was submitted to the Council
on 12 June as document S/863 1.
A vote wastaken by shuwof hands.

In favour: Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, Hungary,
Paraguay, Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

110. My delegation has carefully studied the declarations
made by the three nuclear-weapon States and appreciates
the sincerity of the effort made by them to provide
assurancesof security to non-nuclear-weapon States. In the
declarations, the three nuclear-weapon Powers themselves
recall the provision of the Charter which calls for effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace and for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace. In OUTopinion, it
is the clear responsibility of the nuclear-weapon States
members of the Security Council to go to the assistanceof
any nuclear-weapon State that is threatened with or is the
victim of nuclear attack, and not merely of those that may
be signatories of a non-proliferation treaty. This is their
special responsibility by reason of their possession of
nuclear weapons as well as of their being permanent
members of the Security Council. It wou1.d be inappropriate, therefore, for the Security Council to welcome
the partial assurances mentioned in the second operative
paragraph. It is in the interest of the international community that non-nuclear-weapon States be encouraged to
remain in that category. This can be done only by ensuring
the security of all non-nuclear-weapon States in conformity
with the Charter, regardlessof whether or not they sign the
non-proliferation treaty.

116. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I thank those
members of the Council who have made kind and generous
references to my Presidency of the Council last month. I
wish to say that the consultations in which I had the
privilege to take part last month with other members of this
Council were one of the most satisfying experiencesI have
ever known, I have special reason to be personally most
grateful to every fellow member of this Council.

111. In the light of what I have just stated, it is clear that
the draft resolution contained in document S/8631 does
not fully accord with the basic principles which should
govern the problem of the security of non-nuclear-weapon
States. My delegation, therefore, cannot support the draft

118. I would also wish on behalf of my delegation to PaY
a tribute to Mr. Nesterenko. He has served this Council aad
the United Nations extremely well and has earned the
~6 Seeresolution255 (1968).

Against: None,
Abstaining: Algeria, Brazil, France, India, Pakistan.
The draft resolution wasadopted by 10 votesto none
with 5 abstentions.6

117. Ambassador Bouattoura referred to my duties in this
Council and elsewhere. I only regret that I was in tllis
Council yesterday and not in the House of Lords. While we
were acting unanimously here, I gather that the House of
Lords on another issue was not. Nevertheless, I trust and
believe that this Council’s influence and example Will carry
increasing weight in many parts of the world, including the
Palace of Westminster.

10

gratitude of us ah. We confidently
further successin his future career.

wish him well and

124. The PRESIDENT: I thank Lord Caradon for what he
has said. I admire him particularly for the discretion he
used after those last two lines in waiving consecutive
translation.

119. Before we end our proceedings today, and now that
our debate is over, I should like not only to welcome the
resolution we have just adopted but also to pay my
respectful tribute to the representatives of the two great
Powers who have worked so hard with us and others to
achieve the successin the Assembly last week and in the
Council now.

125. Mr. KUZNETSOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatedfram Russian):The Security Council
has just approved a decision on the question of security
assurancesfor non-nuclear Powers. This action on the part
of the Security Council, together with the General Assembly resolution which approved the draft Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is of extreme
importance. It confirms and strengthens the appropriate
provisions of the Charter relating to the actions of the
Security Council for the maintenance of peace and security
in the caseof aggressionwith the use of nuclear weapons or
the threat of such aggressionagainst non-nuclear States.

120. As to you, Mr. President, it is almost impossible to
add to the expressions of the admiration that we all feel for
you. Winston Churchill used to say that he was half
American and all English. You, Sir, can do better than that.
You have Ambassador Berard’s testimony on Monday
[143Oth meeting] that you have the mind of a Frenchman.
Ambassador Eralp told us yesterday [1432nd meeting] that
you have the will of a Turk. I hesitate to attribute to you
any additional national characteristics. Certainly you have a
mastery of politics, which we have all learned from the
Greeks. We have also good reason to know that you have
something of the obstinacy which is a characteristic
common, I like to think, to the Russians and the British.
So, if we are to believe all that is said of you we must
conclude that you are some kind of international monstrosity. We content ourselves with thinking that, whatever
characteristics of other nations you may have, you are
certainly all American.

126. We may note now that the United Nations has
successfully concluded an important stage. It has auspiciously cleared the way for the signing and ratification of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
The United Nations has emphatically urged that this should
be done without any delay. The coming into force of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
the implementation of the measures it provides for will
undoubtedly mark an important step towards a reduction
of the danger of nuclear war and the creation of favourable
conditions for the cessation of the nuclear arms race, and
will lead us forward towards nuclear disarmament and
complete and general disarmament under effective international control. Undoubtedly this will meet the vital
interests of all peoples.

121. We remember that when you first were our President
you gave us successful leadership in dealing with a most
dangerous and explosive dispute. And now you are again
our successful leader as we have taken such an important
step towards world security in adopting the resolution
today. We shall not forget the excellence of the leadership
you have given us.

127. Now, as we conclude our joint endeavours, I should
first of all like to express my gratitude to all members of
the Security Council for their efforts, their energy and their
desire to achieve an effective solution.

122. I would also wish to say a word to Deputy Foreign
Minister Kuznetsov, who, I understand, will be returning
very soon to his great country. We are always glad to see
him. When he comes we confidently expect agreement, and
we expect action. We are never disappointed. Deputy
Foreign Minister Kuznetsov and Ambassador Malik make a
formidable team, and we greatly respect them.

128. I should like to associate myself, Mr. President, with
the good wishes expressed to you by a number of
representatives in the Security Council. Your most able
leadership, your skill in conducting the proceedings of the
Council and in quickly finding a correct and appropriate
solution in various delicate and complex situations, have
certainly contributed to the successfulconclusion of this
important stage of the Council’s work.

123. As I have sat here in the Council, I have occupied
myself by composing these memorable lines which I
dedicate to the Deputy Foreign Minister:

129. Since you, Mr. President, will very soon be leaving
your post as Permanent Representative of the United States
to the United Nations, I should also like to point out that
you have been a worthy representative of your great
country in this Organization. I need hardly mention the
well-known and important posts which you occupied
before your arrival at the United Nations. Your energy,
your varied experience and your outstanding ability as a
statesman are all noteworthy. Although the positions of the
Soviet Union and .the United States on some issues
considered in the United Nations were fundamentally
different, we have nevertheless met with a desire on your
part to co-operate and to maintain contacts.

“Whenprospectsare dark and hopesare dim,
“We know that we must sendfor him;
“Whenstormsand tempestsfill the sky,
‘I ‘Bringon Kuznetsov ‘, is the cry.
‘IHe comeslike a dove ffom the Communistark,
“And light appearswhereall wasdark;
“His comingquickly turns the tide,
“The propagandafloods subside.
‘<Andnow that he haschangedthe weather,
‘Lion and lamb can vote together.
‘<Godblessthe Russiandelegation.
“I waiveconsecutivetranslation,”

130. We, and presumably other members of the Security
Council, are aware that Mr. Goldberg will not be losing his
connexions with the United Nations even after he leaves his
11

Council on 17 June (1430th meeting], this resolution 1aYs
a firm basis for ensuring the security of non-nucIear-weapon
parties to the non-proliferation treaty.

post as Permanent Representative of the United States. We
have learned that he has been named Chairman of the
Board of the United Nations Association of the United
States of America. May I wish him good health and express
the conviction that, while no longer an official representative in the United Nations, he will contribute to the
solution of the important and urgent problems which still
face the United Nations and mankind as a whole and serve
the interests of maintaining and strengthening peace and
progress for all the peoples of the world.

136. On behalf of the United States Government, which is
one of the depositary States under the non-proliferation
treaty, I wish to reaffrm the pledge given in the General
Assembly by the President of the United States.7 My
Government will move as speedily as possible, in concert
with the other depositary States, to open the treaty for
signature, and we hope to do so in concert with them at a
very early date. We will sign the treaty on behalf of the
United States as soon as it is opened for signature, and we
will seek its speedy ratification by our Senate in accordance
with our constitutional processes.

131. I should like to expressmy gratitude to the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon. I am
unable at this moment to vie with him in eloquence, but I
thank him for his kind words about the Soviet delegation
and I should like to stressthat we have based ourselves on a
sincere desire to do our utmost to ensure that the tasks still
facing the United Nations will be resolved in the interests of
mankind and the maintenance and consolidation of peace.
However, I should like to say to Lord Caradon that when
one or two men are being praised highly one should beware
of giving excessive praise lest it leads to certain consequences, though I do not think there will be such
consequences in this case.

137. As we come to the conclusion of the consideration of
this matter in the Council, I wish to thank all members,
whatever their views, for their courtesy and co-operation in
the expeditious handling of this important matter and for
the serious and constructive tone of their contributions to
our debate. In my capacity as United States representative,
I wish to express particular appreciation for the great
contributions throughout the entire consideration of this
treaty over many years by the other co-sponsors of this
resolution, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom, both
in Geneva and at the United Nations Headquarters. They
have worked with great dedication in the interests of
disarmament and world peace.

132. I should like to say a few words about the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Nesterenko. I think it is no secret
that Mr. Nesterenko, while being a senior official of the
United Nations Secretariat, is at the same time a good
citizen of the Soviet Union. In this connexion, I should like
to express our satisfaction at the favourable reactions and
appraisals which we have heard here about his work in his
post. He is returning to the Soviet Union where, undoubtedly, he will once again be in a position to use his
experience and talents in his diplomatic career.

138. I wish also to thank our Secretary-General, whose
great interest in progress towards disarmament has been
expressed on many occasions. His interest has been an
encouragement as well asa spur to us all.

133. I should like to express the hope that his successor,
Mr. Kutakov, will carry out the duties of UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations with all responsibility and will make a worthy contribution to the implementation of the tasks facing the United Nations.
134. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank Deputy Foreign
Minister Kuznetsov for what he has said and in particular
for what he has said about me. I appreciate his remarks
most profoundly. It has been a great privilege and honour
to be associated with him and others in the work that this
Council and the General Assembly have done, If we have
concluded upon a successfulnote, it is in large measure due
to the great contribution that he has made to this
momentous undertaking on which we have embarked. It is
an open secret that I am a profound believer in a d&ntk
between our two countries, a ditente which is essential if
world peace and security are to be ensured. Perhaps the
most momentous development from the non-proliferation
treaty will be the further advancement of that
understanding.

139. Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the great role
which the entire United Nations has played in this historic
enterprise. The non-proliferation treaty and the security
assurances which have been given in this Council and
formally welcomed by it have been shaped and influenced
by the principles of the Charter, by the United Nations as
an institution and by many of its Members in the courseof
diplomatic exchanges and in the debates which have taken
place here, in the recent General Assembly session and at
prior Assembly sessions. I know of no episode in the
history of the United Nations which better exemplifies the
major purposes of our Organization: to unite our strength
to maintain international peace and security and to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
140. The non-proliferation treaty is a giant step towards
nuclear disarmament-in my view, the most important and
significant disarmament measure adopted to *date by the
world community. Under the treaty the nuclear-weapon
States are obligated promptly to negotiate further measures
of nuclear disarmament. The United States will discharge
that obligation in full measure. We shall not wait until the
treaty comes into force. My Government has instructed our
negotiators to commence such negotiations immediately.
We shall carry on these negotiations fully mindful of the
overwhelming desire of Member States, which we share,to
rid the world community of the staggering burden of

135. I should now like to say a few words as representative of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. I wish to
express the great gratification of my Government at the
adoption of this resolution by the Security Council. We
consider it to be a major contribution to international
peace and security. Together with the declarations made by
my Government and the other two co-sponsors in the

1 SAC Official
Session, Plenary

12

Records
Meetings,

of the General Assembly,
1672nd meeting.

~eW-secorrd

armaments, so that the social and economic progress of
human beings throughout the world C&I be advanced.

Security Council’s efforts or our satisfaction at its SUCcesses.But we staff members of the Secretariat do not have
the right to make any comments. We avoid expressing our
feelings, although sometimes it would be easier to do so
than to !onceal them. We try to adhere strictly to the rules
which are laid down for us and we simply implement your
decisions.

141. We shall face immense difficulties as we seek to move
further along the road to disarmament and a more stable
world order, and it would be foolish to minimize those
difficulties. Yet, as we wrestle with those difficulties, what
the United Nations has achieved in June 1968 in the
General Assembly and the Security Council will serve as an
inspiration and encouragement to all of us. In the further
steps that we shall take together, we simply cannot fail-for
the survival of all of US, our children and our grandchildren
is indeed at stake.
142. Now I should like to say a word, if I may, as
PRESIDENT of the Council. Several members of the
Council have referred to the impending departure of our
distinguished Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Security Council Affairs, Mr. Nesterenko, and I should like
to sum up for all the members of the Council the feelings I
know we all have. During his three years of service at the
United Nations, Mr. Nesterenko hzs rightly earned wide
respect as a hard-workitig, diligent and capable servant of
the United Nations. He has consistently demonstrated a
patience, attention to duty and expertise worthy of his high
position. Beyond that, he has won many friends as a warm
human being with a delightful senseof humour. We have all
enjoyed his company as much as we have benefited from
his advice and his good work. On behalf of the Council, I
wish to express gratitude to Mr. Nesterenko for his outstanding service to the Council and to express the hope that
he will find occasion to return to the United Nations, where
Ile will find many friends and a warm welcome. We are
sorry to see him and his family go, and they will carry with
them the wishes of us all for successand happiness as he
assumes new and important duties in his own country.
143. I give the floor to our distinguished
Secretary-General.

Under-

144, Mr. NESTERENKO (Under-Secretary-General, Department of Political and Security Council Affairs) (truns&ted jkom Russian): Mr. President, I know that it is not the
usual practice for an Under-Secretary-General to speak at
this table, but it would be impolite if I did not reply to the
kind words that have been said about me here. For the sake
of brevity and accuracy I prefer, as you see, to speak in
Russian, bearing in mind especially that Russian may soon
become the fourth working language of this Organization,

147. Naturally, I do not intend to exaggerate to the
slightest degree my personal contribution, which has been
extremely modest, but I should like to say that the years I
have spent here have been entirely devoted to the work of
the Secretariat. I should like it to be said of me that my
work has been not destructive but constructive, as they say
in English, and if the distinguished representative of the
United Kingdom were to include me as well as the First
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR, who, if I
am not mistaken, is to be my future superior, among the
doves from the communist ark, I should be very pleased
indeed.
148. In any case, I have tried to make -as large a
contribution as possible to the causewe all serve, an+ I have
endeavoured to carry out my duties in the manner I
thought best. My task was made easier ,because I had the
good fortune to work under the guidance of such an
experienced and tactful leader as UThant, out SecretalyGeneral. I.have already had an opportunity to express my
gratitude to him privately and it is with great pleasure that I
now do so publicly, I should like to say to him that he has
been not only my superior but also my comrade in work,
and I am happy to use this Russian word “comrade”. I
hope that he had the same feeling towards me.
149. Anyway, I went to him with my convictions and
with my misgivings and we were able to discuss quietly a
number of complex and at times very difficult problems. I
should like to hope that the good relations which have
existed between us will be inherited by Mr. Kutakov, my
successor, who will soon be coming to sit in this not
altogether comfortable, but I think useful, chair. I believe
that he will enjoy the same good relations with all the
members of the Security Council as I myself have had.
150. Mr. President, permit me once again to thank you,
and through you, the members of the Security Council. If I
could express any emotion I would expressmy appraisal of
you as President of the Security Council and as the
representative of your country. But as I have already said, I
do not have the right to express any emotions-at least,
until 21 June. If we by chance meet on 22 June, I shall be
able to continue my conversation with you. I thank you,
Mr. President, and all your colleagues.

145. In my brief statement I should like sincerely to thank
you, Mr. President, and through you all the members of the
Security Council, particularly those who felt able to say
some kind words about me. Although I am not a woman, I
find complirhents pleasing-they are like balsam to my
rather outworn heart. And if the words of greeting
addressed to me were said not only out of fopal politeness
but as a token of respect for the work of members of the
Secretariat, I, as one of the representatives of the Secret*
riat staff-like the Secretary-General, who is also here-find
this doubly gratifying,

152. We have completed consideration of the item on our
agenda. If there is no objection, and with my profound
t&u& for your co-operation and for all that you have said
and done here today, I will declare the meeting adjourned.

146. Believe me, our work is not so easy. It is not easy to
refrain from expressing our feelings about the futility of the

The meeting rose at 5.2.5 p.m.

151. The PRESIDENT:
Secretary-General.

13

I thank the distinguished Under-

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Ler publications
des Nations
Unies
sent en vente
dons
d6positoires
du monde entier.
Informer-vow
auprbs
de v&e
Nations
Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Genive.

KAK

IlOflYYMTb

H3AAHMR

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPrAHM3AuMH

Las publicociones
de los Nociones
Unidos
estbn
en todas partes del mundo. Consulte
rl IV librero
Ventos, Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

in Uni‘ted Nations,

New York

ler librairies
et les agancar
librairic
ou odrersez-voup
6:

06bEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAL(Hfl

UNIDAS

en vento en librsrias
o dirljase
a: Nociones

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

throughout
New York

in other

y cosos distribuidoros
Unidos,
Sacci6n

currencies)

de

3.5711~-September

1972-2,100
