S/PV.6805

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6805th meeting

Thursday, 12 July 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Holguín Cuéllar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its fifth session (S/2012/70)
Note verbale dated 2 July 2012 from the Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/511)

12-41659 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1241659*

S/PV.6805

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/70, which contains the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on its fifth session. I also
wish to draw the attention of members to document
S/2012/511, which contains a note verbale dated 2 July
2012 from the Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its
fifth session (S/2012/70)

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.

Note verbale dated 2 July 2012 from the
Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/511)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Belgium, Brazil, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Croatia,
Egypt, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Mexico, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, the Republic of Korea, Sierra Leone, South
Sudan, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland and Tunisia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana, former Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Abulkalam Abdul Momen, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Joachim
von Amsberg, Vice-President and Head of Network
Operations, Policy and Country Services of the World
Bank, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2

begin

its

The Secretary-General: I commend Colombia’s
initiative to convene this timely debate, and I thank the
Foreign Minister of Colombia for taking the time to
preside over this meeting.
The international community has long recognized
the challenging and multidimensional character of
the transition from conflict to sustainable peace
and development. Security Council mandates have
grown in scope. Our field missions now perform an
unprecedented variety of tasks. We have increasingly
integrated the various efforts carried out under the
United Nations flag, and we have come to understand
that we can succeed only if we work in close partnership
with other key international actors, in support of
nationally owned priorities.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and the Peacebuilding
Support Office were established in 2005 to reinforce
ongoing efforts on the ground in conflict-affected
countries. Yet questions remain as to the focus and
effectiveness of these bodies. Two years after the
mixed review of the peacebuilding architecture, we
are seeing signs that it has begun to come of age and
is making a difference. This is the case particularly in
those instances when the Peacebuilding Commission,
Fund and Support Office reinforce each other and work
hand in hand with the United Nations presence on the
ground.
In Liberia, for example, the Peacebuilding
Commission and Fund have worked closely with United
Nations actors on the ground to strengthen existing field
efforts in the area of security sector and justice reform.
This collective engagement is helping to establish the
first of five regional justice and security hubs, which
are critical elements of our transition strategy for the
United Nations Mission and Liberia.

12-41659

S/PV.6805

In Sierra Leone, the PBC and PBF have been
supporting efforts to deepen democracy. Over the course
of five years, this work has evolved from strengthening
State institutions, through the establishment of
anti-corruption and human rights commissions, to
empowering non-State actors.
In Guinea, after more than 50 years of dominance by
the military, the country has moved towards democratic
rule and we are supporting the crucially important
step of conducting a military census and providing a
retirement programme for 4,000 military personnel.
But of course, much remains to be done. Let me
highlight three areas in which we can enhance the
impact of our peacebuilding tools.
First, the PBC should do more to leverage its unique
membership and collective ability to mobilize resources.
Through distinct messages that complement those of
others, the Commission can reinforce the efforts of
national actors, Member States, and the United Nations
family at Headquarters and on the ground.
Secondly, the PBC should sustain the focus
on longer-term peacebuilding. The Commission’s
contribution can be particularly valuable in galvanizing
international commitment beyond the limited lifespans
of United Nations missions on the ground.
Thirdly, the PBC may be able to add significant
value in some non-mission settings, where national
authorities and Resident Coordinators would benefit
from the intergovernmental support that the Commission
can bring to bear. In order for the PBC to fully meet
its potential, the Security Council should offer greater
clarity on what type of advice it would like from the
Commission in its deliberations and in the definition
of mandates. That would help lead United Nations
departments and actors in the field to coordinate with
the Commission, and reduce the risk of duplication.
The United Nations is committed to maximizing
the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the wider peacebuilding architecture. Assisted by the
Support Office and in synergy with operational lead
entities, the Commission’s impact in the field can be
further amplified. The United Nations is also working
to enhance our cooperation with the international
financial institutions, including the World Bank and the
African Development Bank. We are also committed to
supporting the new model of partnership between fragile
and conflict-affected countries and their development

partners, as envisaged last year by the g7+ countries
and their partners in the New Deal on Engagement in
Fragile States.
But we need the support of Member States,
including for the Peacebuilding Fund. The PBF
has proven itself as a timely and flexible financing
instrument when peacebuilding needs are most acute
and when few other resources are available for early
post-conflict interventions.
As I outlined in my action agenda for my second
term, supporting nations in transition is a top priority
and generational opportunity for the United Nations. We
have much work ahead of us. But if the United Nations
family, Member States and the wider multilateral
system work together in support of nationally owned
strategies, we can have an impact far greater than any
single entity could achieve on its own. That is what we
owe the peoples we serve. We look forward to deepening
that work together.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gasana.
Mr. Gasana: I am pleased to present the report
(S/2012/70) of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on its fifth session.
We have come a long way in appreciating the
imperative of complementing the investment in
peacemaking and peacekeeping with a long-term vision
for sustainable peace. Today, we know that peacebuilding
is more than a set of activities and tasks to be mandated,
undertaken and reviewed. Peacebuilding is, rather, a
state of mind — a culture of policymaking, planning,
funding and implementing activities in post-conflict
settings. Today, we know that peacebuilding is a term
used to describe the continuum that spans all efforts
to lay the foundations for sustainable development and
for resilient societies and institutions. Today, we have
a platform that could help the United Nations and the
international community to conceive such a long-term
vision for peace and to sustain attention on critical
priorities. Today, we have the PBC, whose full potential
we have yet to tap.
During the reporting period under review today,
the PBC responded to the request for advice and support
from the Republic of Guinea, thereby becoming the
sixth country to be placed on the PBC’s agenda. The
decision taken by the Commission to respond positively

12-416593

S/PV.6805

to Guinea’s request for advice marked a new phase in
the evolution of the PBC. This is a country that has not
emerged from an armed conflict, is not on the agenda of
the Council and has no mandated mission deployed to it.
In Guinea, the PBC is up for a new challenge to support
the country in a crucial political and socio-economic
transition phase.
In the other five countries on the Commission’s
agenda — Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone — the PBC
has continued to support each country through the
different stages and challenges facing the peacebuilding
processes.
The reporting period also included the Commission’s
initial effort to respond to the resolution 1947 (2010),
concerning the outcome of the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. At the beginning of
the year, the Commission adopted a road map of actions
as an implementation framework to take forward
relevant recommendations emanating from the review,
with special emphasis on enhancing the Commission’s
impact in the field.
Allow me to highlight just three elements from the
annual report before us today.
First, the report underscores the activities undertaken
by the Commission’s various configurations to reach
out to and engage a number of critical actors within and
outside the United Nations. In view of the complexity
of peacebuilding challenges and the multiplicity of
actors, the need for coherence and partnerships cannot
be overemphasized. Building and strengthening
partnerships with relevant actors has been identified as
a key area of potential added value for the Commission.
In that regard, the PBC devoted the majority of its
effort and time to engaging with the international
financial institutions, especially the World Bank and
the African Development Bank. In the particular case
of the African Development Bank, the reporting period
laid the foundation for a deep and diverse partnership
that promises to align the Commission’s and the Bank’s
engagement in the countries on the agenda.
Secondly, the Commission has an enormous
capacity to promote knowledge and experience-sharing.
To that end, the Government of Rwanda, together
with the PBC and in collaboration with the African
Development Bank, hosted a high-level meeting on the
theme “Post-conflict peacebuilding: the experience
of Rwanda”, held in Kigali on 8 and 9 November

4

2011. The event represented an innovative effort by
the Commission to serve as a platform for promoting
experience-sharing between the six countries on
its agenda and other countries that have undergone
peacebuilding and State-building processes. There is
a real need to nurture that type of cooperation among
the countries of the South. The PBC is best suited to
become a platform for such cooperation.
Thirdly, the Commission has continued to
prioritize the need for strengthening the interaction
with, and its advisory role vis-à-vis, the principal
organs of the United Nations. Briefings by the Chairs
of the country-specific configurations to the Security
Council have become systematic ahead of the Council’s
periodic consideration of the situations in, and mandate
involving, the countries on the Commission’s agenda.
The year 2011 also witnessed the introduction by the
Council of the informal interactive dialogues on certain
country situations.
The 2010 review particularly highlighted the
potential for developing a dynamic linkage between
the Commission and the Council. Fourteen out of the
15 members of the Security Council are currently
members of the PBC in its various configurations. The
joint membership offers a natural interface that would
facilitate the Council’s drawing more proactively and
regularly on the Commission’s advice. I would like
to echo the Secretary-General’s point on the need for
clarity from the Council regarding the specific areas
for which the PBC’s advice could be sought.
The reporting period also witnessed the continuing
development of the Commission’s relationship with the
Economic and Social Council. The jointly organized
special event on the Millennium Development Goals
in countries emerging from conflict testified to the
Commission’s growing advocacy role for an integrated
approach to peacebuilding, including through a
well-deserved focus on the socio-economic dimension
of peacebuilding.
There is need to empower the PBC to become
the central United Nations platform for support to
countries emerging from conflict and aspiring to
sustained engagement as they undertake the arduous
task of building national capacity and institutions. The
challenge facing the Commission in demonstrating its
full potential, however, is to ensure that its work in
support of these countries is backed by a high degree
of political commitment from the Member States and

12-41659

S/PV.6805

the senior United Nations leadership. This is our shared
responsibility and one that we are yet to shoulder with
full commitment.
As noted by the co-facilitators of the 2010 review
report, “the review should become a wake-up call
to strengthen the collective resolve to deal with
peacebuilding in a more comprehensive and determined
way” (S/2011/41, para. 107). I hope that today’s debate
will take us a step further towards realizing the full
potential of the Commission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Gasana for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Momen.
Mr. Momen: In just over six years, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), with valuable support from the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO), has helped to generate a much-needed
focus on the complex challenges of post-conflict
peacebuilding. As the Secretary-General rightly
noted, while its full potential is yet to be realized, the
architecture has started to demonstrate signs of what it
is capable of doing. The 2010 review indeed contributed
to renewing our commitment to strengthening the
architecture and ensuring that it can meet its full
potential.
At the outset, I wish to recognize the constructive
role played by the Chairs of the respective PBC
configurations. Drawing on their experience of working
with the countries on the agenda and in the field, their
inputs to this statement have been invaluable.
As indicated in the PBC’s annual report (S/2012/70)
and in the concept paper prepared by the presidency
for this debate (S/2012/511, annex), there is need for
better understanding of the nature and scope of the
Commission’s role. Faced with diverse expectations
and challenges, the PBC will certainly benefit from a
common articulation of its real potential and limitations.
This debate represents an opportunity that should be
fully utilized. I shall therefore begin on a very frank
note.
As an intergovernmental body that is dedicated
to addressing the special needs of countries emerging
from conflict, the PBC was conceived around the
imperative of ensuring the commitment of a broad
range of the most relevant global actors. These actors
include its own members, which are drawn from the
membership of the three principal organs and from the

top financial and troop and police contributors to the
United Nations. They also include institutional donors
and regional actors. This unique membership structure
suggests that the PBC could leverage the collective
political, financial and technical capacities of its
member States and institutional partners in support of
national peacebuilding objectives in the countries on
its agenda.
In contrast to these expectations, the Commission’s
engagement has been too frequently defined by the
individual efforts made by the leadership of the country
configurations and, in rare instances, by a few interested
members. The full potential of such a unique political
platform, made up of the most influential global actors,
has unfortunately not been met. This is a statement that
invites serious reflection.
At the same time and despite those difficulties,
the PBC has still managed to show signs of its vast
potential in the area of political accompaniment and
advocacy. To name but a few examples, it has been able
to confer legitimacy upon serious national and United
Nations efforts to build trust between political actors
in the case of Sierra Leone in 2009; manage tensions
accompanying electoral processes in Burundi in 2010;
support national capacity development for police and
the rule of law in Liberia since 2011; support security
sector reform in Guinea, leading notably to the
completion of the largest military retirement project in
the country’s history in late 2011; and provide effective
support to the first round of presidential elections in
Guinea-Bissau last March.
The partnership with the international financial
institutions is also an area in which the PBC has
demonstrated signs of potential. The most recent
completion of the new poverty reduction strategies in
Burundi and the Central African Republic offered an
opportunity to strengthen the United Nations partnership
with the World Bank and the African Development
Bank and to integrate peacebuilding priorities into
socio-economic planning and programming for both
countries. In the case of Guinea-Bissau, the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank have supported a
significant debt relief, helping to generate a virtuous
economic cycle in the country. In the case of Guinea,
the World Bank is partnering with the Government and
other peacebuilding stakeholders to launch a productive
social safety nets project that will provide employment
to 24,000 young people and women.

12-416595

S/PV.6805

Last year’s Kigali high-level meeting demonstrated
the PBC’s potential to facilitate South-South and
triangular cooperation in critical and recurring
peacebuilding priorities, such as aid and donor
coordination, national reconciliation, reintegration, job
creation, and security sector and justice reform.
It is difficult to imagine how the international
community and the United Nations will be able to
tap into this potential in the absence of the political
commitment of individual Governments, and the United
Nations system as a whole, to render the PBC’s efforts
successful. The United Nations and other partners
should view the PBC as an opportunity and a source
of support, not as a competitor or an additional layer of
bureaucracy.
At the same time, the PBC must also make great
effort to enhance its stature and added value. We
must continue to refine and adapt the Commission’s
instruments and forms of engagement to changing needs
and circumstances at the country level; strengthen
linkages with the United Nations leadership and other key
actors in the field and at Headquarters; explore practical
approaches to facilitating resource mobilization; and
develop ways of assessing peacebuilding progress. In
accomplishing these objectives, the PBC needs the
continued and increased support of the PBSO and other
relevant United Nations and non-United Nations actors
engaged in peacebuilding.
It is significant that this debate on the potential and
limits of the PBC is taking place under the auspices of the
Security Council, as one of the two parent institutions
of the Commission, along with the General Assembly.
Given the fact that the Security Council is facing an
ever-increasing number of situations to cope with, the
PBC can play a useful role in alleviating the Council’s
workload by looking after situations that are not on its
immediate agenda. We thus look forward to innovative
ideas and suggestions from Council members. In the
meantime, allow me to share a few preliminary ideas
suggested by the Chairs group that could provide a
framework for strengthening and taking forward these
relations.
First, the relations between the Security Council
and country-specific configurations should be further
intensified and institutionalized. Such a relationship
could manifest itself most importantly when the
Council is in the process of establishing or renewing
the mandate for a country under PBC consideration.

6

Council resolutions could also include specific requests
for advice from the PBC around the priority areas
identified with the country concerned. This would
help the Council to receive more focused analysis on
issues ranging from the linkages between security and
socio-economic development, the alignment of key
actors behind national priorities, the opportunities for
connection with relevant global initiatives, and the
status of partnerships between the United Nations and
other relevant actors in the country concerned.
Secondly, I share the Secretary-General’s belief that
the PBC would benefit from clarity on the division of
roles and responsibilities with the senior United Nations
leadership in the field. Such clarity would facilitate
the establishment of mutually reinforcing relations in
a manner that would optimize the implementation of
Council mandates and allow for developing coherent
messages and engagement with national actors. We
must assure the senior United Nations leadership in the
field that the PBC is committed to supporting their role
on the ground and that their cooperation is essential to
the work of the Commission.
Thirdly, the advice of the PBC could be most relevant
as the Council considers a transition from one form of
United Nations engagement to another. This advice is
expected to be based on an assessment of progress in
national peacebuilding efforts, of the level of support
from and commitment of the international community,
and of the specific capacities required for the United
Nations country team to continue to support long-term
peacebuilding efforts in the country concerned.
Fourthly and finally, there is need for periodic
information sharing with the Council on country-specific
opportunities and risks. This would help the Council to
identify areas for which greater buy-in and coherence
from the United Nations system and the international
community should be sought and attained in a timely
manner. The Chairs of the PBC country configurations
highly value the opportunity given to them to formally
brief the Council on the situation in the countries
concerned.
We also commend the initiative taken by certain
Council Presidents in organizing interactive informal
dialogues on country-specific issues. As an incremental
step, for instance, a more systematic and periodic use
of the country-specific informal format, possibly on a
quarterly basis, needs to be considered. Such regular
and substantive exchanges could be of great value to the

12-41659

S/PV.6805

Security Council ahead of the Council’s field visits to
countries on the PBC agenda. They could also focus on
thematic and regional issues concerning more than one
country-specific configuration, for example emerging
threats such as transnational organized crime.

you, Madam President, for inviting the World Bank to
brief the Council on the progress on the strengthening
and deepening partnership with the United Nations
to support peacebuilding and development in fragile
country situations.

In addition, an annual interactive dialogue on the
occasion of the consideration of the PBC’s annual report
could also address broader systemic issues of mutual
interest. We look forward to discussing these and other
suggestions in the full membership of the Peacebuilding
Commission and in the context of the planned informal
dialogue.

I bring with me today the good wishes from the
World Bank President, Mr. Jim Yong Kim, who
assumed the presidency just last week. He is very much
looking forward to engaging over the next weeks and
months closely with all our partners on how to deepen
and strengthen our collaboration and, in particular, on
how to make our work on the ground in conflict and
fragile situations even more effective in the future.

It is essential that the countries on the agenda of
the PBC not relapse into conflict. Therefore, we must
continue to maintain our focus on enhancing the PBC’s
impact in the field. This impact should be ideally
manifested by empowering national actors to own and
lead the peacebuilding process and by ensuring that the
United Nations and other key actors are positioned to
support this endeavour. The PBC will strive to provide
hope and facilitate the efforts of the national leadership
to achieve sustainable peace and security.
Our goal is also to offer all relevant national
actors a fair chance at building resilient societies and
institutions. This is undoubtedly a goal shared by the
Security Council and the broader membership of the
United Nations. This is a goal that can be attained only
if we manage to muster the necessary political will and
commitment.
In conclusion, I invite us all to take this debate as an
opportunity to recommit ourselves to putting the needs
and aspirations of the peoples of the countries affected
by or emerging from conflict ahead of everything else.
I recall that none of the post-conflict, low-income,
fragile countries can yet achieve a single Millennium
Development Goal, but there is hope that countries that
could manage to reduce violence also could produce
some of the fastest development gains. Therefore, our
commitments must be rock solid and long-term, and we
must persevere. With the Council’s concerted effort, we
will win.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Momen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Von Amsberg.
Mr. Von Amsberg: I thank the Secretary-General
and Ambassadors Momen and Gasana for their
leadership in this very important endeavour. I thank

Over the past 20 years, we have seen formidable
progress in global poverty reduction, but progress has
been uneven. Issues of conflict, fragility and violence
are among the biggest obstacles to development. Fragile
and conflict-affected States are the furthest from
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
I just want to make a few comments on how the
World Bank is scaling up its own efforts to fight
poverty and promote development in these particular
situations, talk about our rising partnerships, and make
a few comments on future developments.
On our own efforts over the past two years, when
we prepared the World Development Report 2011
on conflict, security and development, in very close
collaboration with the United Nations, we decided to
scale up and intensify our work in conflict and fragile
situations. We are now putting into operation that
document, which has set us on a new path. We have
seen that the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States, formed in Busan at the High-Level Forum
on Aid Effectiveness in November and December
2011, and which was endorsed by about 40, countries
embodies some of the same principles of more effective
partnerships in support of those partner countries. The
New Deal and the World Development Report 2011 call
for the international community to re-examine the way
it engages in situations of fragility and conflict.
Challenges facing fragile and conflict-affected
countries cannot be resolved on a short-term basis or
with partial solutions in the absence of institutions
that provide people with security, justice and jobs.
The development assistance must support and must go
hand-in-hand with peace and State-building goals. We
at the World Bank are making four major changes on

12-416597

S/PV.6805

how we engage in our work in situations of fragility
and conflict.
First, we are doing strategies differently. Our
country strategies for fragile and conflict-affected
States are now focused on support to peace and
State-building goals, directly or indirectly through the
programmes we are supporting.
Secondly, we are financing differently. Together
with our partners in the International Development
Association — the World Bank’s fund for the poorest
countries — we are developing proposals to simplify,
adjust and accelerate the framework for allocating
resources to fragile and conflict-affected situations. We
also have a State- and Peace-building Fund, which we
use as a pilot fund to actually implement the ideas of
the World Development Report 2011 and the New Deal
for International Engagement in Fragile States. In fact,
aligning financial instruments is critical for all of us in
order to ensure coherence in our approaches to working
with fragile and conflict-affected situations. We have
therefore launched a discussion on how to align the
World Bank’s State- and Peace-Building Fund with the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and on how we can
learn from each other.
Thirdly, we are operating differently. We are also
developing a package of internal reforms to enable
more informed risk-taking, more nimble operational
responses to changing environments, more hands-on
implementation support to partner teams, and new
approaches for measuring results.
Fourthly, we are deploying our human resources
differently. The g7+ group of fragile and conflict-affected
States has challenged us by saying that they need more
face-time with more senior technology specialists on
the ground, working more closely with partners in the
United Nations and other agencies. In response, we have
created a new centre in Nairobi, the Global Centre on
Conflict, Security and Development, and are increasing
our staff presence in several conflict-affected countries.
I would like now to turn to the partnership and
our work with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
New Deal and the g7+ have called for strong national
ownership of development and peacebuilding strategies
and for the alignment of development partners to support
those strategies. To achieve those objectives, we need
to see greater coherence across an international aid
structure that is often too divided and too stove-piped
between development, security and humanitarian and

8

diplomatic assistance. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission can play a fundamental role in bridging
some of those gaps, as it has in the past. The regular
exchanges that are being promoted between the United
Nations, its Member States and the World Bank Board
have also been instrumental in bringing about that
coherence.
The World Bank has supported the Peacebuilding
Commission’s work since it was founded, six years
ago. It has engaged actively in all of the Commission’s
country-specific configurations. We have been
coordinating our respective efforts well.
The Commission has provided useful inputs and
guidance to our country teams. I am also encouraged
to see that the Commission’s country-specific
configurations are working to enhance coordination
and coherence on the ground. The suggestions made by
Ambassador Momen also offer promising avenues for
further enhancing the Commission’s impact.
Over the past two to three years, the United
Nations-World Bank partnership has continued to
grow at both the institutional and the country levels.
Our teams are collaborating more than ever to ensure
that our strategies are aligned and that we respond in
a complementary fashion. We see progress in all of
the country-specific configuration areas and in all
six countries on the agenda. Ambassador Momen has
already mentioned some of the joint initiatives.
In the Central African Republic, we are working
with the former Belgian Chair on a common agenda to
support the Government and development partners.
In Liberia, we are coordinating our upcoming
country assistance strategy with the country-led
implementation of the New Deal and the Peacebuilding
Commission’s efforts led by the Swedish Chair.
In Burundi, we are working hand-in-hand with the
Swiss Chair and are jointly supporting the Government
in organizing a partners’ meeting this fall.
In Sierra Leone, the leadership of the Canadian
Chair helped all partners align behind the Agenda for
Change, and we are coordinating efforts in the critical
area of job creation.
In Guinea-Bissau, the World Bank and the Brazilian
Chair joined forces to support the country in reaching
the decision point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative.

12-41659

S/PV.6805

In Guinea, as the Ambassador mentioned, we
collaborate closely with the Government and the
Ambassador of Luxembourg on a number of critical
issues, including employment generation, and we are
exploring ways to further engage in the area of security
sector reform.
The World Bank and the United Nations, along with
the European Union, are also strengthening coordination
on the framework for post-crisis assessments, as the
recent example of the joint assessment in Yemen
effectively illustrates.
In addition to the country-level collaboration I
mentioned, we have thematic collaboration in a joint
platform for coordinating job creation and collaboration
in the area of justice and security.
We are also working to more effectively address
on-the-ground implementation. The World Bank
and the United Nations are finalizing a review of the
important Fiduciary Principles Accord, which facilitates
implementation by one entity of trust funds managed
by the other, in specific post-crisis circumstances. That
review will open space for a broader discussion of how
the World Bank and the United Nations can collaborate
to address operational challenges to implementation
on the ground, including increased interoperability,
common approaches to risk management and the
development of instruments for combined operations.
We are also carrying out a joint review of the
United Nations-World Bank collaboration within the
2008 Partnership Framework Agreement to take stock
of cooperation and identify priorities going forward.
That brings me to my final point, on future
perspectives. We need to continue to strengthen our
partnership and alignment of activities in the countries
on the Peacebuilding Commission’s agenda, especially
our work on needs assessments and poverty reduction
strategies.
We support the recommendations of the annual
report to further explore complementary programming
between the United Nations, the World Bank and other
international actors, where issues of security, justice
and development intersect.
It will be most useful to link the relevant
recommendations of the World Development Report
2011, the review of civilian capacity and the ongoing
work of the Peacebuilding Commission. Additionally,
the implementation of the New Deal offers fresh

opportunities to strengthen our collaboration. Six States
that have endorsed the New Deal are also on the agenda
of the Commission. The Commission has a role in
ensuring the coherence and alignment of international
assistance behind the New Deal’s implementation.
Better support to peacebuilding requires moving
from needs-based approaches towards genuine
prioritization. The peace- and State-building goals
provide a great starting point for such prioritization
by highlighting the issues that States themselves
have identified as critical moving forward. The
Peacebuilding Commission could be a useful forum
in which to explore how the peace- and State-building
goals and specific challenges facing conflict-affected
countries can be reflected in the post-2015 United
Nations Development Assistance Framework.
Delivering results for people living in fragile and
conflict-affected situations will require concerted and
sustained efforts from all of us. The World Bank is
deeply committed to that agenda and looks forward to
working closely with all partners around the table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Mr. Von Amsberg for his briefing and for all the
commitment shown by the World Bank.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for joining us and for his presentation.
Likewise, I would like to highlight the statements
made by the former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Rwanda,
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana, by the current
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador Abulkalam
Abdul Momen, and by Mr. Joachim von Amsberg,
Vice-President for Operations Policy and Country
Services of the World Bank.
The 2005 World Summit reached a milestone
when we took on a commitment to give impetus to
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations. Within
the Organization, the Commission has been given
the role of proposing and advising on strategies for
post-conflict recovery and of bringing together all the
agents involved in resource mobilization. Colombia
considers peacebuilding processes to be of vital
importance. Peacebuilding constitutes a fundamental
stage if countries are to overcome the root causes of a

12-416599

S/PV.6805

conflict. We hope that this discussion will contribute to
strengthening the Commission towards that end.
We know from experience that there is no
substitute for strengthening national institutions and
that sustainable results are those supported by national
ownership. The generation of local and national capacity
and ownership over processes, strategies and policies
are indispensable conditions for avoiding a relapse into
conflict.
A successful peacebuilding process is the first step
towards leaving behind past conflict and confrontation
and laying a solid and lasting foundation for a promising
future for the population. The main responsibility for
successful peacebuilding belongs to Governments and
relevant national agents, including civil society.
From the Commission’s report (S/2012/70), it is
clear that the challenges presented by peacebuilding in
post-conflict situations demand an ongoing learning
process, bearing in mind that no situations are
identical and no formulas can be universally applied.
Six years after the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the fundamental notion of its mandate
is still novel for an international community used to
thinking almost exclusively in terms of conflicts and
their resolution. For the Security Council, it is also
novel to move from a paradigm centred on maintaining
international peace and security, in application of
Chapter VII of the Charter, towards a vision focused
on strengthening national capacity and promoting
conditions for sustainable development.
Experience has shown the United Nations that
peacekeeping tasks cannot be thought of as separate from
post-conflict approaches. The structural strengthening
of institutions and of the architecture that allows
States to function encompasses both peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The actions of peacekeepers clearly can
set solid foundations for early peacebuilding.
Of foremost importance is strengthening national
capacities and creating the conditions for countries
to regain their full independence and sovereignty,
generate development and promote the welfare of their
populations. Regional and subregional organizations,
more closely acquainted with the challenges faced by a
country going through the rebuilding process, play an
important role in that process through their vision and
leadership. In that regard, it is important to highlight the
role of international financial institutions, such as the
World Bank, and of regional banks similarly working

10

for recovery and reconciliation and building the social,
economic and financial structures of countries in such
transition.
The Commission has the potential to create
mechanisms and modalities to identify knowledge and
lessons learned in matters of technical assistance, and
thus to promote South-South cooperation. Likewise, it
can help States on its agenda to strengthen their national
capacities by coordinating the activities of donors and
encouraging transparency and accountability.
We commend the configurations for each country
on the Commission’s agenda for applying flexible and
realistic criteria. Such criteria allow for work on the
ground within available capacities and provide existing
institutions the time and opportunity to achieve their
own results. The Commission and its configurations
require the commitment and active participation of
all their members. It is important to establish specific
objectives through which genuine progress and political
support can be achieved.
In that context, visits by the Chairs of the
configurations are valuable tools, not only in lending
political support to countries on the agenda but
also as a channel for dialogue between the various
national actors and the United Nations system. We
therefore believe that dialogue between the General
Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission must be
maintained and deepened. We take note of the channel
of communication established through the report of
the Chairperson of the Commission to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. In that spirit,
Colombia will hold an interactive dialogue with the
Security Council, the Commission and the countries
on its agenda in order to provide an opportunity to
exchange opinions in a frank and dynamic manner,
jointly analyse expectations and achievements, and
establish realistic objectives.
Deepening peacebuilding means modifying
traditional attitudes and adjusting to countries
and regions that are ever more autonomous in the
international system. That shift in balances of power
calls for dialogue and political solutions to issues that
have traditionally been addressed through sanctions
or confrontation. Nations like ours that understand
the difficulty of achieving lasting peace know that,
despite the obstacles and challenges, we must believe
in the possibility of peace and development for

12-41659

S/PV.6805

nations affected by conflicts. We know that the path of
peacebuilding road is not an easy one.

to incorporate the perspectives of youth and women in
particular, which are crucial to post-conflict recovery.

Given its experience and the challenges it has
overcome, and aware that there are still more to
surmount, Colombia believes that we must focus on
bringing people hope and offering them a chance for
a decent life, moving beyond the circumstances of the
past. That can be done through public policies providing,
inter alia, for reparation for victims and creating
effective mechanisms to promote social and economic
development to the benefit of the most vulnerable and
affected population. We believe that lasting peace can
be achieved through a balance of policies that provide
for reparations and that generate sustainable welfare and
prosperity in the long term. We must commit ourselves
to finding policies that promote consensus, heal the
wounds of the past and allow societies — especially
younger generations — to rebuild their countries, create
opportunities and work towards reconciliation, security
and peace.

The Liberia configuration’s recent meeting with a
local peace committee is one example of grass-roots
engagement that should be repeated. Peacebuilding
strategies need to be integral to national plans, not an
added burden to post-conflict Governments already
struggling to manage delicate transitions. The PBC
can help reinforce existing national strategies and
ensure a focused effort from all actors. The PBC has
done that effectively in Sierra Leone by adopting the
Government’s Agenda for Change as the basis for
its engagement in the country. As a result, the PBC
promotes a single vision for Sierra Leone’s future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Minister Holguín Cuéllar, for chairing this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Gasana, Ambassador Momen and Mr. Von
Amsberg for their important leadership on the issue of
peacebuilding.
We have learned time and again that the end of
conflict does not mean that peace has necessarily
arrived. Sustained peace must be built on a durable
foundation of national commitment, broad international
support and experience informed by the lessons of the
past. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has an
important role to play, and can continue to enhance
its contribution by focusing its efforts, strengthening
coordination with internal and external stakeholders,
and highlighting best practices.
First, peacebuilding cannot succeed without
national ownership. That is indispensable. Government,
civil society and citizens must be engaged regularly in
order to ensure the international community responds to
their needs. We encourage the PBC to engage affected
communities in shaping peacebuilding priorities and

Secondly, the international community still
struggles with coordinating an increasingly crowded
field of peacebuilding actors. We urge the PBC to forge
and expand partnerships with international financial
institutions, including the African Development
Bank and the World Bank, major donors and key
regional actors. Deeper relationships between the
PBC and regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, would also benefit
many countries on the PBC agenda, particularly in
dealing with issues that benefit from regional solutions,
including combating transnational illicit networks.
Thirdly, mobilizing resources for peacebuilding
remains an enormous challenge, but one on which the
PBC can have a significant impact. We commend the
country-specific configuration Chairs for publicly
advocating for sustained commitment to peacebuilding
and increasing the alignment of PBC priorities with
projects supported by the Peacebuilding Fund. The PBC
can also leverage its diverse composition and convening
power to mobilize new sources of investment and
support, including from the private sector, and work
to ensure timely and successful donor conferences and
related processes.
Fourthly, today’s discussion of the PBC’s
effectiveness cannot be separated from the broader
work of United Nations peacebuilding, including efforts
to develop and deploy more effectively capable civilian
specialists in the aftermath of conflict.
We
welcome
the
commitment
of
the
Secretary-General to implement reforms since the
issuance of his report (S/2011/527) on the subject.
Those include the development of an online mechanism
to access the marketplace of civilian expertise, and

12-4165911

S/PV.6805

the designation of a new global focal point on the rule
of law, to bring greater coherence to the work of the
United Nations and mobilize the combined expertise of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on
that critical, cross-cutting issue. Indeed, successful
peacebuilding requires the United Nations to pool its
own system-wide expertise.
On
other
multifaceted
issues,
such
as
youth employment and improving public sector
capacity-building, progress still needs to be made in
bringing all partners together around common strategies
and effective divisions of labour.
The United Nations can also play a unique role
in facilitating triangular partnerships that support the
sharing of expertise in post-conflict transitions, such
as the initiative of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to deploy Kenyan, Ugandan and Ethiopian
experts to South Sudan, with the support of Norway and
UNDP. United Nations agencies can encourage wider
use of those and other innovative arrangements when
designing peacebuilding activities.
Finally, fortunately, we have an increasingly long
list of experiences to inform our support for countries
emerging from conflict. The PBC has worked with six
countries on a diverse range of peacebuilding needs,
and the United Nations has supported numerous other
peacebuilding efforts in places such as South Sudan and
Timor-Leste.
While there is no one-size-fits-all peacebuilding
solution, the United States encourages the PBC,
through its Working Group on Lessons Learned, to
systematically review peacebuilding precedents and
disseminate global best practices from countries on and
off the PBC’s agenda.
The Council’s mandate to advance peace and
security demands that we work not just to end conflict,
but to prevent its recurrence. By aligning with national
priorities, strengthening international partnerships and
learning from what we have already accomplished, the
Peacebuilding Commission has great potential to help
countries emerging from war to stay on the path to
peace. The United States looks forward to the Security
Council’s continuing engagement with the PBC to
facilitate and enhance that critical work.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The
importance of the debate being held by the Security

12

Council today stems from the fact that peacebuilding
remains at the heart of the work of the United Nations.
I would therefore like to thank Colombia, Madam
President, for deciding to put the issue at the centre of
the Council’s work for this month.
The annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) on the work of its fifth session (S/2012/70)
provides an illustration of the actions taken in 2011.
The statements just made by the Secretary-General, the
current and outgoing Chairs of the Commission and the
representative of the World Bank serve to inform the
Council about the work carried out and the challenges to
be addressed. I congratulate the Chairs of the PBC and
its country-specific configurations for their leadership.
Since the 2005 World Summit, peacebuilding
has remained at the centre of United Nations efforts
in countries emerging from conflict. Peacebuilding
supports peacekeeping in order to enhance the
effectiveness and visibility of the United Nations
presence, which has the task of considering
systematically and comprehensively all of the problems
due to or exacerbated by an armed conflict, in order to
build a viable State that respects fundamental freedoms
and establish good political and economic governance.
Since the establishment of the PBC, the Security
Council has also worked to develop and adapt its
peacekeeping mandates, which now give pride of place
to the rebuilding of a country after peace has been
restored.
In that context, my country commends the
reconstruction work carried out by the PBC
country-specific configurations in Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Guinea, the Central African
Republic and Burundi. Although the results vary from
one country to another, the new approach translates
the will of the United Nations to ensure that countries
emerging from conflict do not revert to violence due to
a lack of appropriate support.
The Commission’s report reviews the key actions of
the country-specific configurations, which essentially
concern establishing dialogue among the various
political actors of a country in order to provide solutions
to divisive issues, strengthen national capacities in
order to establish a solid foundation for development
and mobilize external resources to rebuild the country
and foster strengthened coordinated efforts among the
various development agencies aimed at consolidating
real accomplishments.

12-41659

S/PV.6805

It is comforting to note that many sectors of the
concerned countries have experienced accelerated
development resulting from the initiatives of the country
configurations, which have established dialogue among
the various actors participating in reconstruction and
targeted priority tasks.
Among the priority actions, Togo believes that
there should be emphasis on political dialogue among
the various actors in a country, so as to ensure that the
settlement of political issues will open a path towards
democracy while establishing the rule of law and good
governance and reforming the key sector of justice.
Nevertheless, Togo would recall that to ensure the
long-term success of those actions it is important to
continue to prioritize the participation of women and
youth in all future initiatives.
The PBC’s support for Liberia, Guinea-Bissau,
Sierra Leone and Guinea in West Africa with respect to
their development programmes indicates that the issues
of youth and women’s employment, drug trafficking
and security sector reform were particularly targeted
because settling those issues is essential to the stability
and sustainable development of those countries.
Turning to the issue of transnational organized
crime in West Africa, we are pleased by the
cooperation among the four country configurations,
which have joined efforts to respond to the problem
comprehensively based on the principle of common
and shared responsibility, along with assistance from
exterior actors.
In that regard, the call for cooperation among the
PBC, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and INTERPOL deserves support, not only
in order to implement the relevant ECOWAS action
plan, but also the West Africa Coast Initiative. In each
case, it should be noted that awareness-raising, political
support and resource-mobilization are key elements of
the activities to be conducted.
While congratulating the PBC for its policy on
mobilizing resources, we encourage it to strengthen
efforts in that area. External financing should assist
national authorities to cover all sectors, rather than
targeting only a few areas, such as governance, justice
sector reform, the preparation of elections and security
sector reform.
In that context, my delegation commends the
good cooperation established with such international

financial institutions as the World Bank, the African
Development Bank and other funds and programmes,
which all participate in peacebuilding in their own way
and according to their own capacities.
In spite of all of those efforts and the encouraging
results achieved on the ground, much remains to be done.
Other actions and initiatives should be taken to improve
the performance of the PBC and the country-specific
configurations. Togo believes that the Commission
would provide added value in attracting greater
appreciation if it were to synchronize cooperation and
direct exchanges with local actors and their partners.
By visiting the field more often and meeting not only
country authorities but national and international actors
and other concerned United Nations bodies, the PBC
would be able to see for itself what actions are needed
to strengthen its action in the field. Such cooperation
would have the added benefit of harmonizing the
efforts under way with a view to avoiding duplication.
In that respect, the Chair of the PBC should be given
the opportunity to join the Security Council on its field
missions when needed.
In the same vein, national ownership of development
programmes provides another opportunity for the work
of the United Nations to succeed in countries where it
is involved. This involves, in particular, training for
local stakeholders. In order to properly carry out its
reconstruction mission, the PBC should also rely on
subregional organizations, which have the advantage
of knowing the fundamental needs of the people,
with particular emphasis on the energy and basic
development sectors.
Togo also believes that national reconciliation
should be a major focus in efforts to ensure lasting
peace. Even if reconciliation is based on the application
of justice, the Commission should promote a justice
that repairs and restores. In that respect, truth, justice
and reconciliation commissions should be supported
and encouraged, because they offer true reconciliation
after having established the facts, determined who was
responsible and provided reparations to the victims.
To conclude, Togo calls once again for greater
support from Member States and all competent
organizations for the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Allow me to thank Secretary-General Ban

12-4165913

S/PV.6805

Ki-moon, the Permanent Representatives of Rwanda and
Bangladesh and the representative of the World Bank,
who have shed light on developments in peacebuilding
and on problems and prospects in that area.
Peacebuilding assistance is one of the key factors
for the effective settlement of conflicts and the
stabilization of post-conflict situations, as well as for
avoiding a relapse into crisis. This is especially clear in
light of the recent events in the Middle East and the new
wave of instability in a number of States on the African
continent.
Against this backdrop, today’s meeting on the
issue of peacebuilding is, in our view, a most timely
initiative, and we expect that we will have a candid and
comprehensive discussion. We welcome Mrs. María
Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Within the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, peacebuilding offices and the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), significant peacebuilding work
is being carried out. This activity is difficult and
challenging. It requires the coordinated efforts of
Member States, United Nations programmes and funds,
regional entities, the United Nations Secretariat and
international financial institutions.
At the same time, we see that international
assistance in this field remains fragmented. There
is a need for increased coordination in the division
of labour among the relevant stakeholders, and the
effectiveness of existing financing mechanisms must
be enhanced. Solving those problems will require the
close attention of Member States. It will also require the
systematization of peacebuilding processes, including
by harmonizing the work of the existing United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
The Russian Federation supports the activity of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The main added value of
this body, in our view, lies in its coordinating role in
peacebuilding and in the provision of valuable advice to
the Security Council, upon its request, regarding States
on its agenda. We would like to convey our gratitude
to the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Mr. Abulkalam Abdul Momen, for his statement and
for his first six months of effective leadership of the
Commission. We expect that the proposals that he has
spelled out, which were drafted jointly with the chairs of

14

the country-specific configurations, will subsequently
be carefully considered by the entire Commission.
Regarding the PBC’s work as a whole thus far, and
despite the time that has passed since 2005, we must
note that a great deal remains to be done to optimize
the effectiveness of its work. In that respect, we are
convinced that the PBC’s current mandate and its
unique intergovernmental nature and structure are all
in keeping with its intended role as a key body in the
coordination of peacebuilding assistance.
Serious work is being carried out within the
framework of country-specific configurations, and
here the PBC’s main merit lies in engaging in direct
dialogue with Governments, guaranteeing their leading
role and ownership of the peacebuilding process as well
as determining and setting out the main needs on the
ground.
The country-specific configurations are a unique
opportunity for cooperation with all peacebuilding
stakeholders, both in the field and in New York.
This includes United Nations structures, regional
organizations, financial institutions and bilateral
donors. Information on assistance should be aggregated,
analysed and, most importantly, discussed in an
intergovernmental format. The result would, in our
view, be useful both to the PBC itself for the elaboration
of recommendations for various States on its agenda
and to the Security Council in making decisions on
individual States.
The reverse process is necessary as well. The
Commission must relay information on peacebuilding
priorities, on existing shortcomings in peacebuilding
assistance and on the duplication of efforts to entities
working in the field.
The PBC, within the framework of its mandate,
should also make a contribution to resolving important
cross-cutting issues related to peacebuilding and the
United Nations system as a whole and which require
multifaceted comprehensive discussions with Member
States within the framework of the main bodies of the
United Nations.
Currently, one such topic is civilian capacity­
building. Training reserves of national civilian
experts has become one of the most important fields
of assistance to post-conflict States. After all, it is to
resolve peacebuilding tasks, to provide assistance in
rebuilding State institutions, law enforcement and

12-41659

S/PV.6805

other structures shaken by conflict that civilian experts
are sent to post-conflict States. The unique composition
of the PBC and its country-specific configurations
enables it to lend this process a high profile and a
genuinely intergovernmental dimension and to utilize
the South-South and trilateral cooperation mechanisms.

provides an excellent opportunity for the Council
members and the wider United Nations membership
to exchange views on the important role that the
Commission plays in advancing the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts, and to assess progress and
challenges.

In practice, and despite the efforts of individual
components of the Commission, it has not always
been possible for the Commission to achieve harmony,
even in its own work. As is often said, the right hand
is simply unaware of what the left hand is doing. The
organizational committee therefore needs a clear
picture of what is going on in the country-specific
configurations, just as a thread is needed to stitch
together the various configurations.

I also thank the Secretary-General, the former and
current Chairs of the Commission, and Mr. Joachim
von Amsberg for their briefings and statements. Let
me also emphasize the dedicated work of the Chairs
of the country-specific configurations. We are looking
forward to an informal interactive dialogue tomorrow
with them, in which we will continue to reflect in a
frank and detailed manner on the issues relevant to the
United Nations peacebuilding efforts.

The procedure for the preparation and taking of
decisions in the configurations needs to be fine-tuned
and the process of determining priorities for the activities
of the Peacebuilding Fund and Peacebuilding Support
Office must be made more transparent for PBC member
States. Many of these problems can be resolved through
technical fine-tuning, including the reorganization of
working methods, especially as the roadmap for the
Commission’s work for this year contains the issue of
working methods as a priority.

Azerbaijan has aligned itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the representative of Tunisia
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We would like to touch on an important component
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
namely the Peacebuilding Fund. This mechanism for
emergency financing, which promotes the attraction of
long-term resources for reconstruction and development,
has proven its effectiveness. For this reason, the Russian
Federation continues to contribute $2 million to the
Fund annually. The provision of assistance through the
Peacebuilding Fund on the basis of programmes and
projects elaborated by Governments and the United
Nations duly takes into account the priorities of the host
country and fosters a responsible approach to using such
assistance. It is gratifying that over half of the Fund’s
resources are allocated to States on the PBC’s agenda.
We continue to base our actions in that regard on the
priority given to the country principle in the allocation
of resources.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I should
like to thank the Colombian presidency of the Security
Council and you personally, Madam Minister, for
convening and presiding over this long-awaited debate
on the report of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
on its fifth session (S/2012/70). Today’s open debate

Post-conflict peacebuilding does not exist in a
vacuum and is dependent on a number of underlying
principles. First of all, the peacebuilding process can
take root and succeed only if a genuine peace, based
on the norms and principles of international law, is
established on the ground. Peacebuilding must not be
directed at sustaining the status quo created as a result
of the violation of international law. It should not be
used as a tool to consolidate illegal solutions based on
faits accompli.
Secondly, the Governments of countries emerging
from conflicts bear the primary responsibility for
peacebuilding, including for identifying their own
needs and setting up national development agendas.
The international community should fully respect the
sovereignty, independence and national development
choices of countries, and the United Nations should
play the role of coordinator of international efforts and
mobilizer of international resources to assist countries
in formulating and advancing their national strategies.
Thirdly, peacebuilding can be truly effective only
if it strives to build the national institutional capacities
of post-conflict countries to sustain peace and stability.
Solid national capacities and strong national ownership
are key prerequisites that underpin the continuity and
sustainability of peacebuilding.
Speaking of national ownership in peacebuilding,
we would like to stress that in certain situations in which
some parts of national territory are conflict-affected,

12-4165915

S/PV.6805

strategic planning and long-term preparation are
required for the immediate and smooth rebuilding
process to be launched once peace is achieved.

emphasis on improving the effectiveness of its
configurations.

As a country suffering from conflict and foreign
military occupation of its territories, Azerbaijan
is working hard on the political track to achieve a
negotiated settlement based on international law.
Although the prospect of a speedy solution still remains
elusive, the Government of Azerbaijan long ago started
designing strategies and programmes for the social,
economic and environmental reconstruction of its
territories after their de-occupation. Simultaneously, we
are increasing institutional and resource capacities in
all spheres to effectively meet our goals. It goes without
saying that the engagement of international expertise
at the relevant phases of national peacebuilding efforts
will be required.

Despite being a complex process with a variety
of actors and spheres of engagement, peacebuilding
constitutes an integrated system and a web of
different components, with one complementing and
reinforcing another. The success of the Commission’s
work is inextricably linked to and gauged against the
achievements of its configurations on the ground. In
other words, the more effective the country-specific
configurations become in the field, the more valued and
in-demand the Commission will be by Member States.
In this regard, further strengthening the role of the
country-specific configurations, as recommended by
the 2010 review, could bring qualitative improvements
to the effectiveness of the Commission’s work and to
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
sought to bring coordination, coherence and integrity
to the United Nations peacebuilding efforts with a
view to achieving sustainable peace. By virtue of the
complexity and heavy dependence of the peacebuilding
process on existing circumstances in the field and
changing realities globally, the Commission cannot
entirely meet expectations across the whole spectrum
of activities that fall within the notion of peacebuilding.

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): It is a great pleasure to
welcome you to the Security Council, Madam, and
we should like to thank you for coming because, with
your being here, we find that we have the opportunity
to discuss the matter of peacebuilding and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which otherwise
has been pending for a longer time than many of us
would care to remember. I think that it is a good omen
to see you here.

The year 2010 marked the first review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The review
laid out a number of ambitious, yet very plausible
recommendations aimed at further improving the
effectiveness of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Council’s subsequent resolution 1947 (2010) provided
political ground for all relevant United Nations actors,
including above all the Commission, to take forward
these recommendations in their activities. Therefore,
the Commission’s fifth annual report is of particular
importance, since it is the first to reflect progress in
the implementation of the recommendations set out by
the review.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
statement.

The Commission’s road map for actions in 2011
provided a structured approach for the implementation
of two overarching recommendations addressed to
it by the review, namely, enhancing its impact in the
field and strengthening its relations with key actors
at Headquarters. Looking at the road map for actions
in 2012, we note that this year the Commission,
while focusing on further advancing its work in these
directions, also recognizes the need to place particular

16

I would like to commend the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda for ably guiding the work
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and specifically for presenting the report
on the fifth session of the PBC (S/2012/70). I also thank
my friend the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
whose is currently Chair of the PBC.
The 2011 session was the first one after the
completion of review process in 2010. The process
helped realign focus along three key concepts of
peacebuilding. First, it created a strict prioritization
of targeted areas from among the areas of security
sector reform, local capacity-building and economic
revitalization. Secondly, it sharpened the emphasis on
development aspect of peacebuilding. Thirdly, it refined
the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus. From this, the
conclusion was also drawn that it was imperative to
craft and implement peacebuilding strategies according
to national priorities and policies, with complete local
ownership.

12-41659

S/PV.6805

Before I discuss the 2011 report, I should like to
say that I find in this three-point focus some disturbing
omissions. I find that perhaps we have not focused on
these issues as we ought to have. I believe that, at this
institution, we must seek a more integrated role for the
Commission in order to make it effective.
We note that the 2011 report of the PBC points
to progress on implementing the 2010 review. Some
aspects of the report have a reference value, such as
a record of work and meetings and country-specific
configurations. The value of such reports can be
enhanced through an analytical explanation — if
available — of the decision-making process. Such an
analysis must dovetail into enhancing our collective
understanding of the various facets of peacebuilding.
Work in the country-specific configurations of
the PBC is an important element of the peacebuilding
narrative. Our shared understanding of the challenges
and complexities of peacebuilding endeavours will
improve as respective configurations take forward their
work.
I would not be out of place in mentioning here
that, when I was looking at the various zones of
conflict that are now endowed with some sort of United
Nations-inspired peace, I found the number to be far
in excess of the countries that are to be reflected here
today in speech and/or in the report.
Achievements of the older configurations, such
as those for Burundi and Sierra Leone, as well as the
challenges faced by them, will offer a useful body
of knowledge for application to the emerging new
configurations, such as those for Liberia and Guinea. It
is important that the work of country configurations is
congruent with overall peacebuilding objectives and is
carried out under full national ownership. In our recent
travels to these areas, we heard the oft-repeated remark
of not being included in this process, instead being
reported upon. That is a difference that we in this body
must understand. Therefore, regular interaction among
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations, the
Security Council and the Organizational Committee
of PBC are critical to ensuring transparency and
accountability.
The countries that decide or agree to be placed
on the PBC’s agenda themselves have a special
responsibility to put the concept of their own ownership
into practice. Often, they tend to be in great awe of the
United Nations and do not do so. I think that it is time

for them to lead and guide the discussion from the front,
and to frankly present and explain their priorities and
expectations to the Commission for it to consider. It is
only through their active engagement that we can drive
this process forward. In turn, international partners
must demonstrate political will and flexibility to
respond effectively to nationally owned peacebuilding
priorities.
In the general discourse on United Nations conflict
management, “peacekeepers are early peacebuilders”
is an oft-encountered adage. However, the linkage
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding needs to
be put in the proper perspective. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are specialized activities, albeit with
a common objective. They should not be subjected to
competition for resources. Despite the very generous
contribution of some members here and from the
General Assembly, the record thus far shows that
the funds are by no means commensurate with the
peacebuilding process. Without that, they will not
really move forward with the three objectives outlined
earlier. Given that integrated mandates are increasingly
becoming the norm, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks should be articulated clearly and adequately
resourced from onset of a mission.
Clear articulation of peacebuilding tasks in a
mission’s mandate necessitates closer interaction
between the PBC and the Security Council. Regrettably,
that has not happened as it should have. It has been
inadequate in whatever has happened so far. The Council
must utilize the PBC’s advice in framing peacebuilding
mandates. The PBC’s interaction with principal organs
of the United Nations and the international financial
institutions will be important as well to moving matters
forward.
The success of United Nations peacebuilding hinges
on adequate financial resources. The Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) has thus far had a catalytic role in harnessing
other sources of funding — without adequate success,
however. But it is an essential component of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. However, given the
magnitude of the challenges, the PBF alone cannot, and
was not supposed to, meet the rising overall demands
for peacebuilding. Avenues of resource mobilization
should therefore be more vigorously explored. I would
like to recall that the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture in 2005 was a direct recognition of the
interlinkage between peace and development. Unless
that aspect is given due attention, success will continue

12-4165917

S/PV.6805

to elude us in achieving and building durable peace
internationally.
Besides financing, peacebuilding initiatives
require necessary human resources. In that context, the
Secretary-General’s initiative on civilian capacity must
be called extremely important for identifying expertise
that could be tailored to particular needs. We hope that
the ongoing follow-up on the civilian capacity process
will lead to more efficiency in the field, as well as at
Headquarters, where it is missing. Intergovernmental
input in the process will grant it the legitimacy it seeks.
The Peacebuilding Commission, with its unique
composition and specific mandate, is an important tool
for post-conflict stability. We must consider ways and
means of better realizing the contribution that its unique
composition can make to the collective objective. We
hope that the working of the PBC will improve in leaps
and bounds as the global narrative on peacebuilding
further evolves and as our collective response becomes
more focused and, hopefully, more results-oriented.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for your attendance at this
morning’s meeting and for convening this debate.
In particular, I am grateful to Colombia for focusing
the Council’s attention on the important issue of
peacebuilding and on the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We think that this is a very timely
debate, especially following the Council’s recent visit
to West Africa. We thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassadors Gasana and Momen and Mr. Von Amsberg
for their comprehensive briefings.
Peacebuilding remains a central focus for the
United Kingdom. We believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a potentially important role to
play within the wider context of United Nations
efforts to support countries emerging from conflict.
But, as Ambassador Momen rightly said today, the
Peacebuilding Commission has not yet fulfilled that
potential.
As Council members will be aware, following our
visit to West Africa I wrote to the Council President on
12 June with some ideas on how we might strengthen
the role of the PBC in the countries visited, and how we
might improve the quality of the interaction between
the Council and the PBC Chairs. I am grateful to the
Colombian presidency for scheduling an interactive
dialogue tomorrow with the relevant PBC country
configurations, and for this wider open debate today.

18

For now, I would like to highlight three areas where
we see an important added value for the role of the PBC.
They are, first, supporting strong national ownership
of peacebuilding; secondly, promoting coherence in
international support for peacebuilding; and thirdly,
providing informed briefings for the Security Council.
First, on national ownership, as we know, the
primary responsibility for peacebuilding rests with
post-conflict Governments themselves. That means,
as Ambassador Haroon has just reminded us, national
leadership and ownership of the process from start to
finish. But national leaders should not feel that they
are in it alone. The international community has an
important role to play by helping post-conflict countries
build national capacity to lead, and by helping to
strengthen and underpin the political will necessary to
consolidate peace.
We do not have to invent this sort of partnership
from scratch. A number of conflict-affected countries
have come together and produced, after some two years
of effort, an agenda for how the international system
should partner them as they build peace, based on the
core principles of national leadership and ownership.
This agenda, the so-called New Deal, is one we should
actively support.
The Peacebuilding Commission should be working
with the countries on its agenda in line with the
principles of the New Deal. That means helping to
ensure that national Governments are in the driver’s
seat and that their leadership is not undermined. But it
also means holding national actors to account for their
commitment to peacebuilding. The PBC should be a
supportive partner, but also a robust one, and should
not shirk engaging in discussion about the tough issues
and political choices that post-conflict countries face,
including, for example, on national reconciliation, the
rule of law and human rights.
Secondly, as the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Momen highlighted, the coherence of the international
effort is absolutely vital. We simply cannot overburden
countries emerging from conflict with individual
agency turf wars or duplication of effort, or major
gaps in support for key peacebuilding sectors. We
must ensure that our own efforts as an international
community are coherent. This is especially true for
the United Nations. We need strong, effective links
between United Nations missions and country teams,
so that the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.

12-41659

S/PV.6805

That requires good planning, a clear division of labour
and strong leadership on the ground. I welcome the fact
that the new Deputy Secretary-General has stressed
that message in his first few days in his new job.
The PBC can play a vital role here. It can support
the countries on its agenda in mapping international
assistance, identifying gaps and lobbying international
actors to improve coherence and predictability of
support. It can even name and shame when international
actors are not lining up in support of a coherent,
effective international effort. In that regard, the PBC has
a critical role to play in bringing to bear the perspective
of the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, which play such a central role in helping many
countries restart their economies in the aftermath of
conflict. We warmly welcome the participation of the
World Bank in today’s debate.
Finally, let me turn to the relationship between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
I believe that the PBC can add genuine value to
Council deliberations for the countries on its agenda
by complementing the briefings given by senior United
Nations officials on the ground. For example, the PBC
could provide the Council with an overview of the
effectiveness of international support to the countries
on its agenda. It can elucidate on the kinds of issues
I have talked about today: the coherence, inclusivity
and degree of national ownership of peacebuilding in a
given country. For its part, the Council could be more
direct in requesting specific information from the PBC
Chairs, especially in the run-up to consultations or
mandate renewals. That would enable the Commission
to widen the Council’s field of vision across the full
range of peacebuilding challenges and actors.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Colombia for its initiative in holding this
open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, and Foreign
Minister Holguín Cuéllar for presiding over today’s
meeting. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; Ambassador Gasana and Ambassador
Momen, the Permanent Representatives of Rwanda and
Bangladesh, respectively; and Mr. Von Amsberg of the
World Bank for their presence.
China greatly appreciates the remarkable
achievements of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) last year. As the first entity within the United
Nations system in charge of coordinating post-conflict
peacebuilding, the PBC has made efforts to implement

its mandate, pursuant to the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, and has played an
important role in advancing peacebuilding in countries
emerging from conflict. At the same time, since
peacebuilding is a long-term, complex and arduous
task, the PBC confronts many challenges in its work. I
would like to make the following four comments.
First, the PBC and all relevant parties should
fully respect the national ownership of the countries
concerned. Post-conflict States bear primary
responsibility for building peace in their own countries.
In helping such countries to build peace, the Commission
should respect their will and try to help them strengthen
national capacity-building, including by enhancing
their capacity in the areas of civil administration and
national governance. The PBC should also proactively
strengthen its partnership with the countries on its
agenda in a constructive manner.
Secondly,
the
Commission
should
help
post-conflict countries mobilize the necessary
resources in accordance with their national situation
and specific priorities. The priorities of post-conflict
peacebuilding are stabilizing the security situation,
promoting political reconciliation, and strengthening
the development of democracy. At the same time, root
problems that threaten peace and security, particularly
issues of social and economic development, should
also be tackled. The PBC should act as an important
platform to help coordinate international assistance
and mobilization of resources. We also hope that the
Peacebuilding Fund will be able to provide greater
support for the work of post-conflict peacebuilding.
Thirdly, the Commission should enhance its
coordination and cooperation with the chief United
Nations entities, international financial institutions and
regional organizations. We hope that it will build on its
coordination and coherence with such major organs of
the United Nations as the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
in an effort to explore effective means of assisting
post-conflict countries in building peace. The unique
advantages in the field of peacebuilding possessed by
such financial institutions as the World Bank and by
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, should be tapped further in order to
achieve more concrete results in peacebuilding among
countries emerging from conflict.

12-4165919

S/PV.6805

Last, but not least, we believe that the PBC should
continue to strive to improve its working methods
and enhance efficiency. Peacebuilding covers a broad
area and involves complex and burdensome tasks.
The PBC should continue to improve its internal
institution-building, and actively collect experiences
and best practices. At the same time, it should put more
emphasis on results achieved in the field in specific
countries, including using such resources as various
United Nations projects, funds and peacekeeping
missions, while strengthening coordination and
cooperation and avoiding duplication.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for presiding over the
Council. It is always an honour and a pleasure to have
you with us. I would like to congratulate the Colombian
presidency of the Council for having organized this
important debate. I should also like to thank you,
Madam, for the excellent concept note (S/2012/511,
annex) that your delegation prepared.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement, as well as our colleagues from
Rwanda and Bangladesh for their very useful briefings
and for their leadership. I also wish to say a word of
appreciation to Mr. Von Amsberg for his presentation.
Portugal naturally shares the positions that will
be presented later during this debate by Ambassador
Mayr-Harting on behalf of the European Union.
There is no denying that, over the past six years,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has established
itself as a unique actor within the United Nations
architecture for post-conflict peace consolidation. The
report (S/2012/70) we are considering today testifies
to that effect and provides a comprehensive account
of how the Commission and its various configurations
have evolved and developed new forms of engagement
with fragile countries, as well as with the wider donor
community. Of course, much can still and should be
done.
One distinctive aspect of the PBC that Portugal
particularly values is the way it brings together security
and development as interrelated elements of peace
consolidation. Making sure that those two dimensions
are treated in an integrated manner from the early
stages of peacekeeping requires bringing our political,
development, security and humanitarian instruments

20

into a single consistent framework. In each of the
countries where it is involved — including in the four
configurations that Portugal is a part of — the PBC
certainly contributes to the United Nations effort to
devise such a framework.
The PBC’s singularity derives also from its
membership, which brings together Member States and
international organizations, and from its engagement
with national actors in the definition of peacebuilding
priorities. Its approach, based on mutual engagement
between the PBC and the authorities of the countries
on its agenda, provides a strong incentive for national
ownership of peace consolidation processes.
The issue at stake here today is how to make the
best use of those singular features of the PBC in order
to ensure a more coherent and effective United Nations
presence on the ground, but also greater visibility for
the PBC’s work. As the annual report indicates, one
of the PBC’s main tasks is the mobilization of donors’
resources and the identification of financing gaps and
of the priorities for international assistance. Yet, that
should translate into the actual work being carried
out on the ground. Besides the regular planning and
articulation with national authorities, we strongly
believe that the PBC should, early on, be more
systematically involved with other actors, first and
foremost with United Nations agencies, but also with
bilateral partners, international financial institutions
and regional organizations. By engaging with the
different partners, the PBC can play a very important
role in bridging potential gaps between what each actor
is doing. In that respect, the partnership established
with the African Development Bank is a very positive
step, which will hopefully yield concrete results in the
near future.
Another crucial aspect is that of political dialogue.
The statements of mutual agreement, as well as the visits
by the Chairs of the country-specific configurations,
constitute excellent opportunities for conveying
political messages regarding the situation in the
countries on the PBC’s agenda. Yet, we must admit that
more needs to be done to articulate the political role of
the PBC configuration Chairs with that of other United
Nations actors, namely, the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, in order to avoid duplication or,
even worse, contradictions.
Priority areas for PBC intervention should also
be carefully considered, taking into account the

12-41659

S/PV.6805

mandate of United Nations missions on the ground.
While the current trend for a stronger focus by the
PBC configurations on security sector reform (SSR)
activities is, in our view, a positive development, it is
critical to ensure that such focus does not duplicate the
work carried out by United Nations missions whose
mandates already include SSR assistance as priority
tasks.
The same applies, to a large extent, to initiatives
aimed at promoting the effective participation of
women in political transition and economic recovery.
We value the initiatives of the PBC to tackle what we
believe is a fundamental aspect of peace consolidation
in the various countries on its agenda, and can only
encourage the different configurations to work with the
missions on the ground, as well as with relevant United
Nations organs and international partners, to ensure
better coordination of existing activities.
Still on the issue of priority areas, we believe
that recent debates on cross-national issues, such as
the ones on transnational organized crime in West
Africa, are very promising and represent an attempt to
provide a regional dimension to the work of the PBC.
In that respect, we encourage the configurations to
work closely with United Nations regional offices in
the implementation of concrete projects for combating
organized crime.
The answer to the issues I have identified here
require a broader refection on the relation between
the PBC and other organs of the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council. The PBC’s annual
report acknowledges some progress in the interaction
between the two organs and provides recommendations
on how that relationship can be strengthened.
We should work collectively to improve our working
methods in order to allow us, on a regular basis, to
draw upon the advice of the Chairs of country-specific
configurations. The interactive dialogue to be held
tomorrow represents a positive step in that direction,
but there is certainly room for the Council to seek, and
make a better use of, the PBC’s advice, especially when
discussing the renewal of mandates, but also as an early
warning for potential setbacks in peace consolidation in
specific countries.
In conclusion, as always, Portugal stands ready
to engage in an open and creative discussion on ways
to advance the PBC’s contributions to more efficient
and integrated action on the part of the international

community throughout the various stages of
post-conflict and peace consolidation in the countries
involved. The success of the PBC in fulfilling its
functions represents our collective success towards
achieving sustainable peace.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to
welcome you, Madam President, and we want to
thank you for presiding over this meeting. We thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. In general,
Madam President, we wish to thank your delegation
for organizing this debate. We also thank the outgoing
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana of Rwanda, for the
outstanding work done during his term. We would like
to congratulate Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen
of Bangladesh on his assumption of the important role
of Chair of the Commission. We wish him all the best
and pledge our support to his leadership.
In the intervening period between the 2005 World
Summit, which took the decision to establish the
peacebuilding architecture, and today’s debate, we have
had discussions about the relevance or the value that
the PBC brings to the international peace and security
equation. Among others, the principal questions that
have been asked include, first, what is the added value
of the PBC? Secondly, what is the relevance of the PBC?
Thirdly, what is the role of the PBC? Those are critical
questions that the United Nations system ponders every
day, sometimes with limited answers.
The establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
was a major milestone in recognizing the nexus and
interrelatedness between security and development.
Ideally, the Commission should be a premier United
Nations body for dealing with the challenges of security
and development. It could serve well as a point of
convergence between the different organs of the United
Nations with Charter mandates.
Nonetheless, South Africa would like to say from
the outset that we believe that the PBC remains a
relevant and critical tool in the broad realm of conflict
prevention and peace consolidation. It cannot be an
over-exaggeration to purport that without the efforts of
the PBC in the countries on its agenda, the situation
would have been different to what it is currently, that
is, that we could have seen those countries relapse into
conflict.
In that context, our objective analysis of the PBC
further leads us to conclude that the Commission is still

12-4165921

S/PV.6805

evolving and that it has not yet reached its full potential.
All six countries on its agenda recently witnessed a
reversal in their democratic processes, in particular
in Guinea-Bissau. A reflection on the achievement
and challenges of the PBC is therefore crucial as we
continue sharpening the tools of this important body. It
is our well-considered view that we should not shy away
from continuous reflection on the need to strengthen
the Commission’s capacity with the necessary tools,
skills and expertise. That may well mean differentiating
between the notion of peacebuilding and the nature
and configuration of the actual structure that is the
Commission.
Today’s discussion should also be seen as an
important opportunity to recommit ourselves to the
pledge that we took when we unanimously adopted the
resolutions that created the peacebuilding architecture,
in 2005. One critical moment in which the international
community intervened in the life of the Commission was
the 2010 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which provided concrete recommendations
on how to enhance the work of the Commission. My
delegation is pleased to learn, as stated in the report
(S/2012/70) under discussion, that there is a growing
momentum to implement relevant recommendations
developed during that review.
South Africa is encouraged at the progress made by
the Peacebuilding Commission and the country-specific
configurations in the countries on its agenda. While we
welcome those positive developments, we also believe
that more can and should be done. In that regard, I
would like to focus on the issue of enhancing the utility
of the country-specific configurations.
We believe that the membership of the country­
specific configurations should be encouraged to take
on specific responsibilities, ranging from political to
financial support. One of the main tasks of the PBC is
to provide political attention to, and advocacy for, the
countries on its agenda. In that context, the members of
the configurations should be encouraged to bring their
influence to bear and to provide the necessary political
backbone to the countries on whose configurations they
sit.
Furthermore, membership in those configurations
should not be simply a label of prestige for its members,
but should come with responsibility. Therefore, as
recommended in the 2010 review, in order to improve
the PBC’s effectiveness on the ground, the Chairs of

22

configurations should not be personalized, so as to
allow the country from which the configuration Chair
comes or that the Chair represents at the United Nations
to take the lead in the process, or at least to be actively
engaged. That could be even easier and more effective
where the country that the Chair represents at the
United Nations has diplomatic representation in the
country on the PBC agenda. It is a fact that we have
not yet reflected on whether the composition, which is
currently made up of State representatives based here in
New York, is the only way to make up the Commission,
or whether we should be flexible and open-minded
about expertise residing elsewhere, whether in the civil
service or in the private sector.
With respect to coordination and strategic
partnerships, we believe that increased coordination is
crucial for ensuring effective international efforts in
post-conflict situations and international interventions.
United Nations efforts are often fragmented and face
a struggle to pull the critical resources together and
maximize the strength of collective efforts. Over the
years, the PBC, as part of that United Nations machinery,
has also had to struggle to coordinate resources that
are necessary to strengthen and sustain new peace. In
that regard, South Africa strongly supports the call
for greater coherence, coordination and interaction
between various United Nations organs and agencies,
especially in the field. Greater coordination has the
potential to avert duplication of efforts and maximize
output at a time of limited and constantly shrinking
resources.
The interaction with the World Bank and donor
organizations is welcome and should be sustained.
We also welcome the dynamic partnership between
the Commission and the African Development Bank.
However, we would encourage cooperation with the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa as
well. We further welcome the engagement with the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of African
States.
Having recognized the inextricable link between
security and development, we welcome the growing
relationship between the Commission and the
Economic and Social Council. As regards coordination
in the field, the PBC should be given the mandate to be
the sole convener or coordinator of at least the United
Nations peacebuilding interventions in countries on its
agenda. In consultation with other stakeholders, the
United Nations should ensure that all other agencies,

12-41659

S/PV.6805

including civil society, should channel their efforts
through the PBC at the country level in the interest of
avoiding possible duplication and competition for space
and attention. The integrated peacebuilding Mission
in Sierra Leone, where the PBC involvement was
aligned with the priorities of the Government through
its national Agenda for Change, could be used as an
example.
We believe that the relationship between the
Security Council and the PBC is perhaps the most
important one, given the mandates of both entities.
The PBC report notes that, “The relationship with the
Security Council has continued to develop during the
reporting period.” (S/2012/70, para. 24) That positive
development is evidenced, inter alia, by the introduction
of informal interactions between the Council and the
Chairs of the country configurations.
We would once again like to stress the need for the
Council to consider flexible working methods so as to
enable the PBC to play its role effectively in advising
the Council on post-conflict situations. Whereas
the Council has incorporated peacebuilding tasks in
virtually all, if not all its peacekeeping mandates, we
nevertheless emphasize that the advice of the PBC
should be sought at all times where it is deemed relevant.
We also reiterate that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
should be mutually reinforcing in the pursuance of
lasting peace in post-conflict countries.
With respect to resource mobilization, it goes
without saying that peacebuilding in post-conflict
countries requires a substantive injection of resources.
In that regard, we believe that timely, sustainable and
predictable financing remains a crucial ingredient
in realizing the objectives of peacebuilding. We
therefore emphasize the need for the United Nations
to consider utilizing sustainable mechanisms as a
means of kick-starting peacebuilding activities in
countries emerging from conflict, including assessed
contributions, especially with regard to quick-impact
projects. Such projects are critical for the consolidation
of peace dividends so as to avert a total relapse into
conflict.
Post-conflict countries often have weak human
and institutional capacities for peacebuilding. South
Africa emphasizes the importance of building local
institutional and human capacities and of providing
training to create new, and enhance already existing,
capacities. We welcome the process led by the United

Nations Development Programme to strengthen the
United Nations system-wide approach to capacity
development for peacebuilding. In developing such
capacities, we cannot over-emphasize the importance
of forging partnerships at the local, regional and
subregional levels in order to exploit the unique
advantages inherent in human capacities at those
levels. In that context, the notion of developing and
tapping into civilian capacities, particularly from the
global South, is crucial. In developing those capacities,
national ownership should be emphasized at all the
stages of the peacebuilding process.
To conclude, South Africa reiterates its commitment
to the work of the PBC. We believe that the Commission
has a critical role to play in terms of conflict prevention,
including in the early detection of root and proximate
causes, as well as in identifying potential triggers of
conflict. Africa has benefited from the efforts of the
PBC. We want to see a more robust, agile and resourced
body that will help the continent avert conflict and
consolidate fragile peace where it is created.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Columbia for her excellent contribution to today’s
discussion, which is a very important one for my
country and the other members of the Council. I would
also like to express my gratitude for the fifth annual
report on the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2012/70),
as well as to commend the Secretary-General on his
personal involvement in strengthening the United
Nations role in peacekeeping. I also wish to thank as
Ambassadors Eugène-Richard Gasana and Abulkalam
Abdul Momem, along with World Bank Vice-President
Joachim von Amsberg, for their edifying presentations.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement that
will delivered later in the meeting by the representative
of Tunisia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Post-conflict management is so important that
its outcome, whether for good or ill, can either save a
country or condemn it to instability, as examples drawn
from recent experience amply prove. In particular,
they show us that the bases of peacebuilding begin
to take shape as soon as peace is established and that
they play a determining role in the country’s process
of transition and transformation. Before they become
the responsibility of the international community,
those transitions and changes are first and foremost
the responsibility of the authorities of the affected

12-4165923

S/PV.6805

countries. Ownership on the part of the stakeholders
concerned in post-conflict countries is a sine qua non
condition for any successful peacebuilding initiative.
Such national ownership requires prioritizing actions
to ensure that the stabilization process goes forward,
without backsliding. In our view, those priorities are
security, the rule of law, national reconciliation and
socio-economic development.
Clearly, no country emerging from conflict can
build peace without timely, substantive and sustained
help from the international community, including its
neighbouring States and the regional and subregional
organizations it belongs to. The United Nations system
is called on to play a central and catalytic role in
peacebuilding, given the confidence it inspires, the
credibility it brings and the collective knowledge it
has gathered over decades. Within the United Nations
architecture, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has
demonstrated its usefulness, its relevance and its ability
to turn the tide in the initial stages of peacebuilding.
The establishment of the Commission, six years
ago, decisively marked the beginning of a new United
Nations approach to international peace and security
and development. By virtue of its multifaceted
nature, that new organ filled an institutional vacuum,
addressing issues of security, development and aid in
an integrated way. Because of the wide representation
of its membership, the Commission is a credible entity
for coordination and the sharing of best practices in
helping countries emerging from conflict.
I would like to focus today on two crucial issues
that seem to me to demand special attention, namely,
funding and coordination. The PBC cannot fully reach
its potential and make a difference on the ground if it
lacks the funding necessary for its work, as all speakers
today have stressed. The funding it can count on has
to date fallen short of the urgent needs of the countries
on its agenda. That affects not only its effectiveness
but also its visibility as a peacebuilding actor, as
members of the Council saw in West Africa last May.
We agree with the Working Group on Lessons Learned
that the Commission would benefit from exploring
new, innovative and dependable means of funding its
projects while strengthening its relationships with other
elements of the United Nations system, international
financial institutions and regional development banks,
such as the African Development Bank and the Islamic
Development Bank.

24

The important work done by the Working Group
on Lessons Learned in mapping possible areas of
cooperation among the various country configurations
should be encouraged. It must be said that the
Commission’s growing appeal for countries emerging
from conflict is often not accompanied by awareness
of or gratitude for its work. Communication lines must
therefore absolutely be established to give greater
visibility to the PBC, to its role in countries benefiting
from its assistance and to the contributions it can make
elsewhere, as underlined by the Secretary-General in
his opening statement.
The Organization enjoys significant human,
technical and financial resources that would benefit
from being focused along the lines of the PBC. It is
therefore crucial to increase coherence. The contribution
of regional actors and subregional organizations is
of great importance to achieving peace, stability and
development for countries emerging from conflict. We
believe that triangular cooperation is an approach that
the Commission should further explore, especially when
it comes to South-South cooperation. That would make
it possible to adapt methods to local circumstances and
to optimize the use of available resources.
With the establishment of the Guinea configuration,
in 2011, the number of PBC country configurations
rose to six. We would like to take this opportunity
to commend the current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and his predecessor for the practical and
important work they have done.
Given the geographic proximity of many countries
emerging from conflict and the similar socio-economic
and security challenges they face, we believe that the
time to establish regional configurations has come.
Such areas of focus, for example along the Mano River,
which runs through Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone,
or in the Sahel or the Great Lakes region, would make for
better coordination of action and increased coherence
in peacebuilding operations at the subregional level.
In the light of recent developments in the Sahel, we
believe the PBC should come to the aid of the countries
of the Sahel-Sahara Strip that are either in conflict or
emerging from institutional crises.
Strengthening the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission within the United Nations architecture
is of particular importance to sustain the successes
achieved in many countries on the African continent.
The relationship between the Commission and the

12-41659

S/PV.6805

Security Council should be further strengthened. In that
context, we commend the regular invitations extended
by the Council to the Chairs of the configurations to
share their perspectives and assessments of the countries
on the Commission’s agenda. At the same time, we
appreciate and support strengthened cooperation
between the Commission and the Economic and Social
Council and between the Commission and international
and continental financial institutions.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Madam President, allow me to say that
we are pleased to see you presiding over this meeting.
We appreciate your personal presence, we appreciate
the delegation of Colombia’s having organized this
open debate and we appreciate the excellent concept
paper you have prepared to guide our deliberations
(S/2012/511, annex). We also wish to express our
thanks to the Secretary-General for his statement and
to the secretariat for the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2012/70), which covers the proceedings
of its fifth session.
Guatemala was a Member State of the Commission
during the period under consideration and even had the
honour of holding one of the Vice-Chairs. We therefore
can relate to the contents of the report, in both its
informational and analytical aspects. We especially
appreciate the detailed information on each of the
countries belonging to specific configurations when it
comes to the main functions of the Commission, namely,
political advocacy and support, resource mobilization
and fostering coherence.
We are grateful for the statements made by
Ambassadors Gasana and Momen and by Mr. Von
Amsberg of the World Bank, whom we welcome here
today.
What gave life to the Peacebuilding Commission
in 2005 was a very simple idea, conceptually speaking.
The United Nations had accumulated 60 years of solid
experience in both peacekeeping and development.
The time had come to capitalize on those experiences,
crystallizing them in a specialized entity that would
apply the lessons learned in both areas to countries
emerging from conflict — in other words, in
peacebuilding processes.
A corollary to that idea is reflected in the
institutional aspect, since three of the principal
inter-governmental organs — the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the Security

Council — addressed different aspects of peacemaking
or peacebuilding. What could be better than creating
a specialized body linked to those three organs that
would foster greater coherence within the United
Nations system in addressing specifically the situation
of countries emerging from conflict?
As will be recalled, the Commission was created
through concurrent resolutions 60/180 of the General
Assembly and 1645 (2005) of the Security Council, after
a relatively prolonged negotiation period. Furthermore,
the possibility of modifying the forum was agreed to,
by establishing a five-year review process.
Consequently, in 2010 three of our colleagues — from
South Africa, Mexico and Ireland — provided the
Council with their report (S/2010/393, annex), which
tries to reflect the opposing views within the United
Nations regarding the performance of the Commission.
The main conclusion of the three co-facilitators can
be characterized in a single phrase: the hopes that
accompanied the creation of the Commission “have yet
to be realized”. The report contains recommendations
that seek to close the gap between expectations and
results. The General Assembly and the Security Council
so aligned themselves in adopting General Assembly
resolution 65/7 and Security Council resolution 1947
(2010).
In a brief statement it is neither possible nor
appropriate to address the multiple issues raised both
in the co-facilitators’ report and in the Commission’s
report before us. For that reason we are grateful to the
Colombian presidency for its concept paper, which
ends with three questions that will help us to focus our
remaining remarks. I shall be brief.
First, how can the Commission realize its potential
to provide added value to the web of institutions
dedicated to similar roles? In our judgment, if the
Commission would fully comply with its mandate its
added value would be self-evident, since, contrary to
the question’s implication, its role is unique. It does not
need to compete with other forums to gain attention
or space. The way to highlight its role is to improve
its capacity to create partnerships within and outside
of the United Nations. Within the Organization, owing
to the constitution of its membership, it can be said
that the Commission is a product of the three principal
intergovernmental organs I have mentioned, and as such
forms a hinge between them, thereby strengthening the
role of each.

12-4165925

S/PV.6805

Furthermore, the Commission represents a meeting
point among the Security Council — whose mandate
is limited to maintaining international peace and
security — the General Assembly and, above all, the
Economic and Social Council, which have mandates in
the area of development and democratic governance.
Of course, the dividing line between peace-making
and peacebuilding is hazy, but precisely for that reason
a good understanding between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission would enhance
compliance with each organ’s mandates, especially in
the field.
However, our perception is that in practice each
forum carries out its activities separately. In other
words, the frequent invocations of coordinated efforts
are more rhetorical than operational. That must end
and give way to genuine alliances. The same can be
said regarding alliances outside of the United Nations,
especially among the international financial institutions.
Some progress has been achieved in that connection,
especially regarding the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. But we believe that there is still a
long way to go.
Secondly, what tools should the Commission utilize
to expand its potential in each of its three main functions
to have a greater impact in the field? In our brief
experience in the Commission, we perceived the greatest
potential at the level of the country configurations,
which have clearly had a positive impact on the ground,
but could be strengthened even more. The leadership
of the configurations plays a critical role, and so the
selection of their Chairs merits special care. Theu do
not necessarily have to be limited to the pool of United
Nations accredited Permanent Representatives; one
could also consider notable persons from outside of the
Organization.

Commission, like any intergovernmental organ, is
the product of the responsible guidance and support
of the Member States and the enlightened support of
its secretariat. Up to now, the demands to expand the
number of country configurations has collided with
the finite capacity of the secretariat to handle a larger
volume of activity. In other words, we must support
the Secretariat and continue to support our active
participation in this forum with the dedication, care
and, I would even say, sacrifice that many countries
have demonstrated over the past five years.
The Peacebuilding Commission has become one
of those cases that we frequently encounter that is
characterized by the “glass half full” syndrome. We
believe that there is the potential to fill the other half of
the proverbial glass and transform the Commission into
what it was expected to be when our Heads of State and
Government adopted the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1). Both the report of the co-facilitators
of 2010 and the most recent report of the Commission
suggest ways to achieve this goal.
Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): Let me begin by
welcoming you, Madam President, to the Security
Council and by thanking the Colombian delegation for
organizing today’s open debate. Our thanks also go
to the Secretary-General, Ambassadors Gasana and
Momen, and the Vice-President of the World Bank for
their valuable statements. I also want to put on record our
appreciation for the useful concept paper (S/2012/511,
annex) provided by your delegation, Madam, to anchor
our deliberations today.

The other instrument that clearly has had an
important impact, with intrinsic value as well as a
catalytic element for the other root functions of the
Commission, is the Peacebuilding Fund. A call should
be made to the entire donor community to replenish the
Fund with fresh resources, since, in our opinion, and
as the Secretary-General indicated this morning, it has
been the most successful element of the United Nations
efforts in the area of peacebuilding.

The nature of conflicts today is very different from
what it was in the past. Their intra-State nature, the need
to manage natural resources, transnational organized
crime, illicit trafficking in drugs and weapons, and
regional dimensions demand an approach that is
capable of building upon the gains of stabilization.
Building the institutions of core governance, promoting
youth employment, ensuring transitional justice and
national reconciliation, providing electoral support
and constitution-building are tasks that need the
coherent and sustained assistance of the international
community. This in turn requires political will, the
allocation of adequate resources and readiness for
long-term engagement.

Thirdly, what can Member States contribute,
individually and collectively, to empower the Commission
and bring it closer to meeting its core objectives? The

It is in this context that peacebuilding, once
described as the missing middle between peacekeeping
and durable peace, assumes importance. The setting

26

12-41659

S/PV.6805

up of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) six years
ago reflected the collective desire of the international
community to assist post-conflict countries on a
long-term basis in their transition. Despite its advisory
role, the Commission and its Organizing Committee
have done work worthy of our commendation in
mainstreaming peacebuilding.
Given the wide range of tasks the PBC is expected
to administer, it is not surprising that it faces several
challenges. In our view, the willingness of the
international community to provide adequate resources
is the first and necessary condition for successful
peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict countries.
Secondly, greater coherence among various United
Nations organs under the aegis of the Commission
is required to enhance its ability to carry its agenda
forward. In this connection, I would like to mention
that the organizational context of peacebuilding
continues to lack uniformity. Some peacebuilding
efforts are being managed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, others by the Department of
Political Affairs, and yet others by the United Nations
Resident Coordinator system. Clearly, peacebuilding
policymaking needs to be suitably addressed in this
Organization today.
It is also important to keep in mind that peace
in post-conflict societies cannot be restored unless
citizens are free from fear and want and institutions
of governance perform effectively. The capacity for
effective governance, in turn, depends on the existence
of institutions that enable these authorities to respond
effectively to people’s aspirations. This general
political aphorism is substantiated by the experience
of the international community in its peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts over the past two decades.
We therefore think that the core institutions of
governance are the key to sustainable peace. They
must be rooted locally rather than being imposed from
above. Their local relevance and inclusiveness will
make all the difference in the governance process. It is
therefore important for the PBC to align its objectives
with national priorities and ensure that all plans and
programmes are implemented under national leadership
and through national institutions so that gains are
sustainable, if slow. The Commission must also draw
from the experiences that are the most relevant to the
prevailing socio-economic conditions in the countries
on its agenda. An effective measure of the success of

peacebuilding efforts will be the Commission’s success
in promoting inclusive political processes, national
reconciliation and security sector reforms.
Peacebuilding anchored firmly in the overall peace
process will deliver the best results. This requires
the international community to make available a
predictable and appropriate level of resources over
extended periods. Our advocacy must be accompanied
by matching commitments in resources.
The United Nations capacity to assist national
institutions is contingent upon the Secretariat and the
funds and programmes having the skills and expertise
that are relevant to these societies. We believe that
the Secretary-General’s review of civilian capacity
is a step towards making that process inclusive and
representative. We firmly believe that the nimbleness
of recruitment and deployment is not a sufficient
condition for performance delivery.
Those willing to invest their lives in the field must
be valued. Our in-house experts who have gained
valuable insights by spending time in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, the Sudan and other
challenging locations should be the pivots of all our
endeavours. Our efforts, at the same time, must be
demand-driven and nimble in order to respond the
changing times, rather than supply-driven. Our ways
of selecting police and military officers on secondment
need to be simplified. Communication methods with
Member States have stagnated and are outdated in this
regard. The representative nature of our institutions will
ensure the collective spirit of our enterprise, including
in the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that, as a
responsible global citizen with extensive nation-building
experience that is very relevant for countries on the PBC
agenda, India will not be found wanting in responding to
the challenges of the peacebuilding process, including
under the aegis of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for your presence
among us here today, and Colombia for having
organized this open debate on peacebuilding. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General; the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh; his predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda; and the
representative of the World Bank.

12-4165927

S/PV.6805

France associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.
We note today that, despite the 2010 review, the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is still being
defined. I would therefore like to make three comments
concerning this matter.
First, the primary role of the PBC is to identify,
together with the States concerned, the needs on
the ground and the stakeholders who are already
involved. Contact with those in the field offers a
picture of the needs on the ground. The work carried
out in the case of Guinea is an example of this. The
mapping exercise carried out by Luxembourg and Japan
provides us with a precise, quantifiable picture of the
existing shortcomings and projects needed to remedy
them. This exercise deserves to be repeated in other
country-specific configurations of the PBC.
The identification of the most pressing areas should
be the result of an in-depth dialogue with the relevant
State. To facilitate this dialogue, there are integrated
peacebuilding offices in a number of post-conflict
countries, such as Burundi and the Central African
Republic. The country-specific configuration of the
Commission must be in close contact with these offices,
and their exchanges must be fluid. That dialogue will be
effective only if links with the field are strengthened.
As was demonstrated by the Security Council’s visit
to western Africa, the PBC is sometimes lacking in
visibility in States in the region, in particular Sierra
Leone.
Once the work to identify needs has been completed,
it is important for the PBC to be able to play its political
supporting role. On the one hand, an important element
of the tasks entrusted to the Peacebuilding Commission
is that of advocacy, especially for resource mobilization.
On the other hand, the PBC should open a dialogue with
the authorities of countries on its agenda in order to ask
them to take specific commitments and follow up with
results on the ground.
The signing of mutual commitments or
peacebuilding plans with a State is not in itself enough
to guarantee that they will in fact be implemented. For
example, the peacebuilding plan for South Sudan is
blocked for now as a result of budgetary austerity. In a
number of situations, States do not possess the means
to cover and fully participate in all projects under way.
It is therefore essential to establish priorities and to be
realistic.

28

Finally, the key element of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission is coordination. The PBC
was designed as a platform for contact between the
various members of the international community,
including the international financial institutions, which
play a decisive role in this regard. Partnerships with
them must be developed. Coordination is a long-term
endeavour. To ensure the sustainability of the
international community’s commitment, various efforts
aimed at reviewing the topic have been launched, such
as, inter alia, the review of civilian capacities. The issue
of partnership development lies at the very heart of that
review. We believe that that approach provides us with
the best hope for a long-term commitment.
The international community must not create
conditions of dependence where a State is kept on life
support, but rather conditions for recovery. An excellent
option is the drawing up of contracts such as the New
Deal for International Engagement in Fragile States
developed at the 2011 Forum on Aid Effectiveness, in
Busan, which involved defining a State’s commitment
and so involves it in the project. Initiatives aimed at
promoting the recovery of a viable economic fabric
must be especially encouraged. The joint informal
event of the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in June on partnerships for
youth job creation in States emerging from conflict was
useful. That approach should also be reflected on the
ground in each State on the PBC’s agenda.
I will conclude by underscoring that to bring a
coordinated response to post-conflict situations and
to make sustainable any return to peace and stability,
the Commission must work as a flexible and responsive
mechanism, one bringing all players together in a joint
action plan. It therefore behoves us to be especially
vigilant with regard to the risks of bureaucratization of
this young institution.
Mr. Wittig (Germany) Madam President, let me
begin by thanking you, Ambassador Néstor Osorio
and your whole delegation for today’s important and
timely initiative and for preparing an excellent concept
note for our debate (S/2012/511, annex). Let me also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, as well
as the current and former Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and Vice-President Von Amsberg
of the World Bank for their insightful statements. Let
me also commend Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins for her important work at the helm of
the Peacebuilding Support Office.

12-41659

S/PV.6805

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
on in today’s debate.

the ground is its intergovernmental structure, which
should allow it to lend the the Secretary-General’s
representatives additional political weight.

We are here today not only to discuss the latest
annual report of the PBC (S/2012/70), but also to speak
in more general terms about how we can enhance the
role of the Commission within the United Nations
system, and in particular the impact that it has in the
field. In our view, the PBC has not yet entirely realized
its full potential. What can be done better? The concept
paper prepared by the Colombian presidency raises
important questions. The PBC’s engagement with a
country needs to be flexible and has to evolve on the
basis of a continuous assessment. Our approaches must
be context-specific; there is no single approach that will
fit all situations. However, there are a few overarching
points and principles that seem important to us.

Thirdly, the PBC must make better use of the
political leverage of its individual members. PBC
member States need to become better at assisting
the PBC country configuration Chairs in their work.
Members of the PBC’s Organizational Committee and
the PBC country configurations have a responsibility to
support the PBC so that it can have a true impact on the
ground. The PBC was created as a body composed of
members of different United Nations bodies, including
seven members of the Security Council, precisely for
the reason that those members bring their political
weight and experience from other bodies to the PBC’s
activities. The intergovernmental nature of the PBC
needs to be much better used in order to support the
countries on its agenda.

First, we need to clarify what the role of the PBC
is and set realistic expectations. It seems that the PBC’s
success has often been measured only by its capacity to
mobilize resources. Resource mobilization, including
by mobilizing non-traditional donors, is indeed a key
role of the PBC. But it needs to be clear that that is not
its only role. Supporting countries politically as they
emerge from conflict and fostering coherence among
international actors are other core tasks outlined in
the PBC’s founding resolutions. Eligibility for funding
by the Peacebuilding Fund is therefore also linked
to a country’s national commitment to a political
peacebuilding process. To marshal resources is not an
isolated task but has to go hand in hand with a credible
and nationally owned political process. The PBC
can only be successful if there is a genuine political
commitment by the national Government in question to
a political peacebuilding process.
Secondly, effective political support of countries
on the PBC’s agenda can only work if there is close
cooperation between the PBC and other key actors
on the ground, namely, the executive representatives
and Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
The roles and responsibilities of the different actors
must be clearly outlined in order to avoid overlap. The
first meeting between the PBC country configuration
Chairs and the Secretary-General’s representatives for
countries on the PBC’s agenda, which took place in New
York in May, was an important step in the right direction.
In our view, such a dialogue needs to take place on a
much more regular basis. The comparative advantage
of the PBC compared with United Nations missions on

Fourthly, the PBC needs to maintain stronger
and more regular rapport with other key partners in
the field, especially with major donors such as the
World Bank, active bilateral donors and other relevant
international actors. I therefore welcome the presence
of Vice-President Von Amsberg of the World Bank
at today’s meeting. His statement on the improved
coordination between the World Bank and the PBC in
post-conflict situations is reassuring. We encourage
both sides to make full use of their potential for future
cooperation. It is only through a regular, strong rapport
that gaps and overlaps will be identified, be they in
resourcing or in civilian capacity-building.
Fifthly, we believe that there need to be more
interactive and dynamic relations between the PBC and
the Council. We welcome the fact that the Chairs of
the PBC country configurations are regularly included
in briefings to the Security Council. Council members
should, in our view, also consider inviting the PBC
country configuration Chairs, as appropriate, to closed
consultations of the Security Council. Furthermore, we
should work on expanding existing informal ways of
interaction between the PBC and the Security Council
outside the Consultations Room. In that connection, we
have had fruitful informal exchanges of views on both
Burundi and Liberia. We think it could be beneficial to
the work of the Council to have more of those informal
exchanges of views.
The PBC’s Organizational Committee can do better
in using the advantages of its unique intergovernmental

12-4165929

S/PV.6805

structure. It could potentially serve as an ideal platform
to create stronger links between developments that take
place outside the United Nations, such as activities of
the World Bank, but also such initiatives as the New
Deal for International Engagement in Fragile and the
peacebuilding agenda of the United Nations. Equally,
the PBC could help to link certain processes within
the United Nations, such as the post-2015 development
agenda, to the peacebuilding agenda.
Having myself served as Chair of the PBC’s
Organizational Committee, in 2010, I am very well
aware of the opportunities, the challenges and the
limitations of that unique intergovernmental body. All
of us created it together in order to achieve more durable
peace and development in countries emerging from
conflict. It is therefore also our common responsibility
to make it work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): We are
pleased to see you, Madam President, presiding over this
meeting. Your presence with us today is an illustration
both of the importance of the peacebuilding theme and
of that which Colombia and all of us attach to building
solid and lasting foundations for peace and security
through socio-economic development.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
for the work he has done in fostering peacebuilding as
an essential component of the United Nations work.
I also thank Ambassadors Gasana and Momem for
their statements on the past and current work of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also welcome the
presence with us today of the Vice-President from the
World Bank.
Allow me to touch upon three issues that should
continue to merit our attention in the near future,
namely, the relationship between the PBC and other
United Nations bodies; the partnership with external
actors; and resource mobilization.
As many previous speakers have said, enhancing
the PBC’s institutional linkages with the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council has been one of the most important
undertakings of the Commission. That is a natural
consequence of the diversity of challenges that it has to
address and of the need to muster political support from

30

the wider membership. We are convinced, in particular,
that the PBC is in a unique position to perform its
advisory role to the Security Council, especially with
regard to countries that are on the agenda of both
bodies. As the Council has already recognized, security
and development are closely interlinked. The PBC is
naturally suited to offer a comprehensive perspective
on the root causes of conflict and on the multiple
challenges in post-conflict scenarios. An integrated
approach that takes into account the close interrelation
between security and development as pillars of
sustainable peace should be seen as an important added
value of the PBC.
A coherent mix of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
activities is also a powerful tool to ensure that short-term
stabilization will be matched by a greater capacity
to deal with medium- and long-term challenges to
security. The better a State is equipped to address social
and economic strife, the more it will be able to avoid a
relapse into conflict. In that regard, the perspectives of
the PBC can be valuable in a variety of areas, such as
in security sector reform; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; the economic inclusion
of women; youth employment; the management of
natural resources; and the restoration of basic services
and economic revitalization. We therefore hope that the
synergy between the Security Council and the PBC will
be continually strengthened, including through more
frequent interactive dialogues and the participation of
PBC Chairs in discussions that are of interest to both
bodies.
Furthering a stronger relationship with regional
organizations and United Nations missions is of
the utmost importance to ensuring a more in-depth
perspective on the reality on the ground and closer
involvement with local stakeholders. The annual
report (S/2012/70) demonstrates that the pool of PBC
partners has been expanded lately. It is up to us to
maintain the momentum. The case of international
financial institutions should be singled out. The
World Bank, the African Development Bank and the
International Monetary Fund have been pivotal in
helping post-conflict countries to improve economic
management, jump-start economic recovery and access
much-needed financial support.
That brings me to my last point, namely, the
mobilization of resources. As we are all aware, the
countries on the PBC’s agenda usually have to overcome
situations that generate a perception of high risk on the

12-41659

S/PV.6805

part of donors, investors and international institutions.
It is our role is to help them find ways of increasing
the level of attention from the international community
and garner the necessary resources to develop national
capacities and to maintain stability.
We hope that today’s discussions will be a further
step in enhancing the relationship between the PBC and
the Security Council. We also expect that it will help
the Commission to play an even more meaningful role
in the United Nations system.

As Chair of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration, as well as a member of the Organizational
Committee, Brazil reiterates its commitment to our
common efforts to assisting countries emerging from
conflict to achieve peace, stability and socioeconomic
development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list. Given the
lateness of the hour, I intend, with the consent of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 o’clock.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

12-4165931
