A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/192
25 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 95
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/610)]
53/192. Triennial policy review of operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/211 of 22 December 1989, 47/199 of 22 December 1992, 50/120 of 20
December 1995, 52/203 of 18 December 1997 and 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, taking into account the
views of Member States, as well as Economic and Social Council resolutions 1996/42 of 26 July 1996
and 1998/26 of 28 July 1998,
Reaffirming that operational activities for development within the United Nations system have an
important role to play in enabling developing countries to continue to take a lead role in the management
of their own development process,
Stressing that national plans and priorities constitute the only viable frame of reference for the
national programming of operational activities for development within the United Nations system and that
programmes should be based on such development plans and priorities and should therefore be countrydriven,
Also stressing, in that context, the need to take into account the outcomes and commitments of
relevant United Nations conferences, as well as the individual mandates and complementarities of the
organizations and bodies of the United Nations development system, bearing in mind the need to avoid
duplication,

99-76963

/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 2

Further stressing that the fundamental characteristics of the operational activities of the United
Nations system should be, inter alia, their universal, voluntary and grant nature, their neutrality and their
multilateralism, as well as their ability to respond to the development needs of developing countries in a
flexible manner, and that the operational activities of the United Nations system are carried out for the
benefit of recipient countries, at the request of those countries and in accordance with their own policies
and priorities for development,
Noting, in this context, the activities of United Nations funds and programmes aimed at providing
technical assistance to recipient countries, in response to their national economic and social needs and
priorities, including poverty eradication and the promotion of all human rights, including the right to
development, for achieving sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with
relevant General Assembly resolutions and recent United Nations conferences, and stressing the need for
those activities to be undertaken at the request of interested recipient Governments strictly within the
respective mandates of United Nations funds and programmes, which should receive increased
contributions from donor countries,
Recognizing the urgent and specific needs of low-income countries, in particular the least developed
countries,
Emphasizing that developing countries are responsible for their development processes, and in this
context stressing the responsibility of the international community, in partnership, to assist developing
countries in their national development efforts,
Recalling the role of the Economic and Social Council in providing coordination and guidance to the
United Nations system to ensure that policies formulated by the General Assembly, particularly during the
triennial policy review of operational activities, are implemented on a system-wide basis in accordance
with Assembly resolutions 48/162 of 20 December 1993 and 50/227 of 24 May 1996,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the triennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system;1
2. Reaffirms its resolutions 47/199, 50/120 and the parts relevant to operational activities for
development of its resolution 52/12 B, and stresses the need to implement fully, based on lessons learned,
all the elements of these resolutions in a coherent and timely manner, keeping in mind their interlinkages;
3. Emphasizes that recipient Governments have the primary responsibility for coordinating, on the
basis of national strategies and priorities, all types of external assistance, including that provided by
multilateral organizations, in order to integrate effectively such assistance into their development process;
4. Notes the efforts made in order to rationalize and to improve the function and impact of United
Nations funds and programmes;

1

A/53/226 and Add.1–4.
/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 3

I
A. Reform of United Nations operational activities
5. Stresses the need for all organizations of the United Nations development system to focus their
efforts at the field level on priority areas, in accordance with the priorities identified by recipient countries
and the mandates, mission statements and relevant decisions of their governing bodies, in order to avoid
duplication and to enhance the complementarity and impact of their work;
6. Also stresses that, in the context of the reform of the United Nations Secretariat and the
restructuring and revitalization of the intergovernmental process, the mandates of the separate sectoral and
specialized entities, funds, programmes and specialized agencies should be respected and enhanced, taking
into account their complementarities;
B. Funding for United Nations operational activities
7. Notes with regret that, although significant progress has already been achieved on the governance
and functioning of the United Nations development funds and programmes, there has not been, as part of
that overall change process, any increase in core resources for operational activities for development on
a predictable, continuous and assured basis;
8. Expresses serious concern at the persistent insufficiency of resources for the operational
development activities of the United Nations, in particular the decline in contributions to core resources;
9. Reaffirms the need for priority allocation of scarce grant resources to programmes and projects
in low-income countries, particularly the least developed countries;
10. Strongly reaffirms that the impact of the operational activities of the United Nations system must
be enhanced by, inter alia, a substantial increase in their funding on a predictable, continuous and assured
basis, commensurate with the increasing needs of developing countries, as well as through the full
implementation of resolutions 47/199, 48/162, 50/120 and the parts relevant to operational activities for
development of resolution 52/12 B;
11. Stresses the need for continuous overall improvement in the effectiveness, efficiency and impact
of the United Nations system in delivering its development assistance, and welcomes steps that have been
taken towards that end;
12. Notes with appreciation the sustained contributions of many donors and recipient countries to
operational activities for development in a spirit of partnership;
13. Urges developed countries, in particular those countries whose overall performance is not
commensurate with their capacity, taking into account established official development assistance targets,
including targets established at the Second United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
and their current levels of contribution, to increase substantially their official development assistance,
including contributions to the operational activities of the United Nations system;
14. Stresses that other countries that are in a position to do so should strive to augment their
assistance in the framework of development cooperation;
/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 4

15. Notes the importance of non-core resources, including cost-sharing, trust funds and nontraditional sources of financing, as a mechanism to enhance the capacity and to supplement the means of
operational activities for development;
16. Notes the discussions on funding strategies in the executive boards of the United Nations funds
and programmes, including, inter alia, the decisions adopted recently by the Executive Board of the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Population Fund2 as part of ongoing efforts by
Member States to reverse the declining trend in core resources and to put funding for United Nations
development activities on a predictable, continuous and assured basis, commensurate with the needs of
the developing countries, and in this context urges the expeditious and productive outcome of these and
other discussions of the executive boards, and invites the Economic and Social Council to consider, on
an annual basis, the overall financial picture of the funds and programmes;
C. United Nations Development Assistance Framework
17. Emphasizes that the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, which is currently in
a pilot phase,3 should promote a country-driven, collaborative and coherent response by the United
Nations system to achieve greater impact at the country level, fully consistent with and in support of
national priorities as expressed in the country strategy notes or relevant national development plans, as
appropriate;
18. Stresses the importance of ensuring full government participation in the formulation of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework and its full ownership through the agreement of the
recipient Governments concerned to the finalized Framework, bearing in mind that the responsibility for
coordination of all assistance and developmental activities rests with the national Government;
19. Also stresses the need to ensure the full and active participation of the funds and programmes
and specialized agencies of the United Nations system in the preparation of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework;
20. Notes the importance of closer consultation, in the formulation of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, among national Governments, relevant United Nations development
agencies, including specialized agencies, and other relevant development partners;
21. Also notes that the country strategy note remains a voluntary initiative and that where it does
not exist, other similar frameworks reflecting national priorities should be used as the basis for the
preparation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, to ensure that the Framework fully
responds to national development priorities and needs;
22. Further notes the role that the United Nations Development Assistance Framework should play
to facilitate, inter alia, the contribution of the United Nations to the coordinated follow-up to the major
United Nations conferences at the field level and the importance of the common country assessment for
the effective formulation of the Framework;

2

See DP/1999/2.

3

See A/53/226, paras. 72-77, and A/53/226/Add.1, paras. 88-98.
/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 5

D. Resident coordinator system
23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to make the resident coordinator system more
participatory in its functioning at the field level by, inter alia, making greater use of thematic groups and
adopting a more consultative approach within the United Nations system;
24. Notes the improvements in the functioning of the resident coordinator system, and encourages
further progress in close consultation with national Governments;
25. Encourages further efforts, including through the United Nations Development Group, to further
improve the resident coordinator system, and welcomes the efforts to continue to broaden the base of
recruitment of resident coordinators, increasing the number of women resident coordinators and improving
its selection criteria and procedures, including through the use of competency assessment and training and
by ensuring that the resident coordinators take fully into account the mandates of all organizations of the
resident coordinator system;
26. Reaffirms that resident coordinators, in full consultation with national Governments, should
facilitate a coherent and coordinated United Nations follow-up to major international conferences at the
field level;
27. Requests the United Nations system, including the funds and programmes, specialized agencies
and the Secretariat, to provide support to the resident coordinator system;
E. United Nations Development Group
28. Urges the United Nations Development Group to work in a fully transparent and accountable
manner towards a more coherent United Nations performance in the development field, while respecting
the specific mandates and identity of its members;
II
A. Planning, programming and implementation
29. Stresses that the needs and priorities of recipient countries require flexibility and decentralization
of operational activities to the country level, as well as the continued application of those measures, to
enhance further programme responsiveness and impact;
30. Decides that, with the agreement of the host country, the United Nations development system
should assist national Governments in creating an enabling environment in which the links between
national Governments, the United Nations development system, civil society, national non-governmental
organizations and the private sector that are involved in the development process are strengthened, with
a view to seeking new and innovative solutions to development problems in accordance with national
policies and priorities;
31. Calls for the further simplification, harmonization and rationalization of procedures for
operational activities of the United Nations development system at the field level, where possible, and
developing common databases, in consultation with national Governments;

/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 6

32. Urges the funds and programmes to put in place specific measures and timetables to advance
the simplification and harmonization of procedures and to report on these to their respective governing
bodies;
33. Also calls for the United Nations development system to promote greater consistency in the
presentation of budgets at the headquarters level and, at the field level, the sharing of administrative
systems and services;
34. Emphasizes the need to implement the outcome of the major United Nations conferences through
fulfilling the commitments and targets agreed upon at those conferences, and in this context stresses the
importance of accelerating efforts for the coordinated follow-up to major United Nations conferences, and
in this context welcomes Economic and Social Council decision 1998/290 of 31 July 1998, in which the
Council decided to start, on a step-by-step basis, an intergovernmental process on relevant indicators to
monitor the implementation of conference outcomes at all levels, and in this context also welcomes the
decision to hold an informal Council meeting on this issue in 1999;
35. Encourages greater cooperation between the World Bank, regional development banks and all
funds and programmes, with a view to increased complementarity and better division of labour as well
as enhanced coherence in their sectoral activities, building on the existing arrangements and fully in
accordance with the priorities of the recipient Government;
36. Notes the current initiatives in pursuing common premises and the need to take fully into account
cost-benefit studies as called for by relevant resolutions, and encourages further implementation of such
initiatives, where appropriate, while ensuring that there will be no additional burden imposed on host
countries;
B. Capacity-building
37. Reaffirms that capacity-building and its sustainability should be explicitly articulated as a goal
of technical assistance provided by the operational activities of the United Nations system at the country
level, with the aim of strengthening national capacities in the fields of, inter alia, policy and programme
formulation, development management, planning, implementation, coordination, monitoring and review;
C. Humanitarian assistance
38. Expresses concern at the growing number of natural disasters and environmental emergencies
that often strike countries that lack the resources to cope with them adequately;
39. Recognizes that the phases of relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and development are generally
not consecutive but often overlap and occur simultaneously, and notes the urgent need to develop, through
a strategic framework, when appropriate, a comprehensive approach to countries in crisis, and that the
development of such a comprehensive approach must involve national authorities as well as the United
Nations system, donors and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, and that national
authorities must take a leading role in all aspects of the recovery plan, and also notes in this context the
need for an early application of developmental tools in humanitarian emergencies, and takes note with
appreciation of the recommendations included in the report of the Secretary-General in this regard;1

/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 7

40. Stresses that contributions to humanitarian assistance should not be provided at the expense of
development assistance and that sufficient resources for humanitarian assistance should be made available
by the international community;
D. Regional dimension
41. Stresses the growing need for incorporating the regional and subregional dimension in United
Nations operational activities for development, and encourages the resident coordinators, in close
consultation with Governments, to secure greater involvement of the regional commissions, taking into
account their agreed mandates and work programmes, in the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework, as appropriate;
E. Cross-cutting themes
1. South-South cooperation/technical and economic
cooperation among developing countries
42. Requests the United Nations system to take appropriate measures to improve the effective
incorporation of technical cooperation among developing countries into their programmes and projects and
to intensify efforts towards mainstreaming the modality of technical cooperation among developing
countries, including through support to the activities of the Special Unit for Technical Cooperation among
Developing Countries, and encourages other relevant international institutions to undertake similar
measures;
43. Stresses that South-South cooperation, including technical and economic cooperation among
developing countries, offers viable opportunities for the development of developing countries, and in this
context requests the executive boards of the funds and programmes to review, with a view to considering
an increase, the allocation of resources for activities involving technical cooperation among developing
countries;
44. Notes with satisfaction the broad-based support for technical cooperation among developing
countries expressed by Member States at the twentieth anniversary commemoration of the Buenos Aires
Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries;4
45. Takes note with appreciation of the recommendations on strengthening the integration of
economic and technical cooperation among developing countries contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;5
2. Gender

4

Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,
Buenos Aires, 30 August–12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and
corrigendum), chap. I.
5

A/53/226/Add.1, paras. 35-54.
/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 8

46. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations development system to take all measures
to ensure gender balance when making appointments, including at the senior level and in the field, in
accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions;
47. Stresses the need for gender mainstreaming in operational activities of the United Nations system
in all fields, in particular in support of poverty eradication;
3. National execution
48. Decides that the United Nations system should use, to the fullest extent possible and practicable,
available national expertise and indigenous technologies in the implementation of operational activities;
49. Calls upon all funds and programmes to consider ways to increase, within existing rules and
regulations, the procurement of goods and services from developing countries, both as a mechanism to
promote South-South cooperation and for enhancing national execution;
50. Calls for further work on the development of common guidelines at the field level for the
recruitment, training and remuneration of national project personnel, including national consultants, in the
formulation and implementation of development projects and programmes supported by the United Nations
development system, in order to enhance the coherence of the system;
51. Requests the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to continue to work on
promoting, improving and expanding national execution, including through the simplification and
strengthening of relevant procedures, so as to contribute to the advancement of national ownership and
to enhance the absorptive capacity in developing countries, in particular in the least developed countries
in Africa;
III
Monitoring and evaluation
52. Recognizes that the monitoring and evaluation process of operational activities, including joint
evaluations, should be impartial and independent, under the overall leadership of the Government;
53. Takes note of the report on pilot evaluation conducted on the impact of operational activities and
the need to continue these evaluations with the full and effective involvement of the recipient Government
concerned in the process of such evaluation;
54. Emphasizes the importance of disseminating the experience of effective and efficient cooperation
within the United Nations development system;
55. Underlines the importance of promoting, under the leadership of Governments, greater
collaboration on issues relating to evaluation among recipient Governments, the United Nations
development system, in particular the members of the United Nations Development Group, and relevant
development partners at the country level;

/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 9

56. Recognizes, in that context, the need to strengthen capacities of the recipient countries to perform
both effective programme, project and financial monitoring and impact evaluations of operational activities
funded by the United Nations;
57. Requests that the United Nations system strengthen its efforts, in consultation with recipient
countries, to ensure that the lessons learned from both monitoring and evaluation exercises are
systematically applied to programming processes at the operational level and that evaluation criteria are
built into all projects and programmes at their design stage;
IV
Follow-up
58. Reaffirms that the governing bodies of the funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system should take appropriate action for the full implementation of the present resolution,
and requests the executive heads of those funds, programmes and specialized agencies to submit a yearly
progress report to their governing bodies on measures taken and envisaged for the implementation of the
present resolution, as well as appropriate recommendations;
59. Invites the executive boards of the United Nations funds and programmes to ensure that the
heads of those funds and programmes include in their annual reports to the Economic and Social Council,
prepared in accordance with Council resolution 1994/33 of 28 July 1994, a thorough analysis of problems
encountered and lessons learned, with emphasis on issues arising from the implementation of the
Secretary-General's reform programme, the triennial policy review and the follow-up to international
conferences, so as to allow the Council to fulfil its coordinating role;
60. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the funds, programmes and specialized
agencies of the United Nations system, to present a progress report to the Economic and Social Council,
at its substantive session of 1999, on an appropriate management process, containing clear guidelines,
targets, benchmarks and time-frames for the full implementation of the present resolution;
61. Invites the Economic and Social Council, during the operational activities segment of its
substantive sessions of 1999 and 2000, to examine the operational activities of the United Nations system
in order to evaluate the implementation of the present resolution with a view to ensuring its full
implementation;
62. Also invites the Economic and Social Council, at its substantive session of 1999, to consider,
inter alia, the issues of poverty eradication and capacity-building and, at its substantive session of 2000,
to consider, inter alia, harmonization and simplification, including of programming, and resources, on the
basis of progress reports by the Secretary-General, including appropriate recommendations;
63. Decides, as an integral part of the next triennial policy review of operational activities, in
consultation with Member States, to conduct an evaluation of the impact of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework in the field of operational activities, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report, through the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2001, on the
results of such an evaluation, including lessons learned and recommendations made, for consideration by
the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session, and also requests the Secretary-General to report annually
to the Economic and Social Council on the United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
/...

A/RES/53/192
Page 10

64. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive analysis of the implementation of the present
resolution in the context of the triennial policy review, and to make appropriate recommendations.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
