United Nations

A/RES/60/162

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 71 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/509/Add.2 (Part II))]

60/162. Strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing
the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine
elections and the promotion of democratization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in particular resolution
58/180 of 22 December 2003,
Reaffirming that United Nations electoral assistance and support for the
promotion of democratization are provided only at the specific request of the
Member State concerned,
Noting with satisfaction that increasing numbers of Member States are using
elections as a peaceful means of discerning the will of the people, which builds
confidence in representational governance and contributes to greater national peace
and stability,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted on
10 December 1948, 1 in particular the principle that the will of the people, as
expressed through periodic and genuine elections, shall be the basis of government
authority, as well as the right freely to choose representatives through periodic and
genuine elections, which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and held by secret
vote or by equivalent free voting procedures,
Taking note with interest of Commission on Human Rights resolution
2004/30 of 19 April 2004 on enhancing the role of regional, subregional and other
organizations and arrangements in promoting and consolidating democracy 2 and
Commission resolution 2005/32 of 19 April 2005 on democracy and the rule of
law; 3
Recognizing the need for strengthening democratic processes, electoral
institutions and national capacity-building, including the capacity to administer fair
elections, increase citizen participation and provide civic education, in requesting
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
3
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2

05-49732

A/RES/60/162

countries in order to consolidate and regularize the achievements of previous
elections and support subsequent elections,
Welcoming the support provided by States to the electoral assistance activities
of the United Nations, inter alia, through the provision of electoral experts,
including electoral commission staff, and observers, as well as through contributions
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Electoral Observation,
Welcoming also the contributions made by international and regional
organizations and also by non-governmental organizations to enhancing the
effectiveness of the principle of periodic and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on United Nations
activities aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic and
genuine elections and the promotion of democratization, 4
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;4

2.
Commends the electoral assistance provided upon request to Member
States by the United Nations, and requests that such assistance continue on a caseby-case basis in accordance with the evolving needs of requesting countries to
develop, improve and refine their electoral institutions and processes, recognizing
that the fundamental responsibility of organizing free and fair elections lies with
Governments;
Requests the Electoral Assistance Division of the Department of Political
3.
Affairs of the Secretariat, in its role as coordinator of United Nations electoral
assistance, to continue to inform Member States regularly about the requests
received and the nature of any assistance provided;
Requests that the United Nations continue its efforts to ensure, before
4.
undertaking to provide electoral assistance to a requesting State, that there is
adequate time to organize and carry out an effective mission for providing such
assistance, including the provision of long-term technical cooperation, that
conditions exist to allow a free and fair election and that the results of the mission
will be reported comprehensively and consistently;
Recommends that, throughout the time span of the entire electoral
5.
process, including before and after elections, as appropriate, based on needsassessment missions, the United Nations continue to provide technical advice and
other assistance to requesting States and electoral institutions in order to help to
strengthen their democratic processes;
Notes with appreciation additional efforts being made to enhance
6.
cooperation with other international, governmental and non-governmental
organizations in order to facilitate more comprehensive and needs-specific
responses to requests for electoral assistance, and encourages those organizations to
share knowledge and experience in order to promote best practices in the assistance
they provide and in their reporting on electoral processes, and expresses its
appreciation to those Member States, regional organizations and non-governmental
organizations that have provided observers or technical experts in support of United
Nations electoral assistance efforts;

_______________
4

2

A/60/431.

A/RES/60/162

7.
Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Electoral Observation, and calls upon Member States to consider
contributing to the Fund;
Encourages the Secretary-General, through the Electoral Assistance
8.
Division, to continue responding to the evolving nature of requests for assistance
and the growing need for specific types of medium-term expert assistance aimed at
supporting and strengthening the existing capacity of the requesting Government, in
particular by enhancing the capacity of national electoral institutions;
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Electoral Assistance
9.
Division with adequate human and financial resources to allow it to carry out its
mandate, and to continue to ensure that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is able to respond, within its mandate and in close
coordination with the Division, to the numerous and increasingly complex and
comprehensive requests from Member States for advisory services;
10. Notes with satisfaction the comprehensive coordination between the
Electoral Assistance Division and the United Nations Development Programme, and
encourages further engagement of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in this context;
11. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to continue its
governance assistance programmes in cooperation with other relevant organizations,
in particular those that strengthen democratic institutions and linkages between civil
society and Governments;
12. Reiterates the importance of reinforced coordination within and outside
the United Nations system in this regard;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution, in particular
on the status of requests from Member States for electoral assistance, and on his
efforts to enhance support by the Organization for the democratization process in
Member States.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

3
