S/2015/1030

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2227
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) until
30 June 2016 and requested me to report every three months on the situation in
Mali, focusing on progress in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the efforts of MINUSMA to support it. The present
report covers the period from 23 September to 16 December 2015.

II. Major political developments
2.
The reporting period was characterized by a new momentum in the peace
process, with positive steps in the implementation of the peace agreement, including
an improved relationship between the Coordination des mouvements de l ’Azawad
(CMA) and the Platform coalition of armed groups following their bilateral talks in
Anéfis (Kidal region). Those positive developments also included a series of
intercommunal and intracommunal reconciliation dialogues and the nomination of
the members of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission. Meanwhile, all
signatory parties participated constructively in the Comité de suivi de l ’accord and
contributed to sustaining a positive momentum for the implementation of the peace
agreement, in spite of outstanding challenges related to the inclusivity and
transparency of the process.
3.
On 23 September, my Special Representative convened a meeting between the
military leadership of CMA and the Platform in Bamako. Under his auspices, the
parties resolved to immediately cease hostilities, end all incursions into the areas
under the other party’s control, ensure the free circulation of civilians and goods and
resume the participation of CMA in the Comité de suivi de l ’accord and its
subsidiary organs. The parties also agreed to initiate dialogue in Anéfis, with a view
to solving the long-standing intercommunal and intracommunal tensions at the root
of the conflict between them. On 27 and 28 September, a CMA delegation held
meetings with President Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta and the leaders of the Platform in
Bamako. Following the meetings, CMA announced that it would order its
combatants to refrain from using force against the troops of the Government forces
and of the Platform.

15-22402 (E)

291215

*1522402*

S/2015/1030

4.
On 24 September, President Keïta announced a cabinet reshuffle that increased
the number of ministers from 29 to 31, of which five are women and two, namely,
the Minister in charge of Decentralization and State Reform and the Minister of
Territorial Development and Population, are from the north. The opposition parties
complained forcefully that the Government reshuffle was a missed opportunity to
include politicians from outside the presidential majority.
5.
Between 27 September and 14 October, CMA and the Platform engaged in
direct talks in Anéfis. At the end of the talks, the parties endorsed a road map
comprising a series of measures, including the cessation of hostilities, joint
initiatives for intercommunal and intracommunal reconciliation, the exchange of
prisoners, the establishment of interim local administrations and the free movement
of people and goods. During and following the Anéfis talks, CMA and the Platform
brokered a series of intercommunal and intracommunal reconciliation agreements in
Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions, including between the Ifoghas and Imghad
Tuareg communities affiliated with CMA and the Platform, respectively. During the
reporting period, a number of intercommunal and intracommunal dialogues were
held in Bamako, as well as in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions, involving all Arab
and Tuareg communities and the Peulh community. The Ministry of National
Reconciliation organized two intercommunal dialogues in Ansongo and Gao in Gao
region on 10 and 11 November with the support of MINUSMA. On 2 December, as
part of the Government’s reconciliation efforts, the Council of Ministers adopted
draft legislation on compensation for victims of the 2012 military coup.
6.
Sensitization efforts on the peace agreement continued during the reporting
period. On 20 October, the Government launched the second phase of the “Caravan
for peace and reconciliation” and held conferences and cultural events nationwide.
For its part, MINUSMA continued to intensify and diversify outreach to the public
at large in order to enhance understanding of the peace agreement. On 29 October
and 3 November, MINUSMA held information sessions with local politicians in
Gao, Koulikoro, Mopti and Timbuktu to explain the various provisions of the
agreement. On 5 December, the Mouvement des cadres et responsables chrétiens du
Mali organized the first of six awareness-raising workshops on the peace agreement
in collaboration with the Ministry of National Reconciliation and MINUSMA in
Bamako; it is to be followed by additional workshops in Kayes, Mopti, San, Ségou
and Sikasso.
Implementation of the peace agreement: political and institutional measures
7.
During the reporting period, three meetings of the Comité de suivi de l ’accord
were organized and attended by all signatory parties to the peace agre ement. At the
meeting held on 30 September and 1 October, the parties endorsed the workplan and
road map for the political and institutional subcommittee. At the same meeting, the
Comité decided to establish a working group chaired by the African Union Hig h
Representative for Mali and the Sahel to address the participation in its meetings of
armed groups outside CMA and Platform coalitions, namely, the Coalition du peuple
de l’Azawad (CPA-Ousmane), the Coordination des mouvements et fronts
patriotiques de résistance II (CMFPR-II), the Front populaire de l’Azawad (FPA)
and the Mouvement populaire pour le salut de l’Azawad (MPSA), which had been
participating in Comité meetings as invitees, pending resolution of the issue of
membership of the Comité. On 2 November, CMFPR-II and FPA announced their
merger with CMA. On 7 November, the Alliance populaire pour la paix et l ’unité

2/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

nationale joined the Platform. The working group is expected to continue its
deliberations on the status of CPA-Ousmane and MPSA.
8.
At the meeting of the Comité de suivi de l’accord, held on 28 and 29 October,
it welcomed the outcome of the international conference for the economic recovery
and development of Mali and stressed the need for the rapid disbursement of
pledged funds to start implementing critical programmes, including those generating
peace dividends. Further to the request of CMA and the Platform, the Comité called
on the Government to finalize the national development strategy for the north by the
end of 2015, including the national emergency response plan, in consultation with
CMA and the Platform. Participants also stressed the need to accelerate the
implementation of all four chapters of the peace agreement.
9.
The meeting of the Comité de suivi de l’accord, held on 19 and 20 November,
adjourned owing to the terrorist attack on the Radisson Blu Hotel in Bamako on
20 November, was marked by frustration on the part of CMA and the Platform over
the slow progress in the implementation of the peace agreement by the Government .
CMA and the Platform issued a joint statement deploring the Government ’s lack of
inclusivity and inaction, in particular concerning the delayed establishment of
interim administrations for the northern regions, the integration of northern citizens
in State and public institutions, the provision of humanitarian assistance to the
northern regions and the release of conflict-related detainees. This is further to their
joint letter of 13 October addressed to Algeria as president of the Comité, in which
they had voiced their concern over the lack of consultations by the Government on
several institutional reforms, including the terms of reference and composition of
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission and the designation of its
members. To address those concerns, the Government agreed to provide monthly
updates on the implementation of the peace agreement and to include CMA and the
Platform in the national committee of coordination for the implementation of the
peace agreement. Meanwhile, the subcommittee on political and institutional issues
failed to reach consensus on the law governing the designation of interim
administrations in the northern regions and recommended that the matter be referred
to the national committee.
10. On 21 September, the Council of Ministers decided to postpone the regional,
communal and district elections scheduled for 25 October, owing to a number of
factors, including the need to implement the revision of the electoral and
decentralization laws envisaged by the peace agreeme nt and to the prevailing
insecurity and absence of local authorities in some parts of the northern regions.
Political parties, civil society organizations, CMA and the Platform had also
requested that the polls be delayed until the return of refugees and i nternally
displaced persons so as to guarantee an inclusive electoral process. On
13 November, the National Assembly adopted a bill extending the mandate of local
authorities, pending local elections. MINUSMA continued to support the Malian
electoral management bodies in preparing for local elections by providing logistical
support for the annual revision of the electoral list. The Mission and the United
Nations Development Programme also conducted several workshops to address the
needs of women candidates, observers and voters.
11. On 5 October, the President of the National Assembly reaffirmed Parliament’s
commitment to the peace agreement, stating that bills related to its implementation
would be given priority. In early November, the Government began drafting a bill to

15-22402

3/20

S/2015/1030

establish a national office of public service for the territorial co llectivities. On
30 November, the High Council of Territorial Collectivities, which is the national
institution representing local authorities, endorsed the draft national policy for
decentralization for the period 2015-2024 and the draft agricultural policy of Mali,
which were submitted to the Office of the Prime Minister in advance of their
presentation to the Council of Ministers for endorsement.
12. On 14 October, following the appointment of the chair of the Truth, Justice
and Reconciliation Commission on 3 August, the Council of Ministers approved the
nomination of 14 commissioners, including 4 women, 2 CMA affiliates,
2 representatives of the Platform and 7 representatives of civil society, including
1 member of the Haut conseil islamique. Although the Ministry of National
Reconciliation had requested that the signatory armed groups, religious
representatives and civil society organizations propose candidates for the posts of
commissioners, CMA did not submit names by the deadline. Several human rights
organizations regretted the absence of victims’ representatives among the
commissioners. MINUSMA has enhanced its technical support to the Commission,
including the organization, from 26 to 28 October, with international
non-governmental organizations, of a training session for the commissioners on the
implementation of the Commission’s mandate and how to foster effective
communication with other judicial and non-judicial mechanisms.
13. Since my last report (S/2015/732), owing to persistent security concerns, there
has been limited improvement in the number of State representatives who are
reported as present and operating at their duty stations in northern Mali. While 7 out
of 8 prefects are present at their duty station in the Mopti region, the number of
sub-prefects present in the region has decreased from 43 to 38, owing mainly to
increased security threats. However, the sub-prefects who have relocated to Mopti
continue to conduct regular missions to their duty stations throughout the region.
The presence of justice and prison personnel has remained fairly constant, with
7 out of 12 courts and 7 out of 12 prisons operating in the three northern regions. In
Mopti region, justice personnel for Ténenkou and Youwarou have relocated to the
town of Mopti/Sévaré. In Timbuktu region, State representation increased during the
month of November, with the redeployment of the sub-prefect for Tonka in
Goundam Cercle. However, the establishment of the interim administration
arrangements in the northern regions, as envisaged by article 6 and annex I of the
peace agreement, did not take place during the reporting period.
14. In October, the Ministry of the Promotion of Women, Children and Family
sought international political and financial support to promote the effective
participation of women in the implementation of the peace agreement and the
national action plan based on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Out of the
66 representatives of the Government and the signatory parties in the Comité de
suivi de l’accord, there is only 1 woman representative from the Government in one
of the subcommittees. On 12 November, in another development aimed at enhancing
women’s political participation, Parliament passed a bill provid ing for a 30 per cent
quota for the appointment of women to national institutions and legislative organs.
The Council of Ministers is yet to issue a decree defining its application modalities.

4/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

Regional cooperation on the Sahel
15. There was significant progress on regional initiatives to comprehensively
address challenges affecting the Sahel, including terrorism, organized crime and
human and drug trafficking. In Bamako, on 4 and 5 November, the Government of
Mali hosted the fourth Ministerial Coordination Platform of Sahel Strategies. The
participants agreed to strengthen the coordination and harmonization of the
Ministerial Coordination Platform, the African Union -led Nouakchott Process on the
enhancement of security cooperation and the operationaliza tion of the African Peace
and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region, the Group of Five for the
Sahel and other regional mechanisms. On 4 November, in Ouagadougou, the chiefs
of staff of the armed forces of the Group of Five for the Sahel countries, namely,
Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and Niger, signed a military partnership
agreement defining the modalities of cooperation of their armed forces to combat
terrorism and cross-border criminality.
16. On 20 November, the Group of Five for the Sahel Summit was held in
N’Djamena. The Presidents of the Group of Five for the Sahel countries highlighted
the challenges that continue to affect the region, notably, illicit drug and human
trafficking, youth unemployment, radicalization, violent extre mism, the lack of
socioeconomic development, increased migration flows and the forced displacement
of people. They also welcomed the adoption of a road map in June defining the
framework for cooperation between the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Unite d
Nations, to be coordinated under the leadership of the office of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel.

III. Major security developments
17. While positive steps were taken towards the implementation of the peace
agreement by the signatory parties, there was an increase in the number and
geographical spread of activities by extremist and terrorist groups and organized
crime networks, notably in Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu regions, as well as in
Bamako. The prevalence of improvised explosive devices in northern Mali
continued to put the Malian defence and security forces, French forces and United
Nations personnel at risk and to seriously constrain the operations of MINUSMA.
The Mission therefore continued to require convoy escorts and force protection,
despite the absence of fighting between CMA and the Platform following the Anéfis
talks and the ongoing efforts by the Government and the signatory armed groups to
organize the cantonment process and to put mixed patrols into operation.
Asymmetric and extremist attacks
18. On 16 October, an Ansar Dine leader, Iyad Ag Ghaly, denounced the peace
process and threatened to intensify attacks against French forces and their allies in
Mali, making specific references to extremist cells in Kidal, Mopti, Sikasso and
Timbuktu regions. On 25 November, Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb interrupted
an intracommunal meeting of Arab tribes in Boujbeha, approximate ly 200 km north
of Timbuktu, warning participants not to collaborate with the “enemies of Islam”
and expressing its opposition to the peace agreement and the mixed patrols. On
6 December, MINUSMA received unconfirmed reports indicating a possible attack
on Diabaly (Ségou region) by Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb based in Lerneb

15-22402

5/20

S/2015/1030

(Timbuktu region). On the same day, the group claimed responsibility for the killing
of two individuals, including a local CMA leader accused of aiding French forces in
Ber (Timbuktu region), on 9 October and in Algeria on 19 November.
19. The activities of extremist and terrorist groups also continued unabated in
northern Mali, with a total of 28 attacks, compared with 20 attacks during the
previous reporting period, targeting MINUSMA using improvised explosive devices
or mines. During the reporting period, hostile acts against MINUSMA resulted in
the deaths of a total of 2 peacekeepers, 1 civilian staff a nd 1 civilian contractor,
while 18 peacekeepers and 2 civilian contractors were injured. On 24 November, a
MINUSMA armoured vehicle in a logistics convoy hit by an improvised explosive
device 25 km west of Timbuktu resulted in the first death of a MINUSMA civilian
staff by the use of such a device. On 28 November, six rockets hit the MINUSMA
camp in Kidal, killing 2 peacekeepers and 1 civilian contractor and wounding
18 peacekeepers and 2 civilian contractors. Media reports cited a senior Ansar Dine
figure claiming responsibility.
20. MINUSMA convoys remained the primary target of extremist and terrorist
groups and transnational drug traffickers on the main supply routes between Gao
and Tessalit and between Gao and Ménaka (Gao region). On average, two out o f
three MINUSMA convoys between Anéfis and Gao and four out of five between
Gao and Ménaka were hit by improvised explosive devices during the reporting
period, damaging or destroying four MINUSMA military vehicles and three
civilian-contracted trucks. Measures to counter the use of improvised explosive
devices adopted by MINUSMA, including in-depth training of troops and a revision
of the casualty evacuation procedures, prevented all but one civilian casualty.
However, force protection measures, including convoy escort and camp protection,
consume approximately two thirds of the Mission’s infantry capacity, seriously
hampering the implementation of mandated tasks in spite of elaborate planning and
the constant reprioritization of tasks, as well as the inves tment of significant
financial and other resources.
21. The increase in activities by extremist and terrorist groups was particularly
acute in Mopti region, where a weak administrative structure and limited
deployment of the Malian defence and security forces were exploited. The
deteriorating security situation, coupled with the general sense of abandonment by
the State and of the peace process among the population, as well as the lack of
economic opportunities, created a precarious environment in which mar ginalized
youth were targeted by extremist and terrorist groups, including the Front de
libération du Macina, which has links with Ansar Dine. In both Mopti and Ségou
regions, MINUSMA received reports of at least three incidents ranging from death
threats to the summary execution of local authorities. In response, the Malian
defence and security forces launched counter-terrorist operations in Mopti and
Ségou regions on 24 October, resulting in the arrest of a number of suspected
terrorists. For its part, MINUSMA deployed two platoons of an infantry unit to
Mopti immediately after the 7 August attack in Sévaré (Mopti region) in order to
enhance the protection of United Nations personnel and secure the airfield. On
15 September, the Mission deployed two additional infantry platoons and a
company-level command and control team.
22. On 20 November in Bamako, armed assailants gained access to the Radisson
Blu Hotel and indiscriminately fired shots, killing 19 civilians and 1 Malian soldier,

6/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

while injuring many others, including 3 people who were seriously injured. At the
request of the Government, MINUSMA supported the rescue operations led by the
Malian defence and security forces, deploying medical, investigation and forensics
experts and transferring the injured to a local clinic. The forces killed three
assailants during the operations. The attack was reportedly claimed by
Al Mourabitoun and the Front de libération du Macina. On the same day, the
Government declared a 10-day state of emergency. At the request of the
Government, from 20 November to 3 December, MINUSMA participated in daily
joint night patrols with the Malian police and gendarmerie in Bamako.
23. It is reported that extremist and terrorist groups have increasingly sought to
secure new sources of funding to operate in northern Mali, including from the
trafficking in ivory. Following the alarming increase in the poaching of elephants in
the first half of 2015 (57 killed out of an estimated population of 350), local
authorities, MINUSMA and other partners undertook an assessment mission in
Douentza Cercle (Mopti region) from 3 to 5 October. Following the killing of an
additional 11 elephants in October and November, MINUSMA police conducted
patrols in Douentza Cercle in support of local authorities who had deployed
50 additional park rangers to Mopti region.
Ceasefire monitoring
24. The Mission did not document any ceasefire violations during the period under
review, compared with a number of ceasefire violations in and around Ménaka and
in different parts of Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions during the previous reporting
period. Furthermore, as a result of the rapprochement between CMA and the
Platform, MINUSMA lifted the 20 km security zone around Kidal, but decided to
maintain its presence in Anéfis and the 20 km security zone around Ménaka to
ensure the protection of civilians.
25. MINUSMA has also enhanced its system to monitor the ceasefire. The Mission
has mapped the positions of the signatory parties, as outlined in the ceasefire
agreement of 23 May 2014, and has updated it monthly. Depending on the nature,
seriousness and location of reported incidents, MINUSMA sends either the joint
observation and verification team or military observers to investigate. As at
16 December, 11 military observers had been deployed in each of the three military
sectors of MINUSMA in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions, as well as 2 in Bamako.
Since 10 November, military observers in all three sectors have conducted a total of
30 patrols to observe and assess the movement of the signatory parties.
26. In contrast with the compliance of signatory armed groups with the provisions
of the peace and ceasefire agreements, the Mission observed that self -defence
militias such as Ganda Izo and Ganda Koy, which are not party to th e peace
agreement, enhanced their activities and established checkpoints in central and
northern Mali in late September. On 20 October, Ganda Izo -Seydou Cissé called on
the Government to organize consultations between the Bella, Peulh and Songhai
communities, similar to those held in Anéfis, and addressed an open letter to the
Platform stating that it would take up arms against anyone preventing it from taking
part in the peace process. On 4 November, representatives of Ganda Izo, Ganda
Koy, Ganda Lassal Lizaye and the Front de libération du nord informed MINUSMA
that they would submit some 3,000 names for cantonment and that excluding Mopti

15-22402

7/20

S/2015/1030

region from the peace process ran counter to the prospects for long -term peace and
the stabilization of Mali.
Implementation of the peace agreement: defence and security measures
27. Further to the political measures mentioned in section II above, the Malian
parties also made some progress in the defence and security provisions of the peace
agreement. The meeting of the Comité de suivi de l’accord on 30 September and
1 October endorsed the conclusions of the meetings of the Commission technique de
sécurité, held on 1, 2 and 17 September, including those agreements related to the
modalities for the reconnaissance of cantonment sites, the terms of reference of the
Mécanisme opérationnel de coordination and the operating procedures for the mixed
patrols.
28. As at 19 November, CMA and the Platform had each proposed 12 cantonment
sites. Subsequently, the mixed teams comprising the United Nations, the Malian
armed forces, CMA and the Platform assessed three CMA sites and seven Platform
sites against a series of technical criteria, such as the support required and the
environmental impact. On 19 November and 12 December, the Commission
technique de sécurité approved five CMA sites and six Platform sites and agreed to
begin construction of the first three sites proposed by the Platform, namely, Fafa
and Inaggar (Gao region) and Likrakar (Timbuktu region). CMA and the Platf orm
agreed to share one or two sites pending the construction of other sites, but they
have yet to submit lists of combatants. MINUSMA and the United Nations Office
for Project Services intended to begin construction in the second half of December.
Consistent with the decision taken by the Mécanisme opérationnel de coordination
on 29 October, the first mixed patrol took place on 14 November when CMA joined
a Malian armed forces-Platform convoy from Aguelhok to 20 km north of Anéfis
(Kidal region), returning from the Algerian border with nine vehicles donated by
Algeria to the Mécanisme.
29. During a meeting held from 16 and 19 November, the subcommittee on
defence and security matters of the Comité de suivi de l ’accord reviewed the draft
decrees related to the national commissions on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and on integration, as well as the National Council for Security Sector
Reform. MINUSMA, in collaboration with the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF), is developing a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration strategy
for children, which will complement the national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration policy. Efforts to strengthen democratic oversight of the security sector
and ensure gender mainstreaming are also being incorporated into all stages of the
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes .
30. On 14 October, the Council of Ministers approved the establishment of a
specialized judicial unit on terrorism and transnational organized crime. MINUSMA
supported the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights in operationalizing the unit,
which brings together a range of personnel with specialized capacities, such as
prosecutors, investigating judges and judicial clerks. Between 23 Se ptember and
16 December, MINUSMA trained 76 Malian defence and security force personnel
on issues related to transnational organized crime and counter -terrorism, including
intelligence gathering and forensic investigation skills. MINUSMA also supported
the development of holistic national policies on defence, counter -terrorism and
border security. Furthermore, at the request of the Ministry of Defen ce and Former

8/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

Combatants, the United Nations Mine Action Service destroyed a total of 256 tons
of obsolete and expired ammunition in Ségou region.
Protection of civilians
31. Armed banditry constitutes the most significant threat to civilians, with more
than 75 per cent of incidents occurring in Gao and Timbuktu regions. Most of the
crimes appeared to be theft, motivated by economic need. The vastness of the
regions and the sparse deployment of the Malian defence and security forces
remained challenges to reducing the high levels of criminality and arresting and
identifying the assailants in these regions. In response, MINUSMA adopted a robust
and visible posture by increasing the frequency of long -range patrols in all northern
regions, as well as the use of its aviation assets and unmanned aerial vehicles to
monitor remote areas and deter violence. MINUSMA police focused on urban
centres, conducting more than 1,600 patrols jointly with the Malian police, an
increase of 29 per cent since the previous reporting period. In Timbuktu region,
MINUSMA conducted an average of four reconnaissance flights per week over Be r,
Goundam and Gourma-Rharous to monitor the movements of armed groups and
reassure the population. On 2 December, MINUSMA co -located police in the
gendarmerie headquarters in Gao as part of its efforts to support local capacity building.
32. Intercommunal conflict persisted, in particular in Gao region. At least six
violent clashes took place between members of two Tuareg communities, the
Daoussak (largely pro-CMA) and the Imghad (predominantly pro-Platform), as well
as between the Daoussak and Peulh communities in the area between Ansongo and
Ménaka in Gao region. On 30 October, as part of the reconciliation initiative
pursuant to the Anéfis talks, CMA and the Platform organized an intracommunal
dialogue between two communities in Inouellene, Gao region. Approximately
300 people reportedly attended the event, including prominent figures from both
communities and local officials. Following the spate of violent clashes in Gao
region on 21, 23 and 30 October and 11 and 14 November between the Daoussak
and Peulh communities, which left four killed, one injured and four others abducted,
my Special Representative convened a meeting in Bamako on 23 November
between leaders from the two communities. At that meeting, the participants signed
an agreement to cease hostilities and agreed to discuss the root causes of the
tensions between the two communities. Humanitarian actors assessed that fighting
between the Daoussak and Peulh communities had forced approximately 4,500
civilians to be displaced in Ménaka commune.
33. On 28 and 29 October, MINUSMA supported the governorate of Mopti in
organizing a regional conference among farmers, herders and fishermen aimed at
preventing conflicts stemming from seasonal cattle migration. The participants
proposed 19 recommendations on conflict prevention measures and the management
of wetlands in Mopti and Ségou regions. A MINUSMA quick-impact project
demarcated roads for cattle migration in 15 communes of Mopti region to prevent
conflicts between farmers and herders.

15-22402

9/20

S/2015/1030

IV. Human rights
34. MINUSMA continued to document violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed by the Malian defence and security
forces, CMA, the Platform and other armed groups. A total of 25 cases of human
rights violations and abuses involving at least 157 victims were reported during the
reporting period, compared with 29 cases and 70 victims in my last report. The
cases involved 3 instances of summary execution and enforced disappearance,
96 instances of arbitrary detention, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of
detainees and 6 incidents of sexual violence involving 10 victims.
35. As at 16 December, MINUSMA had identified 289 conflict-related detainees,
all male, including six boys, held in State-run detention facilities throughout the
country. Of these, 157 have been detained illegally. The number of people detained
by CMA and the Platform decreased from 67 in June to 43 in December as a result
of the release of detainees by all signatory parties as part of con fidence-building
measures. On 1 October in Gao, the Government freed 21 detainees affiliated with
CMA, including 2 minors, and 9 others affiliated with CMA. CMA released
16 Malian armed forces soldiers and 2 children associated with the Platform. CMA
continued to detain 3 children. Discussions continued between the parties for the
release of an additional 111 individuals, of which 49 are detained by Malian
authorities.
36. MINUSMA continued to monitor detention conditions and the legal status of
detainees charged with terrorism. As at 16 December, 50 individuals had been
charged with terrorism and detained in State-run detention facilities in Gao,
Koulikoro, Mopti and Timbuktu regions and in Bamako. In the context of the
counter-terrorist operations, mentioned in paragraph 21, which began on 24 October
in Mopti and Ségou regions, at least 29 men were arrested on suspicion of being
associated with terrorist groups. Among them, eight were reportedly subjected to ill
treatment by the Malian armed forces upon their arrest. On 26 September, Ahmad
Al Mahdi Al Faqi, a member of Ansar al-Dine, became the first Malian citizen to be
surrendered, by the authorities of Niger, to the International Criminal Court.
37. During the reporting period, 10 women reported to MINUS MA that they had
been victims of sexual violence at the hands of Platform combatants and the Ganda
Izo local defence group. The incidents included three consecutive acts of rape,
reportedly committed against one woman, and the attempted rape of three women
and one girl near Anéfis by members of the Groupe d ’autodéfense touareg Imghad
et alliés during its occupation by the Platform. On 29 September, in Timbuktu
region, one girl and one woman were allegedly raped by CPA -Ousmane combatants,
and, on 28 October, one woman was allegedly raped by Ganda Izo combatants. As at
16 December, the testimony of 12 women on those incidents had been heard by a
magistrate in Bamako. Measures to ensure the security of the survivors of conflict related sexual violence were put in place through the MINUSMA trust fund for the
protection of victims, witnesses and their rights.
38. MINUSMA noted the continuing recruitment of children and the military use
of schools. On 2 October, MINUSMA documented one case and identified two
alleged cases of child recruitment involving six boys by signatory armed groups in
Timbuktu region. As at 16 December, a total of seven schools remained under
military use by signatory armed groups in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu regions .

10/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

V. Humanitarian situation
39. Insecurity continued to constrain humanitarian access and activities,
hampering the return of internally displaced persons and refugees and causing new
displacement in northern Mali. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs registered 15 incidents that resulted in delays or the temporary suspension of
humanitarian activities in Gao and Mopti regions. About 80 per cent of the
incidents, especially carjacking, occurred in the Gao region, in particular in Ménaka
Cercle. The Office continued to sensitize CMA and Platform leaders on the
humanitarian principles of safe access. The Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection
department of the European Commission continuously provided flights so that
humanitarian actors could reach vulnerable populations in the north. Meanwhile,
MINUSMA conducted a comprehensive clearance of mines and improvised
explosive devices at the secondary airfield in Kidal, which is essential for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, while also securing the airfield owing t o a high
risk of remining.
40. Security concerns prevented the reopening of 288 schools in 59 localities in
Gao and Kidal regions, western Timbuktu region, four districts in Mopti region and
one district in Ségou region. The delay in the implementation of the exceptional
administrative measures provided for by the peace agreement hampered the
resumption of basic services, including education, in Kidal region. In Kidal region,
only 15 out of 62 primary and junior high schools reopened on 19 October, for the
first time in three years, following efforts by the Government and CMA, with the
support of UNICEF. Demonstrations against the visit of a senior government official
in Kidal led to the cancellation of the participation of the Minister of Education in
the school’s reopening ceremony. As at 16 December, 52 volunteer teachers and
5 paid teachers were educating more than 3,300 children in the 15 open schools in
Kidal region. In Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions, the World Food Programme
provided school meals to 142,800 children in 782 primary schools and take-home
food rations to 64,198 girls to encourage their attendance at school.
41. In October and early November, an estimated 4,000 Malian refugees arrived in
Niger owing to insecurity in north-eastern Mali. As of mid-December, there were
approximately 62,000 internally displaced persons in Mali and approximately
137,000 Malian refugees in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Niger.

VI. Economic development, cultural preservation and
the environment
42. Six months after the signing of the peace agreement and following the
international conference for the economic recovery and development of Mali in
October, expectations for the delivery of peace dividends were high among the
Malian population. In order to promote ownership of and support for the peace
process, MINUSMA and the United Nations country team continued to strive to
deliver tangible peace dividends to the population through flexible and responsive
mechanisms, including quick-impact projects, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Trust
Fund in Support of Peace and Security in Mali.
43. Since June, MINUSMA has scaled up its support for communities in the north
by approximately 30 per cent, supporting 36 new quick-impact projects, at a cost

15-22402

11/20

S/2015/1030

amounting to approximately $1.3 million. New projects included the provision of
potable water in Kidal region, access to schools in Mopti, equipment for health
centres in Kidal and Mopti, the refurbishment of social care centres in Gao and
social reintegration projects for vulnerable communities, women, youth and
internally displaced persons in Gao, Kidal, Mopti and Timbuktu regions, as well as
the rehabilitation of some Government law enforcement facilities in Bamako and in
Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions.
44. From 6 to 8 October, in preparation for the international conference for the
economic recovery and development of Mali, the United Nations facilitated
consultations by the African Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank and
the World Bank to assess the socioeconomic and development needs in Gao, Kidal
and Timbuktu regions, as part of their joint evaluation mission to the north, in
accordance with article 36 of the peace agreement. The population and regional
authorities of Mopti expressed concern over the exclusion of the region from the
development strategies for the northern regions, despite the fact that Mopti had been
significantly affected by the conflict, with an estimated population of 2.2 million,
three times larger than that of the three northern regions combi ned. On
25 November, CMA and the Platform met with the three development banks and
recommended that additional consultations be held to ensure that the specific needs
of the most vulnerable people would be reflected in the proposed national
development strategies for the northern regions.
45. The international conference for the economic recovery and development of
Mali hosted by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Dev elopment in
Paris on 22 October 2015, generated pledges of approximately 3.2 billion euros for
the period 2015-2017, of which 700 million euros have been earmarked for the
northern regions. At the conference, the Government of Mali presented a draft
development strategy for the north, in accordance with article 34 of the peace
agreement, together with the national emergency response plan for the northern
regions referred to in paragraph 8 above, consisting of short-term activities aimed at
delivering swift peace dividends to the population through the restoration of State
authority, economic revitalization, the strengthening of social cohesion and the
delivery of basic social services. The Government also announced the creation of a
sustainable development fund to which it would contribute 450 million euros over
the period from 2016 to 2018. CMA and the Platform spoke with a unified voice in
support of the implementation of the peace agreement at the conference. In addition
to the signatory parties, representatives of 64 countries, as well as of regional
organizations, international partners, Malian civil society and the private sector,
attended the conference. Malian organizations underlined the importance of swiftly
translating the pledges into tangible benefits for the population and ensuring
transparency in the management of the funds.
46. The Mission undertook several initiatives to address the issue of youth
unemployment, which stands at approximately 60 per cent for persons under the age
of 35. With the support of the Peacebuilding Fund, the United Nations country team
implemented projects to support income-generation activities for youth and
displaced populations in Gao and Timbuktu regions. The Fund also supported the
design of tools and materials to teach the importance of peace in schools in
Timbuktu.

12/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

47. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework Plus 2015-2019,
which sets out a strategic framework for a collective United Nations response to the
poverty reduction strategy of the Government of Mali, and which replaces the
United Nations Integrated Strategic Framework in the country, was signed on
17 September by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, my Special Representative and
the heads of the United Nations country team.
48. MINUSMA continued to consider environmental impacts while operating in
the vicinity of cultural and historical sites. From 23 September to 7 December, the
Mission trained 756 personnel on environmental and cultural management, in
accordance with the provisions of the environmental policy of the Departments of
Field Support and Peacekeeping Operations for the United Nations field missions.

VII. Deployment and capacities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Military
49. As at 16 December, the strength of the military component of MINUSMA
stood at 10,638 out of an authorized strength of 11,240, representing 93 per cent of
authorized military personnel. Women represented 2 per cent of the force. Key
outstanding capacities include a combat convoy battalion, a medium military utility
helicopter unit, an attack helicopter unit, a military transport aircraft, additional
military staff officers for sector headquarters and a force protection company.
MINUSMA has also requested troop-contributing countries to urgently deploy
92 armoured personnel carriers and mine-protected vehicles to reach the originally
planned levels in order to enhance the Mission’s ability to protect convoys.
Concerns over the operational capability of some infantry units remain owing to the
lack of sufficient items of contingent-owned equipment, both in major equipment
(four contingents are below 70 per cent of requirements) and in self -sustainment
capabilities (four contingents are below 60 per cent of requirements) that meet
United Nations standards. The areas of bilateral support needed fo r the MINUSMA
troop-contributing countries include the maintenance of armoured personnel
carriers, capacity-building in minor engineering works and logistics support and
training to improve the asymmetric warfare capabilities of the contingents.

15-22402

13/20

S/2015/1030

Police
50. As at 16 December, the strength of the police component of MINUSMA stood
at 1,055 personnel, representing 71 per cent of its authorized strength of 1,440, with
58 per cent of individual police officers (7 per cent of them women) and 82 per cent
of the formed police unit personnel (5 per cent of them women) deployed.
MINUSMA continues to require the deployment of specialized police personnel,
including a police riverine capacity composed of formed police units and individual
police officers, to support the Malian defence and security forces in its activities to
counter transnational organized crime and terrorism. Meanwhile, in the light of the
increased attacks by extremist and terrorist groups, Malian authorities have
requested that MINUSMA support the establishment of special weapons and tactics
team capacities within Malian law enforcement agencies. The Mission will provide
such support through a specialized team, including provisions for capacity -building,
within the authorized ceiling.
Civilian personnel
51. With respect to civilian staff, 84 per cent was deployed, comprising 83 per
cent of international posts, 70 per cent of United Nations volunteer positions and
88 per cent of national posts. Women hold 28 per cent of all civilian positions .
Civilian staff are currently deployed in Bamako (824), Gao (164), Kidal (80), Mopti
(87), Tessalit (16) and Timbuktu (121).
Construction of camps
52. Persistent security constraints limited the number of logistics convoys in
northern Mali, hampering both the delivery of supplies and materials and
construction efforts. Despite these difficulties, camps in Gao and Timbuktu cities
were fully operational by the end of November, enabling MINUSMA to start
redeploying approximately 6,000 troops to those facilities. Other camps have yet to
be completed, in one instance because MINUSMA awaits a response from the
Government to allocate land for the construction of a camp in Mopti. In Bamako,
preparations continued for the relocation of the Mission’s headquarter s from the
Hotel l’Amitié to another area in the capital by March 2016.

VIII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
53. United Nations personnel continued to operate in extremely volatile security
conditions in Mali. In response to the persistent attacks on MINUSMA and the
spread of the activities of extremist and terrorist groups, the Mission enhanced its
security measures in the northern regions and in Bamako, as well as Mopti, as
outlined in paragraph 21, above. In Kidal, the aerostat balloon and surveillance
equipment to improve force protection and security is expected to be installed in
Kidal by January 2016. A similar capacity is planned to support the camp in Gao.
The ground alert system, which broke down in July, was repaired and became
operational again on 10 December.
54. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to support the safety and
security of MINUSMA personnel by providing technical assistance to MINUSMA
explosive ordnance disposal teams and specialized infantry platoons. It also
conducted predeployment training of trainers on how to respond to the use of

14/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

improvised explosive device for 355 personnel of MINUSMA contingents that
provide escorts for convoys. In Bamako, MINUSMA, in addition to conducting
joint night patrols with Malian police, as mentioned in paragraph 22 above,
enhanced security measures around United Nations premises in the wake of the
attack on the Radisson Blu Hotel.

IX. Conduct and discipline
55. During the reporting period, one allegation of sexual abuse, involving a minor,
was reported. Pursuant to my 2003 bulletin on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, the Mission took additional precautionary
measures to prevent such acts from taking place in Mali. The Mission sensitized the
local population in Bamako, Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu to strengthen existing
mechanisms for reporting misconduct implicating United Nations personnel.
MINUSMA also raised awareness of prohibited conduct, such as sexual exploitation
and abuse, through 12 outreach activities, reaching approximately 600 persons.
Steps are also being taken to implement strengthened measures detailed in my last
report on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
(see A/69/779).

X. Observations
56. A new momentum in the Malian peace process emerged during the reporting
period. I welcome the rapprochement between CMA and the Platform as a result of
their bilateral talks held between 27 September and 14 October in Anéfis, at which
the parties agreed to cooperate on the cessation of hostilities, intercommunity and
intracommunity reconciliation, the exchange of detainees, the return of i nterim local
administration and the free movement of people and goods. The new momentum
was accompanied by a high level of engagement by the international community in
support of peace in Mali, as expressed at the 1 October ministerial consultative
meeting in New York. I was encouraged to see the commitment demonstrated by the
Government of Mali at the international conference for the economic recovery and
development of Mali, held in Paris on 22 October, and the unified voice expressed
by CMA and the Platform in support of the implementation of the peace agreement.
The improved relationship between the signatory armed groups, which translated
into their constructive participation in the Comité de suivi de l’accord and its
mechanisms, as well as the absence of any ceasefire violations, were welcome
developments.
57. The signatory parties must now redouble their efforts to implement the peace
agreement, in particular those institutional reforms that underpin the execution of all
other provisions of the agreement, while ensuring an inclusive, transparent and
sustained process. Ultimately, the responsibility for the success of the peace
agreement rests with the signatories. Without the determined will of the Malian
parties and their constituencies to move forward with the implementation of all
provisions of the peace agreement in a parallel and synchronized manner, the impact
of the support of the international community will remain limited. The parties must
ensure broad and inclusive consultations with all stakeholders, including the
signatories, civil society, women and youth, to consolidate the Malian people’s
ownership of their future. While doing so, the local priorities and development
needs, not only of the three northern regions but also of all Malians, s hould be taken

15-22402

15/20

S/2015/1030

into account. I am encouraged in that context by the recent adoption by Parliament
of legislation introducing a 30 per cent quota for women’s appointment to national
institutions and legislative organs.
58. The political progress made in the peace process must urgently translate into a
tangible improvement of the security conditions for the people of Mali. I encourage
all parties to advance on the defence and security measures envisaged by the peace
agreement and to accelerate the efforts of the Commission technique de sécurité and
the Mécanisme opérationnel de coordination on the cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, including the sustainable
operationalization of the mixed patrols. Security sector reform i s another priority
process to be implemented, as there cannot be successful cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes in the absence of a
comprehensive strategy for security sector reform. I call upon the Government of
Mali to establish, at the earliest possible time, national commissions on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and on integration, while ensuring
inclusiveness of the process through the revision of the National Council for
Security Sector Reform. While the gradual redeployment of the Malian defence and
security forces requires further coordination among the parties, the initiative by the
Government to address terrorism-related security threats in Mopti and Ségou
regions was a welcome development.
59. The security situation in Mali continued to deteriorate during the reporting
period, and civilians, the Malian armed forces, French forces and MINUSMA
remained the target of asymmetric and sophisticated attacks. I strongly condemn
these barbaric acts and express my deepest condolences to the families of the
victims of those crimes, as well as to the Government of Mali and the Governments
of the countries of origin of the United Nations peacekeepers who have lost their
lives. I reiterate my appeal for these crimes to be investigated and punished in
earnest. Attacks targeting United Nations peacekeepers may constitute war crimes
under international law.
60. Since northern Mali remains an extremely difficult environment in which to
operate, MINUSMA is likely to continue to face significant security challenges
posed by actors outside the peace process, namely, extremist and terrorist groups
and transnational drug traffickers. I am particularly concerned about the spread of
insecurity into central and southern Mali, and the unacceptable attacks and
intimidation by extremist and terrorist groups.
61. Under such circumstances, the countries contributing troops and police to
MINUSMA will continue to require support in terms of capabilities. I encourage all
troop-contributing countries and police-contributing countries and bilateral donors
to continue their efforts to ensure that all contingents have the necessary equipment
and training to operate in this challenging environment. I look forward to the rapid
deployment of a combat convoy battalion and urge the rapid deployment of the
priority military and police capabilities outlined in paragraphs 49 and 50, above. I
remain committed to implementing innovative measures to ensure the
implementation of the mandate of MINUSMA, while enhancing the protection of its
personnel.
62. The appointment of the 14 members of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission during the reporting period was a welcome development, although I
regret the absence of victims’ representatives among its members. Sustainable
reconciliation can only result from a comprehensive and transparent truth -seeking,
justice and reparation process with a Commission supported by the whole

16/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

population. I congratulate the Government of Mali, CMA and the Platfo rm for
organizing a series of intercommunal and intracommunal dialogues to promote
reconciliation among different communities of the north. Inclusivity in such
dialogues is critical to finding long-term solutions. I encourage all parties to ensure
that traditional and local leaders, women and youth play a role in the national and
local reconciliation efforts.
63. I welcome the important pledges made by the partners of Mali during the Paris
international conference for the economic recovery and development of Mali, which
highlighted the international community’s unanimous support for the peace process
in Mali. The parties must sustain the momentum by translating the pledges made in
Paris into concrete peace dividends that improve the lives of the Malian pop ulation.
I call upon the Government of Mali to capitalize on this momentum and accelerate
the return of basic services in the northern regions. MINUSMA and the United
Nations country team will continue to support the Malian parties in the
consolidation of the gains made in the peace process, including through quick impact projects.
64. I welcome the establishment by the Malian authorities of a specialized judicial
unit on terrorism and transnational organized crime. The United Nations stands
ready to provide support to enhance the capacity of the Malian authorities to face
these security challenges. While the full implementation of the peace agreement is
the priority to ensure long-term stability in Mali, the transborder nature of the
threats calls for enhanced regional security cooperation. In this regard, I encourage
Member States in the subregion to enhance the effectiveness of initiatives to address
security threats, including measures to prevent and counter violent extremism. I
reiterate that effective counter-terrorism measures and respect for international
human rights and humanitarian law are complementary and mutually reinforcing
and essential to combat terrorism. The United Nations remains committed to
coordinating with regional mechanisms, including the Nouakchott Process on the
enhancement of security cooperation and the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region and the Group of Five for
the Sahel. I also urge the Government of Mali and the inter national community to
allocate adequate resources to address the illicit trafficking in ivory and other
poaching activities, which are increasingly being used as a source of revenue to
finance extremist and terrorist groups.
65. Lastly, I wish to express my appreciation to Mongi Hamdi for his service as
my Special Representative for Mali and Head of MINUSMA, his tireless efforts in
supporting the Malian peace process and his personal initiatives to d efuse
intercommunal tensions. I commend the members of th e international mediation for
their sustained support for the Malian parties. I also wish to pay special tribute to
the men and women of MINUSMA, troop-contributing countries and policecontributing countries, the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and bilateral partners, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations and all other partners,
many of whom have been serving under difficult conditions and facing grave threats
in a hostile environment, for their important contributions in support of peace and
stability in Mali and for their dedication and contribution to the Mission.

15-22402

17/20

S/2015/1030

Annex
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali: military and police strength as at
15 December 2015
Police component

Country

Armenia

Military component
(staff officers and units)

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Male

Male

Male

Female

Total

1

1

1 585

1 585

Benin

260

260

Bhutan

3

3

Bosnia and Herzegovina

2

2

Female

Total

Female

Total police
Total

Male

Female

Total

140

140

140

140

140

169

1

170

2

23

Austria
Bangladesh

140

Belgium

Burkina Faso

1 699

20

1 719

290

13

303

Burundi
Cambodia

30

21

2

23

21

13

13

18

17

4

4

17

Chad

1 134

13

1 147

China

386

14

400

5

5

Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Denmark

1

13

Cameroon

Côte d’Ivoire

29

18

3

1

4

13
1

18
4

7

1

8

7

1

8

5

1

6

5

1

6

1

1

1

1

5

5

5

5

21

Djibouti
Egypt

72

72

El Salvador

88

4

92

Estonia

9

1

10

Finland

5

5

France

29

29

Gambia

4

4

Germany

9

9

13

13

13

13

Ghana

214

214

1

1

1

1

Guinea

85

1

86

4

4

4

4

2

145
2

2

2

2

Guinea-Bissau
Indonesia

1
143

1

Italy

3

3

Jordan

1

1

Kenya

4

3

7

Liberia

47

2

49

18/20

15-22402

S/2015/1030

Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Male

Female

Total

Male

Male

Nepal

145

4

149

Netherlands

589

34

623

19

Niger

858

5

863

8

8

Nigeria

155

26

181

2

2

Norway

18

3

21

Portugal

2

2

Romania

1

1

2

2

Senegal

674

676

16

2

18

1

2

3

Country

Madagascar

Sierra Leone
Sweden
Switzerland
Togo

Female

2

2

7
197

Female

Total

Male

2

2

24

19

Female

2
5

24

31

142

8
109

31

140

111

8

2
276

4

280

Total

2

292

6

298

1

2

3

135

6

141

7
15

212

18

935

4
917

5

Total

Total police

4
1

1

Tunisia

25

25

25

25

Turkey

1

1

1

1

9

9

9

United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

1

United States of America

10

10

Yemen

7

7

9

10 454

184 10 638

201

Totals

15-22402

1

134

6

140

2

14

215

799

41

840

1 000

55

1 055

19/20

S/2015/1030

20/20

15-22402
