S/PV.9323

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9323rd meeting

Wednesday, 17 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-13907 (E)
*2313907*

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

the Sultanate of Oman to support the United Nations
mediation role.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; Ms. Edem Wosornu, Director of Operations and
Advocacy, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; and Ms. Yasmeen Al-Eryani, co-Executive
Director for Knowledge Production, Sana’a Center for
Strategic Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: I am pleased to be with you,
Madam President, in person today to brief the Council
on the situation in Yemen and my efforts to secure an
agreement on a way forward that could sustainably end
the conflict.
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.9304), I have
continued my engagement with the Yemeni parties
and regional interlocutors to establish a ceasefire and
launch a political process. I met with the President of the
Presidential Leadership Council, Rashad Al-Alimi, in
Aden and with the Ansar Allah leadership, represented
by Mahdi Al-Mashat, in Sana’a. I also met with senior
regional and Yemeni officials in Riyadh and Abu Dhabi
and senior United States officials in Washington, D.C.
I am encouraged by the positive and detailed
discussions I have had. All interlocutors demonstrated
an understanding of the immensity of what is at stake
and displayed willingness to constructively engage on
the way forward. There is clear determination on all
sides to make progress towards a deal on humanitarian
and economic measures, a permanent ceasefire and
the resumption of a Yemeni-led political process
under United Nations auspices. I also welcome the
ongoing efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
2/18

17/05/2023

While progress is being made, there are still
issues that require further discussion. With sustained
determination from the Yemeni parties, supported by
a coherent and coordinated regional and international
community, I believe that the outstanding issues can
be resolved and that the parties will be able to commit
themselves to an agreement. Indeed, the parties have
an obligation to build on the progress made to date
and to take decisive steps towards a peaceful and
comprehensive solution.
As stated in my previous briefings, the truce has
provided a conducive environment and starting point
to build towards next steps. More than one year after
its announcement and seven months since its official
expiration, the truce continues to deliver. Yemenis
benefit from commercial flights to and from Sana’a
airport and fuel and other commercial ships entering
via Al-Hudaydah port. While sporadic military
incidents continue to occur, the levels of hostilities are
significantly lower than before the truce.
But the fragility of the military situation, the dire
state of the economy and the daily challenges facing
the Yemeni people provide us with constant reminders
of why a more comprehensive agreement between the
parties is so vital. The continuing reports of violence
across front lines, notably in Al-Jawf, Taiz, Ma’rib and
Sa’ada highlight the fragility of the current situation and
underscore the need for a formal ceasefire. I am equally
worried about the deteriorating economic situation and
restrictions on freedom of movement and its impact
on economic activity and people’s livelihoods. The
inability of the Government of Yemen to export oil,
which generated more than half of total Government
revenues last year, is straining the Government’s
capacity to meet its obligations to the Yemeni people.
Inconsistent financial and economic policies in different
areas of the country have hit citizens and businesses
hard, with businesses facing particular uncertainty in
Sana’a and the surrounding governorates. The lack of
cooperation between the parties on critical monetary
and financial issues means those challenges will worsen
and potentially become more entrenched.
Despite those profound challenges, there is room
for cautious optimism. In recent weeks the parties have
taken some additional positive steps. Following last
month’s release of 887 detainees, facilitated by my Office
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and the International Committee of the Red Cross, with
the generous support of the Swiss Government, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Ansar Allah unilaterally
released additional detainees. I am confident that
those releases will build further confidence between
the parties and support an environment conducive
to dialogue. But while every release is positive news for
the detainees and their families, thousands more remain
detained. I therefore call on the parties to continue to
work with my Office to fulfil their commitments to
release all conflict-related detainees, in line with the
Stockholm Agreement.
Exactly two weeks ago, 3 May, we marked the
thirtieth anniversary of World Press Freedom Day.
While the recent release of four journalists as part of
the Prisoners and Detainees Exchange Agreement is
a welcome step, media professionals across Yemen
continue to face threats, harassment, imprisonment
and the confiscation of their offices and assets. I call
on the parties to comply with their obligations under
international law to immediately release all who
remain in arbitrary detention, including journalists,
human rights defenders, political opponents and other
arbitrarily detained civilians.
To bring an end to the conflict, the cornerstone of an
agreement on the way forward must be the resumption of
a Yemeni-led political process under the auspices of the
United Nations. The difficulties that I have described,
along with Yemen’s other myriad challenges, cannot
be addressed through partial or temporary solutions.
Only an inclusive and comprehensive political process
can sustainably forge a new political partnership and
bring the promise of a secure and economically stable
future in which State institutions function effectively
and Yemen returns to peaceful relations with its
neighbours. That process will have to address complex
issues regarding Yemen’s long-term future and must
start as soon as possible.
The inclusivity of that process will also be key to
ensuring the sustainability of any political solution.
The recently held dialogue among a number of southern
political groups in Aden once again underscored the
urgent need for Yemenis to collectively discuss and
define their own future through a Yemeni-led, United
Nations-sponsored process. All Yemeni voices must
be heard in that process. Equally essential is the
meaningful participation and representation of women
and young people, as well as civil society, in all aspects
of the peace process, in line with resolution 1325 (2000).

S/PV.9323

Meaningful and effective participation is not only about
the number of female and civil-society participants
but also about providing a space for women and civil
society to address their priorities and contribute with
their perspectives and expertise. Women and civil
society are far too often sidelined.
Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate
my appreciation for the Council’s steadfast support.
The Council’s engagement and unity on Yemen is
something I value greatly. Its continued support and
accompaniment to any agreement reached will become
even more important in the long as well as the short
term, as Yemen charts a way towards a more peaceful
and prosperous future that meets the aspirations of the
Yemeni people.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wosornu.
Ms. Wosornu: This is my first briefing to the
Council in my role as Director of Operations and
Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. I look forward to engaging
closely with all members.
There are many hopes hinging on what is happening
in Yemen. There is hope that at long last there could be
an end to a terrible war, as well as hope for a sustainable
peace agreement. On behalf of Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths, I want to commend the Special Envoy for the
tireless work he is doing to make those hopes a reality.
I join him in urging the parties to seize that important
opportunity. In the meantime, Yemenis across the
country are also hoping for other things — food on the
table, a roof over their heads and their children’s ability
to go to school or play outside without fear of injury
from landmines. For millions of people, access to basic
services and to safety and security is still devastatingly
out of reach. But the humanitarian community remains
absolutely committed to doing all it can to address
those and other humanitarian needs in Yemen.
So far this year, aid agencies, in collaboration
with hundreds of international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and local Yemeni organizations,
have reached more than 11 million people every month
with humanitarian assistance. In the first quarter of
2023, that has included, for example, the provision of
food aid to nearly 10 million people per month, while
almost 1 million have benefited from better access

23-139073/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

to clean water, sanitation and hygiene support. Two
critical factors, however, continue to limit our ability to
reach the people we are trying to help.
The first is access. Humanitarian workers continue
to face chronic access impediments, primarily in
areas controlled by the Houthi de facto authorities. In
particular, the ongoing restrictions on the movement
of Yemeni women aid workers have severely disrupted
the ability of aid agencies to operate and reach those in
need, particularly women and girls. Likewise, obstacles
to our ability to conduct independent assessments
of humanitarian needs and contract services have
caused prolonged delays and risk jeopardizing the
quality of our response. That comes on top of ongoing
bureaucratic and administrative constraints, which
have slowed and hampered our operations both in
Houthi- and Government-controlled areas. The
humanitarian community has remained in constant
contact with the parties in Yemen to resolve those
issues and find ways to facilitate access. Improving the
operational environment was a primary objective of the
recent mission to Yemen by the Emergency Directors’
Group — a team of senior United Nations and NGO
leaders — which concluded earlier this month. The
group held frank but constructive and productive
discussions on access with both the de facto authorities
and the Government of Yemen. We hope that will be the
beginning of a positive shift on access. We once again
remind all the parties of their obligation to facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian
relief in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
The second factor limiting our ability to reach
people in need is funding. Five months into the
year, despite the generosity of many donors, around
80 per cent of the Yemen humanitarian appeal remains
unfunded. The shortfall is increasingly threatening our
ability to provide life-saving and livelihood assistance.
Certain elements of the Yemen appeal are being hit
particularly hard. Support for migrants and refugees,
for example, has received very limited funding so far
in 2023, although the needs of those communities are
severe. Economic times are hard, but we must once
again urge donors to do what they can to fund the Yemen
appeal. More funding is also needed for the United
Nations-coordinated FSO SAFER oil tanker operation.
I welcome the pledging event hosted by the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands on 4 May, at which an
additional $8 million was raised. I hope that further
4/18

17/05/2023

pledges will be forthcoming to bridge the remaining
gap and ensure that the operation is fully funded. The
replacement vessel arrived in Djibouti on 7 May. The
salvage vessel, Ndeavor, is expected in Djibouti around
22 May, and the operation is expected to begin before
the end of the month, which is good news.
But while the humanitarian community is doing
everything possible to save lives and end the acute forms
of suffering, we cannot stop there. As we tentatively
look towards a future in which urgent humanitarian
needs reduce, we must bolster Yemen’s ability
to recover. That is why the United Nations is working
on a revised economic framework that addresses the
broader economic drivers of humanitarian need in
Yemen. We hope that will promote increased focus and
momentum around development programming. This
year, the humanitarian community is supporting such
efforts through investment in two major areas, namely,
mine action and sustainable outcomes for displaced
communities and returnees.
Mines and explosive remnants of war continue
to kill and maim civilians, including women and
children — and they will do so as long as they remain
where they are. They prevent people from returning
safely to their homes and earning a living, and they
obstruct the re-establishment of essential services.
Scaling up mine action programming is critical,
including for economic and community recovery.
Support is also needed for displaced communities to
resettle or return to their homes and reintegrate. People
cannot continue to live, year in and year out, in fear of
eviction or discrimination or being forced to flee once
again. They and the communities that host them need
sustainable solutions that allow them to restart their
lives. The humanitarian community is devoting senior
capacity to advance such efforts. The engagement and
support of donors are needed if they are to succeed.
I began my statement speaking about hope. Hope
is important. It holds the promise of a better future
and inspires us to continue to pursue the path leading
towards it. But hope dies in the absence of action.
Now is the time for the parties, with the full support
of the international community, to drive resolutely
towards peace and an end to the conflict. Meanwhile,
the humanitarian community will continue to deliver
aid to as many people in need as our resources and
access allow. At the same time, we will also continue
driving for progress on the economy, including by
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

scaling up mine action and support for displacementaffected communities.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Wosornu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Eryani.
Ms. Al-Eryani (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Madam President, for honouring me with the invitation
to address the Security Council and for the Council’s
interest in listening to the voice of Yemeni civil society,
which is now crucial, as recent developments in Yemen
demonstrate that it is time for the guns to fall silent
and for the voices of Yemenis who yearn to shape their
country’s future to be heard. My name is Yasmeen
Al-Eryani. I speak to Council members today on behalf
of the Sana’a Center for Strategic Studies, but above all
as a Yemeni.
As members of the Council are well aware, the
Yemeni people have suffered the effects of an almost
decade-long war during which no Yemenis — whether
children or adults — have been spared. The conflict
has destroyed their lives at every level, including at
the humanitarian, economic, educational, health and
environmental levels, and has deprived Yemenis of the
chance to dream of a better tomorrow. But I assure the
Council that Yemeni women, young people and every
other social group are fully capable of rebuilding the
country and shaping its future. At the same time, I would
like to emphasize that there is a shared international
responsibility to steer Yemen out of its crisis and create
an environment that is conducive to its reintegration as
an active country in the region and the world. And that
moral responsibility is twice as great for all those that
have become involved in the war in Yemen in one way
or another in previous years.
Therefore, I address the Council today on the top
priorities for achieving comprehensive and sustainable
peace. While I note the importance of the talks being
conducted between Saudi Arabia and the Houthi group,
I should like to emphasize what Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg said in his briefing today, that is, that no
agreement can be achieved unless it is under the
auspices of the United Nations. While we welcome any
negotiation that can mitigate the level of conflict and
open political pathways, the interests of the country
and its people as a whole must be considered, and all
talks should be coordinated under the United Nations
umbrella and engage local peace efforts. At this critical
juncture, it is incumbent upon us as civil society to pause

S/PV.9323

and remind everyone that Yemenis, who have suffered
the scourge of war, deserve to be heard, express their
grievances and have their concerns taken into account
in an impartial manner.
Any hastily arrived at peace deal that does not bring
justice to Yemenis will not end the conflict or improve
regional stability. And while we commend the recent
exchange of prisoners and detainees and its significant
humanitarian impact, we recall that, even as we meet,
thousands of men and women detainees await their own
release. Justice must never be traded for security. In
doing so, we lose both. Any settlement that disregards
the principles of transitional justice and absolves the
belligerent parties of their responsibilities will not only
fail the victims but also risk renewed cycles of conflict
and revenge. Addressing grievances always remains the
wisest and least costly course of action in the long run.
It is important to recall in that regard that for decades
Yemen has experienced a series of cycles of violence,
owing to incomplete and unjust settlements. Therefore,
the concept of inclusive justice, to which I just referred,
calls for engineering a peace process that adheres to
the basic tenets of justice and grants citizens the right
to a dignified life, a fair share of national wealth and
power, the protection of their environment and equal
opportunities based on the principle of equality, while
eliminating all forms of discrimination. We recall that
those rights must be granted to all marginalized groups,
religious minorities and the most vulnerable members
of society.
That brings me to another critical issue that I hope
the Council and the international community will
spare no effort in addressing — women’s freedoms and
combating all forms of violence against them. With the
overall erosion of civic space, Yemen has witnessed the
unprecedented rollback of women’s hard-won freedoms,
including their right to participate in the labour market
and play a vital role in revitalizing the economy, while
ensuring their protection from exploitation and ill
treatment. It also includes the freedom of women to act
as political decision-makers, not just in a limited role in
terms of representative participation but also in terms
of their right to organize and shape civic spaces without
being exposed to incitement against them; the right to a
quality education and to prosper; and the right to enjoy
the freedom of movement and be visibly present in all
aspects of public life. Those basic rights must not be
used as a tool to garner influence, and they must never
be bargained away.

23-139075/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

Let me express my disappointment about the
passive stance taken by international actors towards
discriminatory policies that target women. It appears
that the international community has chosen to deal
with the issue as a mere procedural hurdle facing women
humanitarian relief workers that can be negotiated. In
fact, they are systematic policies that are intended to
reshape the whole of society, and if we do not push back
harder today, we may find ourselves in a nightmarish
reality in which women are erased from public life
altogether, including from schools, universities and
politics. That the international community has chosen
to remain idle in that regard is failing women and may
amount to complicity.
Let me also point out the importance of putting
economic priorities at the centre of any peace process.
Despite the decrease in fighting, the majority of
Yemenis continue to feel unsafe, owing to economic
insecurity. One of the major drivers of Yemen’s conflict
is the unjust distribution of economic resources. The
competition over scarce resources is intensifying.
Warring parties have found new ways to extract money
from an already impoverished population through the
imposition of extortionate taxes, while normal economic
activity has been completely consumed by the war
economy, as has humanitarian assistance. It is therefore
imperative that the international community in general
and the neighbouring Gulf States in particular play a
leading role in the revitalization of Yemen’s overall
economic activity through investment and sustainable
programmes. That should include paving the way for
Yemen’s economic integration into the region and the
global financial system, and facilitating Yemenis’
access to labour markets in neighbouring countries.
Ecological justice is another issue that has been
neglected for decades, despite its direct relation
to Yemen’s economic well-being and future. The
dilapidated FSO SAFER is a blatant example of how an
environmental threat that could affect millions in the
region and jeopardize the Red Sea’s fragile ecosystem
can be exploited as a military and political bargaining
tool. While an operation to transport the fuel from the
FSO SAFER to a replacement vessel is set to get under
way, many Yemenis wonder how it can be ensured that
the belligerent parties will not threaten to target the
new tanker down the road. Meanwhile, oil companies
continue to operate with impunity and little regard
for the environment and welfare of communities and
surrounding farms and pastures.
6/18

17/05/2023

In addition to the threats to the environment
from such practices, Yemen, which is dealing with a
severe water crisis, has also become one of the world’s
countries most vulnerable to climate change. Recurring
extreme weather events, in the form of floods, cyclones
and drought, have had a major impact on citizens’
livelihoods, leading to repeated displacements.
Despite that, Yemen has remained outside global
discussions on environmental justice and has limited
access to funds earmarked for climate adaptation. It
is therefore imperative that environmental protection
and climate-change adaptation programmes be
urgently introduced to revitalize the economic sectors
that Yemenis rely on, such as fisheries, agriculture
and apiculture.
The Council has been involved in the events that
have been unfolding in Yemen since 2015 and before,
and it is important to ensure that it continues to be
involved in order to see Yemen ushered safely through
a comprehensive peace process that will give its people
a solid foundation on which they can begin to heal and
rebuild their country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Al-Eryani for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me start by thanking Special Envoy Grundberg for his
briefing and for his team’s very hard work. I also thank
Ms. Wosornu and Ms. Al-Eryani for their briefings.
I would like to begin by welcoming the strong
progress towards resolving the major threat posed by
the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the risk of more than
a million barrels of oil leaking into the Red Sea. In
recent days, as we heard from Ms. Wosornu, both the
replacement and service vessels have arrived near the
site, and crucially, following the joint United KingdomDutch fundraising event earlier this month, the United
Nations has announced that it has sufficient funding to
start the emergency operation to transfer oil from the
vessel. But, as Ms. Wosornu said, there is more work
to be done. And I think none of us here wants to be
fundraising for the $20 billion required to clean up if
we are unable to avert a catastrophic spill. The United
Nations requires $43 million to complete the operation.
I again encourage contributions so that we can reach
a lasting solution to that ticking time bomb for the
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

environment, global trade, millions of local livelihoods
and the delivery of life-saving aid in Yemen.
Secondly, the United Kingdom welcomes the
positive work done by all parties to build on the truce-like
conditions in Yemen over the past year. We call on all
the parties to continue engaging constructively and
creatively and to negotiate in good faith towards lasting
and inclusive peace for the Yemeni people. The recent
Saudi and Omani delegations to Sana’a represented
valuable steps towards reaching a comprehensive
ceasefire, and I urge the parties to engage constructively
and in a spirit of compromise. Our focus should be on
accepting that all Yemenis should have access to all
sources of revenue. An inclusive peace process, under
United Nations auspices, is the only pathway to end
the dreadful war. I am also reassured by the unity
that the Council continues to demonstrate, and which
Mr. Grundberg referenced. I hope that we can continue
to work together on our common goal of finding peace
in Yemen.
Finally, I want to echo the concerns of
Ms. Wosornu. In spite of the relative peace in Yemen
over the past year, 21.6 million people, or two thirds
of the population, remain in dire humanitarian need.
And while I welcome the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in securing
unrestricted humanitarian access, we are continuing to
see impediments to the free movement of women, to
independent monitoring and assessment and to the fair
selection of service providers. As we have heard, the
humanitarian response is already facing severe funding
challenges. Those impediments pose additional and
entirely avoidable burdens on the humanitarian effort,
and ultimately on the people of Yemen.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Grundberg and all the briefers
for their updates. I also welcome the presence of the
representative of Yemen at today’s meeting.
For some time now, the relevant parties have been
in close communication on the efforts to achieve a
political settlement of the situation in Yemen and
have continued to strive to end the suffering of the
Yemeni people, which China appreciates. They should
maintain the current momentum, step up dialogue
and consultations, set reasonable expectations and
demonstrate flexibility, as appropriate, so as to arrive at
mutually acceptable solutions to the outstanding issues
as soon as possible. Special Envoy Grundberg recently

S/PV.9323

visited Aden and Sana’a as well as other countries in
the region in an effort to promote the political process.
China will continue to support his work.
Relatively speaking, the security situation in Yemen
has eased recently. However, sporadic exchanges of fire
have still occurred in Taiz and other places, causing
civilian casualties, and China is concerned about that.
We urge all parties in Yemen to put the interests of the
people first by staying on course to political solutions,
abandoning military means and actively cooperating
with the Special Envoy so that a comprehensive
ceasefire can be achieved and a favourable environment
created for the political process as early as possible.
Yemen has one of the worst humanitarian
situations of any country on the Council’s agenda.
The recent stampede in Sana’a was heartbreaking.
The international community should increase its
humanitarian and development investment in Yemen to
halt the continuing deterioration on the humanitarian
front. The humanitarian operations of the United Nations
in Yemen should be fully funded and the unreasonable
restrictions on such operations lifted immediately.
The replacement vessel for the FSO SAFER tanker
is about to arrive at the port of Al-Hudaydah. China
hopes that the crude-oil transfer operation will proceed
as planned, and that budgeted funds will be raised and
made available soon.
The political settlement of the situation in
Yemen cannot be considered apart from the regional
dynamics. We are pleased to be seeing a tidal wave of
reconciliation and hearing a clarion call for solidarity
among countries in the Middle East. There have been
positive signs for regional peace and stability and new
and favourable conditions for improving the situation
in Yemen are emerging. China has consistently been a
promoter of security and stability in the Middle East, a
partner in development and prosperity and a facilitator
of unity and self-reliance. We are ready to work with
the international community to actively support the
efforts of the countries of the region to strengthen
solidarity and cooperation and engage in dialogue and
consultation. We will continue to work to achieve peace
and tranquillity in the region as soon as possible.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Mozambique and my own country, Ghana.

23-139077/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

We thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and the
Director of the Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Edem Wosornu, for their briefings,
and we welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen in this meeting. We also take
note of the remarks of the civil society briefer.
The A3 welcomes the climate of optimism built in
recent times by key stakeholders in finding a lasting
solution to the Yemeni conflict, including the ongoing
engagement between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the Houthis, as well as the intermediary role being
played by the Sultanate of Oman. We believe that
those engagements remain essential, and any attempt
by any party to reverse the marginal progress being
made would be counterproductive and must not be
countenanced. We therefore affirm our support for
such regional-led efforts, which we consider to be
indispensable in addressing the crises sustainably.
The A3 holds that a Yemeni-owned and -led political
process lies at the heart of a sustainable resolution
of the crises. We therefore encourage the support of
the international community for such processes in a
manner that enhances the trust and confidence required
to consolidate the gains being made in the peaceful
resolution of that protracted conflict. We consider
useful and encourage the Special Envoy’s determination
to work closely with regional and Yemeni stakeholders
to ensure that the Omani-facilitated talks feed into
United Nations mediation efforts for an intra-Yemeni
political process on a future political, economic and
security governance. We underscore the importance
of leveraging the release plan reached between the
Government of Yemen and the Houthis, which led to
the liberation of about 900 conflict-related detainees
last month. We encourage the parties to continue their
efforts for further releases, as that symbolic gesture can
help build bridges and enhance confidence-building
among the parties to address other aspects of the crises.
We continue to appreciate the invaluable contribution
of all stakeholders, especially the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
In charting a path towards sustainable peace in
Yemen, it is essential for all the parties to deepen their
commitment to sustaining a formal and nationwide
ceasefire and affording the people of Yemen the
opportunity to ultimately own their political future.
Furthermore, we urge the prioritization of inclusivity
by harnessing the potential of women in the ongoing
8/18

17/05/2023

political processes for the attainment of a durable peace
in the country. We commend the Special Envoy for his
commitment to engaging with actors in a manner that
enhances the meaningful participation of women in the
peace process and would welcome more of that support.
Despite the modest gains being made, we remain
concerned about the persisting challenges, including
the continued closure of the main roads leading to Taiz
and the challenges related to the payment of public
employees in Houthi-controlled territory. In that regard,
we call on the parties to prioritize the interest of the
Yemeni people and demonstrate their full commitment
to the peace process in order to preserve the fragile
security situation in the country.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation, with
an estimated 21.6 million people in need of aid, is
worrisome. Today only 11 million people have access
to aid every month. It is therefore crucial for the
challenges that are undermining relief efforts, including
restrictions to access and interferences in humanitarian
activities, to be tackled as a matter of urgency. We
are grateful for the generosity of donors, and we
encourage them and the wider international community
to consider increasing their funding support to the
2023 humanitarian response plan for Yemen in order
to enable it to meet the $4.3 billion target required to
help address the humanitarian needs of the people. We
reiterate our call on all the parties to facilitate the safe,
rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief
to all civilians in need and to protect humanitarian
personnel and assets, in line with their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
On a related matter, we express our concern about
the enforcement over the past year of mahram, which
requires women to be accompanied by male guardians
in areas controlled by the Houthis. In that regard,
we renew our demand to the Houthis to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The risk posed by
landmines and explosive remnants of the war in Yemen,
leading to civilian casualties, is also of great concern
and urgent action is required to address it. We therefore
call for effective international and local collaboration
to comprehensively deal with the issue of landmines
and explosive ordnance.
Undoubtedly, a robust Yemeni economy is part of
the bigger picture needed to address the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, and every effort must be made
to sustain the peace in Yemen in order to facilitate
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

an environment that can unlock improvements in the
socioeconomic conditions of the country. On that note,
we renew our appeal to the international community
to dovetail its support for the country’s economy into
every effort aimed at alleviating the suffering of the
Yemeni people. On the issue of the FSO SAFER oil
vessel, we encourage the close monitoring of the
evolution of the rescue operation, especially in its first
phase, and we hope for greater financial mobilization to
cover the two phases of that operation. We encourage
all the parties to cooperate with the United Nations for
a safe and quick transfer of the oil from the decaying
vessel into the newly acquired carrier.
Finally, the A3 affirms its support for the ongoing
engagement between the Saudis and the Houthis, which
we believe can lead to fruitful proposals that all the
parties can embrace towards the attainment of lasting
peace in Yemen. While calling for the demonstration
of good-faith commitment by all the parties, we also
believe that meaningful progress can be made in the
ongoing talks if consideration is given to a number of
factors, including the establishment of a ceasefire and
the payment of public employees in Houthi territory,
possibly through the oil and gas revenues. It would
also be useful to relaunch broader talks among the
Yemeni parties in order to foster an inclusive process
aimed at ironing out all grievances so that meaningful
progress can be made. Women should not be left out of
that process.
In conclusion, we emphasize the point that an
inclusive Yemeni political process facilitated by United
Nations mediation remains critical for resolving the
conflict in a sustainable manner. The continuous
demonstration of the united voice of the Council
with a view to resolving the crises in Yemen remains
paramount and should be guarded jealously in order to
consolidate the gains made.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
begin by expressing our gratitude to Mr. Grundberg for
his insightful remarks and his tireless efforts in favour
of the future of Yemen on behalf of the international
community. His commitment and dedication to fostering
peace, stability and development in a nation grappling
with multifaceted crises is truly commendable. I also
thank Ms. Wosornu for her informative briefing, as
well as the work that her and her Office have done in
Yemen. I welcome the delegation of Yemen to today’s
meeting, and my delegation takes note of the briefing
by the civil society representative.

S/PV.9323

Yemen is at a pivotal moment. The ongoing
conversations with the parties involved, spearheaded
by Special Envoy Grundberg, hold significant promise.
Coupled with the Saudi-Houthi talks facilitated by
Oman, they exemplify the power of diplomacy as a
catalyst for better days. They also serve as a reminder
that even in the most challenging of circumstances,
fostering dialogue and mutual understanding can pave
the way towards peace. We must continue to support
those efforts.
Brazil echoes the call made by Special Envoy
Grundberg during his recent visit to Sana’a. Any
ceasefire agreement must not be merely a document but
should translate into tangible benefits for all Yemenis.
That includes ensuring more destinations and flights
to and from Sana’a airport, a critical lifeline for a
nation in dire need. It also means the resumption of
the country’s oil exports, an essential component of
Yemen’s economy and a key factor in its recovery.
Additionally, the opening of key roads in Taiz
and other governorates is vital to facilitating the free
movement of goods and people, fostering economic
revival and social cohesion. Such developments
are essential — not only for easing the current
humanitarian crisis, but also for paving the path to
long-lasting stability.
Even in the absence of large-scale hostilities,
the situation in Yemen remains one of the largest
humanitarian crises in the world, with two-thirds of
the Yemeni population in need of assistance. We urge
all relevant authorities to ensure freedom of movement
and access to all humanitarian agents on the ground.
It is not just a question of safeguarding the delivery of
humanitarian aid, but also a matter of upholding the
principles of human rights and dignity. Millions of
men, women and children depend on urgent and vital
assistance, and we must ensure that all the necessary
aid reaches them without hindrance.
We also take this opportunity to address the urgent
task of salvaging the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Brazil
commends the dedication shown by the United Nations
and all donors in bringing this operation closer to
fruition. This initiative is not just about preventing an
environmental catastrophe; it is about averting a crisis
that could compound the already severe humanitarian
crisis in Yemen.
Lastly, in our discussions about peace and stability
in Yemen, the goal of spurring development must

23-139079/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

not be lost. Sustainable peace requires a thriving
economy and opportunities for all. Initiatives that
empower the people of Yemen, especially women and
youth, including through education and employment
opportunities, are decisive. A strong Yemeni society,
with resilient institutions and a functioning economy,
is key for sustaining peace in the country.
As we continue to strive for a peaceful, stable
and prosperous Yemen, Brazil fully supports the
promotion of dialogue and cooperation. In navigating
this path together, we are confident that, with our
collective efforts, we can help Yemen overcome its
difficult challenges and achieve peace, development
and prosperity.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates)
(spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and
Ms. Edem Wosornu for their briefings, and I welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative
of Yemen in today’s meeting. I also take note of the
briefing delivered by Ms. Yasmeen Al-Eryani.
In recent weeks, we have witnessed concerted
efforts to create suitable conditions for a Yemeniowned and -led comprehensive political process under
the auspices of the United Nations. Some welcome
steps have already been implemented, such as prisoner
exchanges and the maintenance of relative calm for more
than a year. However, we look forward to additional
confidence-building measures, along with a permanent
ceasefire agreement, which remains essential to
ensuring the success of the political process.
We commend the central role of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia in resolving the conflict in Yemen
through its initiatives and diplomatic efforts, as well
as its engagement with all Yemeni parties in order to
reach a comprehensive political solution that meets the
aspirations of the Yemeni people. In that regard, we
also welcome the recent visit made by the delegations
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Oman to Yemen,
which the Security Council recognized as valuable
steps towards enabling intra-Yemeni political talks.
We also appreciate the flexibility and constructive
engagement of the Yemeni Presidential Leadership
Council in the political process. We commend the
efforts of the Special Envoy to build on the current
momentum, as well as the key role played by the United
Nations over the past year, which saw a significant
decrease in hostilities.
10/18

17/05/2023

We call on the Houthis to seize the present
opportunity and engage positively with the peace
requirements. Any further delays will serve only to
prolong the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.
It has become evident that dialogue remains the sole
path to achieving a political settlement. A belligerent
stance and reliance on armed coercion are not only
unacceptable, but also detrimental to the welfare of the
Yemeni people.
While discussions and mediation efforts continue,
we must not overlook Yemen’s severe humanitarian and
economic crises, which require unimpeded assistance
delivery to all those in need, economic support and
the reopening of major roads. However, we note that
improving those conditions in a tangible and sustainable
manner cannot be done without ending the conflict.
We stress the importance of lifting the Houthiimposed restrictions on the work of humanitarian
agencies and, particularly, female aid workers. Such
restrictions limit women’s participation in public life
and hinder the access of women and girls to assistance.
We also stress that the children of Yemen must
be afforded the opportunity to lead a safe and normal
life. They should have access to quality education that
prepares them to participate in building Yemen, rather
than be coerced into joining Houthi summer camps and
centres. These Houthi programmes, with their extremist
curriculums, seek to indoctrinate the children with an
extremist ideology.
In conclusion, we have a unique opportunity to
make real progress towards resolving the crisis in
Yemen despite the precarious situation. To that end, we
must send a united message prioritizing the interests
of the Yemeni people and asserting that a political
solution is the only assurance of a brighter future for
all Yemenis.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Grundberg, Director Wosornu and
Ms. Al-Eryani for their briefings.
As the Special Envoy underlined today, Yemen
finds itself at a critical juncture. In that context, we
encourage the parties to continue dialogue and engage
constructively in the peace process. It is important to
seize this unique opportunity that has been created by
the hard work of the United Nations and many regional
actors, such as Saudi Arabia and Oman, to achieve
lasting peace through an inclusive Yemeni-led process.
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

We welcome the talks among Saudi Arabia, Oman
and the Houthis as a means to advance the United
Nations-facilitated political process in Yemen. Also,
the unity of the Council remains vital for the success of
United Nations efforts towards peace and reconciliation
in the country. We reiterate our call on the Houthis to
stop all attacks and engage in negotiations in good faith.
We also encourage the parties to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women and youth in
the political processes.
We welcome the fact that Yemen continues to
see its longest period of calm since last year’s truce
agreement, despite some recent clashes. In that context,
a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire is an absolute
necessity if we are to stop the suffering caused by the
war over the past eight years. The humanitarian needs
are enormous, and we commend the vital work done
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to provide a lifeline for millions, especially
women and children, and fight serious violations,
such as gender-based violence and child abuse. We
especially value the work of female local humanitarian
workers to reach those in dire need, especially girls and
children, and deplore all actions that restrict their work
or put their lives in danger. We call on all the parties
to facilitate the safe, rapid and unimpeded distribution
of humanitarian relief to all civilians in need and to
protect humanitarian personnel and assets in line with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Albania deplores all the cases of abduction in
Yemen. We reiterate our call for the immediate release
of the detained non-governmental organization and
the United Nations personnel and other civilians,
including Yemenis employed by the United States and
the United Nations.
We are encouraged by the arrival of the Nautica
close to the site and call for a smooth start to the
operation of transferring oil from the FSO SAFER oil
tanker. We commend the work of the United Nations
Development Programme in undertaking such an
operation and all donors for their efforts to ensure the
resources necessary to complete this complex operation.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Albania’s full support
for the work of the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism in facilitating the free flow of
goods in Yemen. Albania will continue to support all
efforts to achieve lasting peace in Yemen through an

S/PV.9323

inclusive Yemeni-led process under the auspices of the
United Nations.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador takes note of and appreciates the information
provided by the Special Envoy, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
the Deputy Director of Operations and Advocacy
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Edem Wosornu, and the civil society
representative, Ms. Yasmeen Al-Eryani. I also welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Yemen
in the Chamber today.
I acknowledge the efforts of Special Envoy
Grundberg and his team in Yemen and the work they
have been carrying out to consolidate the political
agreements reached in recent months, with the ultimate
goal of helping the Yemeni people to overcome the
conflict, achieve a sustainable peace and begin the
path towards national reconciliation. The context
that is taking shape in Yemen is the result of the
implementation of strategies in different areas and
involving various actors inside and outside the country.
In this regard, I refer to the constructive willingness
to engage in dialogue among key actors in the local
sphere, the proactive attitude of countries in the region,
and, of course, the commitment of the international
community, which has followed the most critical
moments closely and supported a final resolution to the
conflict in line with the provisions of resolution 2140
(2014).
However, attacks such as those that occurred in
the provinces of Shabwah and Ma’rib during the month
of March or unfortunate events such as the stampede
in Sana’a in April threaten to undermine the progress
achieved in the political negotiations and keep the
civilian population on edge. We therefore encourage
the parties to give serious consideration to a definitive
cessation of hostilities.
We also believe it is important to continue with
the second phase of the release of detainees within
the framework of the Detainees’ Exchange Agreement
and with the support of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Such actions
open the door to the establishment of a transparent
system of justice and accountability, a sine qua non for
the re-establishment of the rule of law.
Beyond the progress made on the political front,
Ecuador expresses its concern for the seriousness of
the humanitarian situation facing the Yemeni people.

23-1390711/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

The eight years of war have left traces that will be
very difficult to overcome; they will require the
sustained support of the international community. It
is also worrying that despite the alarming numbers
of displaced Yemenis and those who depend on
humanitarian assistance to survive, there are still
obstacles hindering the access of humanitarian aid
workers, especially women, to the areas of the territory
most in need. Moreover, the escalation in the rates
of child malnutrition, the increase in cases of polio,
measles, diphtheria and whooping cough, the difficulty
of reviving the education system due to the destruction
of schools, and the number of children killed or maimed
as a result of mines and explosive remnants of war are
threats that affect Yemeni children and deserve the
deployment of immediate and effective actions.
We acknowledge the work of the parties involved
in the resolution of the FSO SAFER tanker situation, as
well as the contributions of committed donors, which
will allow, hopefully soon, the start of the first phase
of oil transfer, thus obviating the environmental threat
that looms over Yemen and the region.
The road map to overcoming the consequences
of the war in Yemen must be drawn on the basis of
an approach that is comprehensive, pluralistic and
long term. In accordance with resolution 2140 (2014),
Ecuador encourages all stages in the negotiation and
peacekeeping process to include the participation
of women, taking advantage of their experience as
peacebuilders and human rights defenders.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of engaging
the efforts of all actors in support of coordinating a
Yemeni-led political transition under the auspices of
the United Nations, with a view to ensuring conditions
of economic well-being and development for Yemen
and its people.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank our briefers for their briefings.
On the ground, the de facto truce continues to
hold, which is positive, although the volatility of the
situation calls for continued vigilance. With regard to
the truce, we welcome the current momentum. The
context is suitable for establishing the foundations of
trust between the parties. We must take advantage of
this favourable context to formalize an agreement on a
lasting nationwide ceasefire. France calls on the parties,
and particularly the Houthis, to make the necessary
efforts to reach such an agreement.
12/18

17/05/2023

The agreement reached on 20 March in Geneva
on prisoner exchanges is encouraging, and we call for
continued discussions in Switzerland on this subject
in conjunction with the International Committee of
the Red Cross and the United Nations. I would also
like to stress the importance of the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism, which
could stop functioning this summer due to a lack of
funding; it is an indispensable mechanism for building
confidence between the parties and allowing Yemen
to continue importing essential goods. Further, France
will continue its commitment to maritime security in
the area.
At the diplomatic level, France welcomes the
actions of Saudi Arabia, Oman and other regional actors
in enabling the resumption of a political process under
the auspices of the United Nations. France reiterates its
full support for the work of the Special Envoy, whose
efforts we commend, to reach a peace plan. Only a
comprehensive and inclusive political solution that takes
into account the concerns and interests of all Yemenis
will make it possible to end the conflict. France stresses
the importance of the participation of Yemeni women
politicians in the negotiations; they must be involved in
the current discussions starting now.
The hope of a lasting ceasefire must not make us
forget the seriousness of the humanitarian situation.
Thanks to the Black Sea Grain Initiative, the World
Food Programme has sent Ukrainian grain to Yemen.
France has contributed financially to an operation to
this end, in the amount of €6 million.
While the Yemeni population is still in need
of food aid and public services, the working and
security conditions of humanitarian actors continue
to deteriorate, particularly in areas controlled by the
Houthis. We reiterate our call on the Houthis to put
an end to the restrictions imposed on these actors,
including and in particular those targeting female
humanitarian workers.
With regard to the FSO SAFER tanker, we welcome
the imminent implementation of the rescue operation.
We thank the United Kingdom and the Netherlands for
organizing a donor conference on 4 May, at which we
announced a new contribution of €1 million, bringing
our total contributions to nearly €3.3 million. We call on
States Members of the United Nations and the private
sector to redouble their efforts to bridge the budget gap
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

as the rescue tanker Nautica will soon arrive in the
Red Sea.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Director Wosornu and Ms. Yasmeen
Al-Eryani for their briefings today.
Malta is encouraged to hear that Yemen is
continuing to experience the longest period of relative
calm since the beginning of the war, with critical
aspects of the truce continuing to hold, despite its lapse
in October. Last month, we witnessed tangible progress
in the form of a prisoner exchange, a significant step
in confidence-building from both sides. We call on the
parties to use this momentum and period of calm to
continue meaningful and inclusive dialogue towards a
permanent ceasefire.
Malta acknowledges the coordinated efforts of
regional partners in their support for peace in Yemen
and stresses the importance of Yemeni ownership in
negotiating sustainable peace.
We are concerned to hear that women remain
marginal to the intra-Yemeni dialogue and multitrack
negotiations and urge their full, equal and meaningful
participation at all levels.
All parties to the conflict must abide by international
humanitarian and human rights law and allow for
independent and impartial human rights monitoring to
bring justice and accountability for victims.
Alleviating the dire humanitarian situation in
Yemen must remain a priority in any negotiations
among the parties to the conflict and for the Security
Council. As highlighted again today, the Yemeni
people continue to suffer extreme hardship owing to the
protracted conflict. Two thirds of Yemen’s population,
over 21 million people, need humanitarian assistance,
with over 4 million internally displaced. Landmines
are a leading cause of civilian deaths, particularly
among children, and demining efforts must be urgently
ramped up.
Movement restrictions continue to cause hardship
for the population, particularly women, and we call for
greater freedom of movement for people across Yemen,
as well as renewed efforts to open the roads in Taiz
and other governorates. Movement restrictions and
other bureaucratic impediments obstruct humanitarian
access to populations in need. We reiterate our call
for the immediate lifting of the mahram requirements
which prevent female Yemeni staff from delivering

S/PV.9323

critical services that only women can deliver. We also
call for the immediate release of all United Nations staff
and humanitarian workers who have been abducted
or detained.
On the human rights front, we are alarmed by
reports of forced and early marriage and sexual
and gender-based violence and exploitation. Grave
violations against boys and girls continue unabated,
including killing and maiming, recruitment and
disruptions to education.
Yemen’s fragile economy continues to be impaired
by competing economic institutions and the depreciation
of the Yemeni rial. That is leading to inflation and
high food prices, thereby exacerbating food insecurity,
which impacts 17 million Yemenis. More must be done
to stabilize Yemen’s economy, as well as to protect the
flow of commercial goods both into and within Yemen.
I conclude by commending the progress made in
the implementation of the United Nations-coordinated
plan regarding the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We are very
pleased to see the replacement vessel, the Nautica,
approach its destination in the Red Sea. That is a
critical step towards removing the imminent threat of
an environmental, economic and humanitarian disaster,
and we hope to see the transfer of oil begin as soon
as possible. Ensuring the project is fully funded to
allow for immediate and uninterrupted implementation
is crucial. In that spirit, Malta made a financial
contribution at the pledging conference hosted by the
Netherlands and the United Kingdom earlier this month.
We echo the United Nations call for further donations
to fill the budgetary gap.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Director Wosornu and Ms. Al-Eryani for
their briefings.
We are encouraged to hear of the valuable steps
taken towards a comprehensive ceasefire and inclusive
Yemeni political talks under the auspices of the United
Nations. Japan echoes the Security Council press
statement last month (SC/15272) in welcoming the
Saudi Arabian and Omani delegations’ recent visit to
Sana’a.
It is important to ensure that efforts made by the
parties to the conflict and regional countries will feed
into a United Nations-mediated and Yemeni-owned
political process towards a durable peace in Yemen.
In that light, we support the critical role of the Special

23-1390713/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

Envoy and his efforts to work with Yemeni and regional
stakeholders. Inclusivity in communications among the
parties is crucially important, and we commend efforts
being made by all the Yemeni stakeholders to transcend
their different political and historical backgrounds.
In addition to inclusivity, the implementation in
good faith of the agreement made during the United
Nations-mediated and Yemeni-owned political process
is essential to achieving long-term stability. The
Security Council should consider how best it can ensure
such implementation going forward.
As we talk about progress on the political track,
let us not look away from the suffering of the Yemeni
people who are enduring the world’s worst humanitarian
crisis. I would like to recall the fact that the Group of
Seven (G-7) Foreign Ministers called on the Houthis to
lift any impediments to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, especially with regard to women and girls.
The Security Council should underscore the importance
of the continuing humanitarian assistance to Yemen. As
political stability needs to be underpinned by economic
stability, the international community must effectively
contribute to achieving stability and economic recovery.
Regarding the FSO SAFER, we appreciate the
initiatives of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands
in hosting the pledging conference on 4 May. In the G-7
Foreign Ministers’ communiqué issued in April, we, as
Chair, joined our fellow G-7 countries in calling on all
relevant parties and the international community to
support the implementation of the FSO SAFER plan. We
commend the work of the United Nations Development
Programme in accelerating the project thus far and ask
other United Nations agencies to further collaborate in
order to fill the financial gap, since we all have a stake
in preventing a potential disaster.
Now is the time to make critical progress in
bringing this environmental, humanitarian and global
economic crisis to an end at last. We must seize the
momentum and not let this chance slip away.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to our briefers today.
The current situation in Yemen is grounds for
cautious optimism. We note the progress on resolving
the years-long military and political crisis in Yemen
achieved by the Yemeni parties with support from the
United Nations and regional forces.
14/18

17/05/2023

On the military front, the situation is calm on the
whole. The fact that there are no large-scale hostilities,
even though there is no official truce at present, says
a great deal about the Yemeni parties’ determination
to engage in a genuine search for appropriate solutions
to put an end to the conflict once and for all and to
transform the Yemeni settlement process into a fully
fledged political dialogue. Another telling example is
the successful large-scale exchange of prisoners and
detainees last month. As a result, there were releases
on both sides, amounting to roughly 900 people in total.
The establishment of conducive conditions for
a settlement is also being fostered by the regional
stabilization. It is important for that process not to
stall. Yemen’s leadership should take more active steps
to find compromise solutions. Achieving peace in the
country will be problematic unless both sides make
constructive concessions. We therefore appreciate the
ongoing mediation efforts by regional Powers, including
Saudi Arabia and Oman. Thanks to them, the Yemenis
have come closer to agreeing on a number of military
and political issues, which should bolster the cessation
of hostilities and ease the acute humanitarian crisis.
For our part, we will continue to assist the
international mediation efforts in Yemen by
maintaining contact with all the leading political forces
in the country and trying to ensure that they take a
constructive approach. The international community’s
common goal for Yemen is achieving a comprehensive
settlement rather than anyone’s individual agenda,
including in the energy sector. First and foremost, we
need to work towards resolving the many fundamental
issues that are impeding a settlement of the Yemeni
crisis and affecting not just Yemen but its neighbouring
States. We support the work of Special Envoy Grundberg
and hope that his active shuttle diplomacy will enable
us to reach a sustainable long-term ceasefire, creating
opportunities for the launch of a full-fledged, inclusive
national dialogue under the auspices of the United
Nations. At a certain stage, we will have to consider
updating the international legal foundations of such
a settlement so that they reflect the real situation on
the ground.
While the lengthy period of calm has provided
some respite for ordinary Yemenis in their daily lives,
the humanitarian situation in the country remains
dire. Many areas continue to experience shortages in
basic necessities, including food and medical supplies,
but those must continue to be provided to the Yemeni
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

people on a non-discriminatory basis. We support the
ongoing operation of the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen, whose role
cannot be overstated. We remain convinced that any
restrictions on the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
as well as any obstacles to the work of humanitarian
personnel, are unacceptable.
In conclusion, we would like to once again recall
resolution 598 (1987) and other initiatives aimed at
regional stabilization, including Russia’s updated
concept of collective security.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Special Envoy Grundberg, Ms. Wosornu and
Ms. Al-Eryani for their briefings.
This is a hopeful moment for Yemen. There continues
to be a window of opportunity for achieving a more
durable and lasting peace built on the groundwork laid
by the United Nations-brokered truce and the intensive
negotiations of the past year. We recognize the efforts of
regional partners, particularly Saudi Arabia and Oman.
The visit of Saudi and Omani delegations to Sana’a last
month and the release of almost 900 detainees from
all sides of the conflict represented important steps
forward. We also commend the contribution of the
Government of the Republic of Yemen to that progress.
The parties now have a chance to bring peace to
Yemen. We urge them to seize that momentum and
intensify their efforts to bridge the remaining gaps
and reach a more comprehensive agreement. We note
that such an agreement must lead to a resumption of
Government oil exports and pave the way for an inclusive
intra-Yemeni political process. That process should also
include the voices of civil society, women and members
of marginalized groups and should address Yemenis’
calls for justice, accountability and redress for human
rights abuses and violations. As we have said before,
that is the only way to achieve a lasting peace in Yemen.
The leadership of the United Nations will continue to
be critical to the success of such a political process. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, stands behind Special Envoy Grundberg and
commends his unflagging commitment to peacefully
resolving the conflict. We urge the parties to continue
to engage closely with him on United Nations-led peace
efforts in order to build on the progress achieved so far.
Despite that progress towards peace and the now
13 months of de-escalation, the humanitarian situation
remains dire, as we heard today. We urge donors to give

S/PV.9323

generously to Yemen’s humanitarian appeal. A funding
gap of more than $3 billion remains — funds that are
necessary to assist more than 21.6 million Yemenis, or
approximately two thirds of Yemen’s total population.
We were deeply saddened by the stampede in Sana’a
over the holy month of Ramadan, which left at least
78 people dead and scores more injured. We express
our condolences to the families of the deceased and
everyone affected by that tragic event. We also call for
the immediate and unconditional release of our Yemeni
staff in Sana’a, who have been forcibly detained for
nearly 18 months.
Finally, along with the opportunity to make progress
towards a sustainable peace, this is also a unique
moment to address the threat posed to Yemen and the
region by the FSO SAFER tanker. The procurement by
the United Nations of a replacement vessel, the Nautica,
was a critical step. The arrival of the Nautica in the
Red Sea earlier this month marked another important
milestone in the project’s implementation. We commend
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Resident Coordinator for Yemen, David
Gressly, for their efforts to address the very real and
imminent threat posed by the FSO SAFER, and look
forward to the launch of the operation later this month.
While we celebrate that progress, the United Nations
still needs to raise additional funds for that effort. We
call on Member States to contribute and to encourage
private sector and environmental groups to help close
the funding gap so that this critical operation can
move forward.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that this is a hopeful
moment for Yemen and a moment of opportunity. I
would emphasize that hopeful moments like these
are not guaranteed. We therefore continue to urge the
parties to seize the moment, come together and bring
lasting peace to the people of Yemen.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Switzerland.
I would like to start by joining my colleagues in
thanking Special Envoy Grundberg and the Director
of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Wosornu,
for their briefings and their efforts in favour of peace
and the protection of civilians in Yemen. My thanks
also go to Ms. Al-Eryani for her statement and
recommendations to the members of the Council. And I

23-1390715/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Yemen at this meeting.
We have been informed in recent months of
the progress in the ongoing peace negotiations. It
is important to remain focused on the legitimate
aspirations of the civilian population and to continue
to meet their immediate humanitarian needs. In that
context, Switzerland would like to echo the appeal made
by the more than 100 non-governmental organizations
that have called on the Yemeni parties
“to maintain sharp focus on reaching a new truce
deal and initiating steps towards a real, long-lasting
and inclusive Yemeni peace process.”
Switzerland would like to highlight the following
three points. First, we welcome all continuing peace
efforts and the commitment of Oman and Saudi
Arabia in particular. We emphasize the importance
of achieving rapid and tangible progress that will
benefit all the people. It is crucial to capitalize on
the current momentum. We therefore call on all the
parties involved to do their utmost to bring the ongoing
dialogues to a successful conclusion. At the same time,
we encourage all parties to agree without delay on
new confidence-building measures, such as the recent
release of prisoners. The joy of those families reunited
as they celebrated Eid is still fresh in our minds.
Secondly, that positive momentum must be
manifested in the realization of an inclusive intra-Yemeni
political settlement under the auspices of the United
Nations. Civil society, especially women, must be part of
it. Their voices count and must be heard. In that regard,
it is essential that they can participate fully, equally
and meaningfully, free from threats or reprisals. We
must spare no effort in promoting women’s freedoms.
In that context, we echo the pertinent recommendations
proposed by Ms. Al-Eryani at the start of our meeting.
Thirdly, we share our deep concern about the
difficult social and economic situation facing the civilian
population in Yemen as we enter the ninth year of the
conflict. We therefore firmly condemn all restrictions
on humanitarian organizations and especially women
humanitarian workers. We remind all the parties of
their obligation under international humanitarian law
to allow and facilitate, including through the provision
of necessary documentation to humanitarian personnel,
the rapid, safe and unhindered delivery of aid.
16/18

17/05/2023

Furthermore, in the absence of a lasting peace, the
protection of children from conflict-related violence
remains a great challenge, as shown by the increase in
incidents involving children who have fallen victim to
mines and explosive remnants of war. We therefore call
on all parties to fully and swiftly implement their action
plans and uphold their other commitments to end and
prevent grave violations against children. Continued
efforts must be made for future generations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you and your delegation
every success in your work. I also thank your
predecessor, the Russian Federation, for ably presiding
over the Council last month, as well as Mr. Grundberg,
Ms. Wosornu and Ms. Yasmeen Al-Eryani for
their briefings.
My Government appreciates all regional and
international efforts, including those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and the
mediation efforts made by our brethren in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman, aimed at
renewing the truce, ending the conflict and achieving
a comprehensive and lasting peace based on the
principles of the agreed political solution emanating
from the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially, resolution 2216 (2015).
We stress the need for the Security Council to support
such regional efforts to overcome the current crisis.
The Yemeni Government also stresses its commitment
to opting for peace and engaging positively and
constructively with all efforts to reach a comprehensive
ceasefire, as well as to relaunching a Yemeni-owned
political process that is led by the United Nations and
realizes the legitimate aspirations of the Yemeni people
to achieve security, stability and development.
However, what we see today is that the Houthi
militias, which have chosen to fan the flames of the
conflict, continue to ignore the suffering of the
Yemeni people and their hopes for peace, security,
stability and freedom. The actions of the militias have
repeatedly demonstrated that they are not serious
23-13907

17/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

about responsibly engaging in peace efforts. They
continue to wield the threat of war, relaunch the
conflict, shed more Yemeni blood and exacerbate the
humanitarian crisis. They persist in violating the norms
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. They continue restricting rights and
freedoms, including by intentionally creating chaos and
depriving Yemeni women of their fundamental rights
and effective participation in building and developing
Yemeni society. They are arresting journalists and
targeting civilian neighbourhoods, which has led to the
deaths of civilians, most of them women and children,
and internal displacement. The militias also deploy
their fighters on the front lines, and they are organizing
military summer camps to attract and recruit hundreds
of thousands of children to send them to the front lines
in the largest recruitment campaign that humankind
has ever known, in plain sight of the international
community. While our children are being recruited in
Yemen, the militias are planting mines and explosives
on our land, which kill Yemenis on a daily basis.
They are starving and impoverishing our
communities, and they are preventing businesses and
charities from doing their work, which led to the heinous
crime that resulted in the killing of more than 80 people
and dozens of injured people in Sana’a last month. For
more than eight years, the city of Taiz and its 4 million
inhabitants have lived under the ongoing suffocating
siege imposed by the Houthis, as the latter have ignored
their commitments under the ceasefire agreement and
the Stockholm Agreement. The militias persist in their
attacks and attempts to tighten even further the unjust
siege, including by repeatedly targeting infrastructure,
including the targeting with missiles and drones of the
vital Al-Kadha-Taiz road on 5 May, while it was under
construction to alleviate the suffering of inhabitants.
The Yemeni Government calls on the international
community and the Security Council to live up to their
commitments and exert further pressure on the Houthi
militias and on Iran, which supports them, to choose
peace and engage positively with peace efforts to end
the prolonged humanitarian suffering. We also stress
the need to monitor the behaviour of the militias in
order to successfully end the conflict.
In the light of all the current humanitarian and
economic challenges and the economic impact of the
Houthi militias’ attacks on the oil sector, the plundering
of tax revenues, the refusal to pay salaries, the increased
infliction of suffering and intransigence on citizens, the

S/PV.9323

Yemeni Government will spare no effort to alleviate the
suffering of our people and meet their basic needs by
providing essential services, despite scarce resources
and dire economic circumstances. Under the guidance
of the Presidential Leadership Council, the Government
is implementing administrative, financial and economic
reforms in the governmental sectors in collaboration
with our brethren in the Coalition to Support Legitimacy
in order to address weak institutional performance
at the central and local levels, owing to the complex
nature of the circumstances and challenges.
In that context, the Yemeni Government appreciates
the leading role of our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in implementing
many development projects and crucial humanitarian
interventions, transitioning them to sustainable
development projects, which attests to the strategic
partnership and the brotherly ties between their peoples.
Yemen calls on all friendly States and international
donor organizations to step up humanitarian,
development and economic assistance to Yemen in
order to contribute to its economic stability, overcome
the current challenges and alleviate the suffering of the
Yemeni people.
We all remember the touching images of the released
detainees. We all remember them shedding tears of joy
and celebrating their freedom. Their release would not
have happened if it had not been for the flexibility shown
by the governmental negotiating team and the efforts of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Special Envoy and
the International Committee of the Red Cross to end the
suffering of thousands of Yemeni people. The Yemeni
Government reaffirms its consistent position on the
need to end the suffering of all detainees, prisoners and
kidnapped individuals and to close the humanitarian
dossier by finalizing the detainees exchange agreement,
based on the “all for all” principle, as stipulated in the
Stockholm Agreement. We call on our partners to exert
further pressure on the Houthi militias to refrain from
using the humanitarian dossier as political blackmail
and to uphold their commitments under the Stockholm
Agreement, including with respect to joint visits to each
other’s detention centres and shedding light on the fate
of the thousands of kidnapped and disappeared persons
in the militias’ prisons, including Mohammad Qahtan,
as set forth in resolution 2216 (2015).
The Yemeni Government commends the progress
made in the safe rescue operation of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker. We also commend the United Kingdom and the

23-1390717/18

S/PV.9323

The situation in the Middle East

Kingdom of the Netherlands for their efforts to bridge
the funding gap in order to start the implementation of
the rescue plan led by the United Nations. We call on
donor States and organizations, as well as friends of
the environment and the private sector, to contribute to
bridging the funding gap. We also urge the implementing
agencies to adhere to the time frame and to the strict
environmental requirements for the rescue operation,
in accordance with local and international laws and
regulations. We need sustainable solutions if Yemen
and the region are to be protected from future risks.
We reaffirm our readiness to provide all the facilities
required to implement the rescue plan with a view to

18/18

17/05/2023

avoiding the serious repercussions of an imminent
environmental, economic and humanitarian disaster.
In conclusion, the Yemeni people yearn for peace
and look forward to a future of security, stability and
development. They do not want further suffering and
continued conflict, and neither do they wish to see
more drones, ballistic missiles or landmines.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

23-13907
