S/PRST/2006/24

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 May 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5444th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 May 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning Iraq”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the inauguration on 20 May of Iraq’s
constitutionally elected government and congratulates the people of Iraq on
this milestone in their country’s political transition.
“The Council is particularly encouraged by the fact that the government
is representative of Iraq’s many diverse communities and expresses its hope
that the Ministers of Defence, Interior and National Security Affairs will be
appointed as soon as possible. The Security Council encourages the new
government to work tirelessly to promote national reconciliation through
dialogue and inclusion and to build an atmosphere in which sectarianism is
rejected. The Security Council, at the same time, urges all Iraqis to participate
in the political process peacefully, demanding that those who continue to use
violence lay down their arms. The Council wholly condemns acts of terrorism
in Iraq, including recent horrific attacks on civilians and religious sites aimed
callously at provoking intercommunal tensions.
“The Security Council underlines the high expectations in the new
government to deliver improvements in security and stability, in human rights
and the rule of law, in the provision of essential services, and in economic
progress and prosperity. The Council urges the government to work effectively
and energetically to this end. The Council also strongly urges all States and
relevant international organizations to continue and enhance their help to
Iraq’s sovereign government at this crucial time. The Council notes the
particular role of Iraq’s neighbours and calls on them to conform to relevant
Security Council resolutions and to examine how they can reinforce their
contribution. In this context, the Council also looks forward to the continued
efforts of the League of Arab States, including the forthcoming conference in
Baghdad, in support of the political process the Council has endorsed.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for a federal, democratic,
pluralist and unified Iraq, as a responsible member of the international
community, in which there is stability, prosperity and full respect for human
rights and the rule of law. The Security Council also reaffirms the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.”

06-36129 (E) 240506

*0636129*
