S/PV.8404

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8404th meeting

Friday, 16 November 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-38362 (E)
*1838362*

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the United Nations World Food Programme; and
Ms. Rasha Jarhum, Founder and Director of the Peace
Track Initiative Yemen.
Ms. Jarhum is joining us via video-teleconference
from Ottawa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to this Security Council briefing.
Yemen has long been referred to as the forgotten
war. I am very grateful that this is no longer the case.
Never has so much international attention and energy
been given to this crisis, and rightly so. Yemen remains
the largest humanitarian disaster in the world, as we
will hear from Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley. The fight
against famine is ongoing. Women, children and men
are dying from preventable diseases, and the economy
remains on the verge of collapse. Those are the reasons
that urgent action is required from all of us.
Public opinion and leaders have called urgently to
remove the prospect of famine. That is a clear example
of the international conscience. For that reason, I
personally encourage the Council to support the five
requests presented by Mark Lowcock in this Chamber
late October (see S/PV.8379). It provides a clear road
map that we must all support.
2/27

16/11/2018

The conflict continues and rages on. We see
Al-Hudaydah as the centre of gravity of the war,
which is why we deeply welcome recent reports of the
reduction of violence on the Al-Hudaydah fronts, and
we need it to last. I am extremely grateful to all leaders
and others who have called for a cessation of hostilities.
There must be no temptation to restart that battle. As a
mediator in that conflict, I strongly believe that nothing
should be allowed to impede the chance of dialogue
and negotiation.
The Council has consistently called on all the
parties to avoid any humanitarian catastrophe, and
Secretary-General Guterres reminded us of our fears
in that regard the other day. But the situation in
Al-Hudaydah is fragile and unstable. We need to take
urgent action. As members of the Council will recall,
we made some progress over the summer to reach
a negotiated handover of the port of Al-Hudaydah to
the United Nations. I plan to visit Al-Hudaydah next
week, along with my colleague Lise Grande, not least
to revisit a United Nations supervisory role for the port
and to draw attention to the continued need for a pause.
I am encouraged by the recent calls from all parties,
the Government of Yemen in particular, as well as
Ansar Allah, in addition to the coalition, for the United
Nations to step forward at this time on this issue. Let us
build on that, rather than retreat.
With increased international attention has come
a renewed commitment from the Yemeni parties to
working on a political solution. I welcome President
Hadi Mansour’s announcement of his desire to move
swiftly to a political solution, and I know from my
contacts in Sana’a that Ansar Allah is also committed to
that. With that in mind, I intend to reconvene the parties
shortly and to do so in Sweden. In that regard, I thank
the Swedish Government through the representative of
Sweden here, Ambassador Skoog, for its offer to host
those consultations.
I believe that we are close to resolving the
preparatory issues that will allow us to make that
happen. I am grateful to the coalition for agreeing to our
proposed logistical arrangements, and to the coalition
and Oman for their agreement to facilitate the medical
evacuation of some injured Yemenis out of Sana’a.
This is a crucial moment for Yemen. I have received
firm assurances from the leadership of the Yemeni
parties — the Government of Yemen first, and then
Ansar Allah — that they are committed to attending
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

those consultations. I believe that they are genuine,
and I expect them to continue in that way and appear
for those consultations, and indeed, so do the Yemeni
people, who are desperate for a political solution to a
war in which they are the main victims.
I have spent the last two months seeking support
from the parties for an updated version of the framework
for negotiations, the elements of which I orally briefed
members of the Council on 18 June. The framework is
based upon the three references, including resolution
2216 (2015), as wll as the progress made particularly
in Kuwait. I reiterate again, as I have done in
previous meetings of the Council, our gratitude to the
Government of Kuwait for hosting those talks in 2016.
After carefully listening to the parties over the last
few months, I am confident that the framework is in
line with both the requirements of the Council and the
new realities of the conflict in Yemen. The framework,
however, is my vision. But its ideas are not mine alone.
Every conversation and every negotiation that has
taken place before has been the basis for that document.
I have, as those present would imagine, shared it with
the parties for their views and ultimately, I hope,
for their acceptance, just as a basis for negotiation
and not to negotiate the text itself, which will be the
matter for which we will bring the parties together in
the coming weeks and months. When the parties have
had the opportunity to brief me on their views on the
framework, I would like to put it in front of the Council
and seek its endorsement, so that we can use it as a basis
for upcoming consultations on substance and agree on
a road map towards a transitional agreement, ideally in
the next round of consultations.
The framework establishes the principles and
parameters for United Nations-led, inclusive Yemeni
negotiations to end the war, resolve the conflict
and start a political transition process. It includes a
set of interim security and political arrangements,
including mechanisms, sequencing and guarantees for
implementation. It is a very broad-brush document, as
it is intended only as a basis for detailed negotiation.
However, I believe that the arrangements outlined
and referred to will allow for an end to the fighting
inside Yemen, the return of Yemen’s friendly relations
with neighbouring States and the restoring of
State institutions.
I believe that the framework reflects the resolutions
of the Council in fact and in words and in no way

S/PV. 8404

derogates from them. My task is to shape a way
towards a principled compromise that allows the people
of Yemen to live again in peace. It sets out a political
solution that is available and, as I have said, is there
to be adopted if we are to have the fortune to move
forward with it.
A mediator’s principal task is to bring the parties
together to resolve their differences through dialogue
and compromise rather than combat and conflict. That
is what I hope we will see soon as we move forward.
We are doing all that we can to achieve those goals but,
as I said in the Chamber in April, the events of war
can always take peace off the table (see S/PV.8235). We
must not let that happen now.
We are working very hard to finalize the logistical
arrangements. I will go to Sana’a next week for that
purpose. I will meet the leader of Ansar Allah,
Abdulmalik al-Houthi, with whom I have had detailed
discussions in previous months about the need for
engagement, consultations and, ultimately, negotiations.
It will be useful to me to again hear his leadership on
such matters. I will also be happy to travel with the
delegation to the consultations, if needed.
For a political settlement to be sustainable, it must
be inclusive. It is a requirement of the resolutions
concerning this conflict. It must enjoy the support of
the Yemeni people. I am fortunate to have the support
of the Yemeni women’s technical advisory group,
which not only came with us to Geneva but also is
providing specific ideas on tactics and strategies as
we move forward towards consultations. We are also
looking at using technology to strengthen inclusivity
and provide an interactive platform for the voices that
cannot travel but remain in Yemen to be heard as we
gather the parties around the table. In the twenty-first
century, in our view, physical presence is not the only
way to strengthen inclusion.
The southern question is always on our minds. We
are currently enjoying a period of calm but the threat of
violence, destabilization and instability is ever present.
I have spent a great deal of time listening to southern
groups and exploring ways to address their concerns.
Ultimately, the just resolution of the southern issue
should be achieved, in my view, during the transitional
period. It should meet the legitimate aspirations of the
people of Yemen and ensure that they enjoy the benefits
of good governance. That almost goes without saying,
but I think that it is important to record that objective

18-383623/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

here. Southern actors will clearly have a crucial role
in safeguarding the outcomes of the peace process on
which we are now working, and it is vital to secure
their buy-in. However, it is my responsibility to alert
the Security Council that there is unfinished business
in the south of Yemen.
I would like to take the opportunity to announce
to the members of the Council that we are about to
conclude — and I had hoped to announce such a
conclusion — an agreement between the parties on
the exchange of prisoners and detainees. I think that
it would and may still be the first signed agreement
between the parties to the conflict. We have made
great progress. President Hadi Mansour was the first
to urge us to focus on that. I also had the support of
Abdulmalik al-Houthi when I first met him. I welcome
the commitment of all parties that have engaged in
good faith — the coalition, the Government of Yemen
and Ansar Allah. It is an important humanitarian
gesture and a timely message of hope to the Yemeni
people. As I said, I had hoped that we would have been
able to announce the formalization of that agreement
today. However, I am sure that it will happen in the
coming days.
I strongly believe that the parties need to get
together without conditions, also under our auspices, to
jointly address the dire economic situation in Yemen,
including the rapid deterioration of the Yemeni rial — a
key contributing aspect to famine. It is useful to note
and important to give credit to the Government of
Yemen for the fact that the depreciation of the rial,
which was so alarming in past weeks, seems to have
flattened out. I think that it is important to note that
extremely significant measure of the stress in Yemen.
That should not be a matter subject to political
consideration when the victims are the Yemeni people.
Indeed, that is not a confidence-building measure. It is
a moral responsibility and the obligation of the parties
to the Yemeni people. I hope, and have been planning
for some time, soon to convene a meeting of the Central
Bank of Yemen, to be facilitated by the International
Monetary Fund, in order to agree on an action plan that
would allow the Central Bank of Yemen to discharge
its responsibilities across the country and for all people
of Yemen.
Finally, we must seize such positive international
momentum on Yemen. The attention to Yemen is a great
asset, as is the unity of the Council. I strongly believe
that this is an opportunity at a crucial moment to pursue
4/27

16/11/2018

a comprehensive and inclusive political settlement to
the conflict. Yemen can indeed no longer be referred to
as a forgotten war. I would ask the Council to consider
the fact that all our efforts should be directed towards
at least two issues. First is the humanitarian priority, to
which, I am sure, Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley will
refer shortly. That is the most important priority for the
people of Yemen. And, secondly, let us hope that there
will be no acts or omissions that prevent the convening
of the parties for consultations in Sweden in the coming
weeks. It is an opportunity that has been long awaited
by the people of Yemen and that the Council has long
asked of the parties. I think that we are almost there. I
do not know if we will succeed and what the odds are.
We need to focus on ensuring that nothing disrupts the
path to that meeting.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: On 23 October, I warned the
Security Council that a grave economic crisis and
escalating conflict had pushed Yemen closer to famine
than ever before (see S/PV.8379).
Shortly after that briefing, the Famine Early
Warning Systems Network released a new alert. The
Early Warning Systems Network, which is supported
by the United States, is one of the leading providers
of early warning and analysis on acute food insecurity.
According to the Network, “Yemen faces the largest
food security emergency in the world, and the worsening
humanitarian outlook requires urgent action to reduce
the likelihood of significant loss of life”.
The Famine Early Warning Systems Network
characterizes the food security situation in Yemen as
facing “a catastrophic deterioration” and warns that
many of the millions of the severely food-insecure
people in the country “face food consumption gaps
large enough to lead to increases in human mortality”.
So is it a famine? With respect, I fear that that is
the wrong question. A very painful lesson learned from
the two famines declared this century — in Somalia
in 2011 and in South Sudan in 2017 — is the fact that
most fatalities occur before famine is declared. So to
be clear, I am not saying that widespread famine has
already taken hold in Yemen, but that is what we are
trying to prevent. It is abundantly clear that Yemen is
already facing mass hunger and severe food insecurity.
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We are fortunate to have David Beasley here today.
He will describe the food security situation in more
detail and tell us about his visit to the country earlier
this week. In my assessment, Yemen has so far avoided
famine for just two reasons.
First, the United Nations and humanitarian agencies
are implementing the largest aid operation in the world,
reaching nearly 8 million Yemenis across the country
every month. Secondly, Member States and other key
stakeholders have taken action when the risk of famine
has intensified in the past, for example by working
together to lift the temporary blockade this time last
year and by providing generous, flexible, large-scale
funding early this year. As I emphasized in my last
briefing, we urgently need the Council to take action
again now. That is why I sought the Council’s support on
five key requests, which, if they are fully implemented,
would save the lives of millions of Yemenis, sparing
them from an entirely avoidable catastrophe. So today
I would like to update the Council on where we stand
with those five actions.
My first request was for a cessation of hostilities to
be implemented in and around the infrastructure and
facilities on which the aid operation and commercial
importers rely. Many Council members made similar
requests during the 23 October meeting and after that,
and the Secretary-General reinforced that position in
his statement of 2 November. What in fact happened was
that violence escalated on several fronts immediately
after my last briefing. Since 30 October, United Nations
sources have observed nearly 800 separate incidents of
shelling, armed clashes or air strikes across Yemen.
Some of the fiercest fighting has been in Al-Hudaydah,
which is where most of the crucial infrastructure
needing protection actually is. Those incidents too
often have devastating consequences for civilians. To
cite just one recent incident, a bus carrying civilians
fleeing conflict in Al-Hudaydah came under attack on
Tuesday, killing seven people.
Critical civilian infrastructure has not been spared
either. Last Sunday, patients — some of whom were
still connected to medical devices — reportedly fled
Al-Hudaydah’s largest public hospital into the street
amidst large explosions. Several days later, the same
hospital was damaged by shrapnel, and then again by
shelling yesterday. A second hospital was damaged
after becoming caught up in the crossfire as front
lines shifted around the city. Fighters also took up
positions inside that hospital and on its roof, placing the

S/PV. 8404

entire facility at grave risk. The impact of violence in
Al-Hudaydah has compounded the chaos and hardships
facing people who were already in desperate straits.
Needs are enormous; perhaps 30 per cent of people
still in the city are barely surviving, including about
a quarter of children who are malnourished. As the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, Lise Grande,
recently noted, the most vulnerable people in the whole
country are sitting there in Al-Hudaydah. These are the
poorest of the poor.
The fighting has also had an impact on humanitarian
operations. Some programmes have been scaled back
in Al-Hudaydah and the staff overseeing them have
left — I hope only temporarily. Other important
emergency programmes remain in place, and agencies
are restocking supplies inside Al-Hudaydah in an
attempt to ensure that critical humanitarian operations
can continue if the situation gets worse.
So, for all the reasons Martin Griffiths has just
cited and those I have just given to the Council, it
remains urgent, as Martin has said, for the parties
to agree a cessation of hostilities. We both issued
statements reiterating that earlier this week. In the past
two days, we have seen a welcome de-escalation and
what appears to be at least a pause in the fighting in
Al-Hudaydah, but what we need to know is that this
lull is going to be sustained. Let me repeat again that,
as we have previously said and as Martin touched on,
the United Nations is ready to play an enhanced role
in ensuring the appropriate use of key facilities around
Al-Hudaydah, such as the port.
The second area for which I sought the support of
the Council is to facilitate and protect the supply of
food and other essential goods across the country. As
members know, Yemen imports nearly all of its food,
fuel and medicine. Commercial food imports in October
through the ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef — where
most of the food enters the country — fell by more
than 50 per cent as compared to September. Only 17
ships discharged cargo in those ports in October — the
second-lowest monthly figure ever recorded. To avoid
famine, it is essential to keep all ports functioning
and to remove obstacles to imports or the domestic
distribution of essential goods. I therefore welcome
the Government of Yemen’s decision this week to
suspend Cabinet Decree 75 for food imports. Experts
had warned that the immediate implementation of that
Decree could lead to worse food shortages and higher
prices. But although the Government has suspended

18-383625/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

Decree 75 for food, it remains in place for fuel, which
is critical to pumping drinking water, maintaining
sanitation systems and running hospital generators.
Since the enforcement of Decree 75 for fuel
began last month, the coalition has, at the request
of the Government of Yemen, denied entry to four
commercial vessels carrying nearly 53,000 tons of
fuel. That is equivalent to more than 40 per cent of
average fuel imports in any given month since the
temporary blockade was lifted about a year ago. To
protect the food supply and avoid famine, parties to
the conflict must also avoid damaging or cutting off
access to supporting infrastructure. The main eastern
road from Al-Hudaydah to Sana’a remains closed due
to insecurity, forcing traders and humanitarian partners
to reroute shipments, which costs more money and
more time. Several humanitarian sites are in areas in
Al-Hudaydah that have recently changed hands. They
include the Red Sea Mills, which contain enough
grain to feed more than 3 million people for a month.
I understand that talks are proceeding on options to
ensure that those critical supplies can now reach the
people who need them.
My third request was for the provision of support
for the Yemeni economy by injecting foreign exchange
and paying salaries and pensions. Those measures will
protect against famine by boosting people’s ability
to purchase food and other essential goods and by
supporting traders in keeping commercial imports
flowing. In October, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
deposited $200 million in the Central Bank of Yemen
to strengthen the Yemeni rial. That welcome move has
helped to bring the exchange rate down from a peak
of about 800 rial to the United States dollar in early
October, to about 670 rial to the dollar today. It has also
helped to finance imports of food and other essential
commodities. Some reports also indicate that that
deposit may be helping to lower food prices slightly.
Those are important improvements.
At the same time, we must recall that the exchange
rate before the conflict escalated four years ago was
215 rial to the dollar, so it still costs more than three
times as many rials to buy a dollar than it did before the
conflict escalated. In the past year alone, the rial has
lost nearly 50 per cent of its value. It is also important
to note that applications to access Central Bank credit
against the Saudi deposit have exceeded the available
funds — a sign that traders are eager to maintain
the flow of essential imports if they have access to
6/27

16/11/2018

adequate capital. Those developments demonstrate that
foreign exchange injections are enormously effective
in this environment. We need a continuing, large-scale
flow of foreign exchange into the market to finance
adequate levels of imports and to support the currency
at a level that will make food and other commodity
prices affordable.
Regarding salary payments, I welcomed the news in
my last briefing that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates would provide $70 million to
cover allowances for 135,000 teachers. We see that as
a best practice, and discussions with potential donors
on replicating it for health and sanitation workers,
as well as for pensioners, are at an advanced stage.
Several weeks ago, the Houthi authorities in Sana’a also
released some of the backlog in civil servant salaries.
We hope that will be a first step towards the resumption
of regular salary payments across the country.
My fourth request was for an increase funding and
support to the aid operation. This year, we are extremely
grateful to all our donors for providing $2.3 billion so
far to the 2018 United Nations coordinated humanitarian
response plan. That is nearly 80 per cent of the
requirements we estimated at the beginning of the year.
Given developments over the past few months, we are
now discussing additional funding for this year with
donors. I hope decisions on that will be taken by the
relevant donors very soon. Given the increase in needs,
as a result of the intensified fighting and the further
recent collapse of the economy, I can say that next
year’s response plan will be substantially larger. I will
announce the precise amount shortly. The SecretaryGeneral plans to convene a high-level conference on
Yemen with a focus on the 2019 humanitarian response
plan in February.
My fifth request called on all belligerents to work
with the Special Envoy to end the conflict, and I will
not repeat Martin’s comprehensive account of where the
process stands. I echo his calls to move quickly towards
confidence-building measures and consultations,
and from there to resume full negotiations. Council
members have just heard Martin confirm his support
for my five requests. I want to emphasize that those five
requests need to be seen as a package. Substantial new
action is needed on all of them if massive loss of life in
a terrible famine is to be avoided. I am therefore again
seeking Council members’ individual and collective
support — both practical and political — on those
five areas.
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Beasley.
Mr. Beasley: I thank you, Sir, for convening
this briefing on Yemen. It is good to be with my two
colleagues and friends, whom I highly respect.
I know that when appearing in this hallowed
Chamber, one is expected to speak in measured tones and
that points are to be made with caution. In diplomacy,
often that is the best and smoothest way, but today I am
not sure that is possible. I have just come from three
days on the ground in Yemen, and soft words will not
do justice to what is happening to the children, mothers,
fathers and families in that country. What I have seen
this week in Yemen is the stuff of nightmares, horror,
deprivation and misery. That country of some 28 to
29 million people has been suffering for years, but now,
as some would say, it is on the brink of catastrophe. But
it is not on the brink of catastrophe — it is actually a
catastrophe, and each and everyone of us has our own
selves to blame. The question is: What are we going to
do about it?
The conditions that everyday Yemenis endure are
presently only because of war. They would not exist at
all if stubborn men would just sit down and talk instead
of fighting. Yemen is perhaps the prime example of
why the Council went on record in May recognizing
the link between conflict and hunger. Let me put it in
true human terms, because Council members will hear
a lot about numbers today and tomorrow.
But that is just not about numbers; it is about real
people with names, like little Mohamed, whom I saw
just two days ago in a hospital in Sana’a. That little
eight-month old boy’s parents had driven 300 kilometres
to the only hospital that had some support; they were
trying to save their little boy’s life. He suffered from
acute malnutrition and weighed just 3.3 kilograms,
which is about one-third of what a child of that age
should weigh. Little Mohamed was not much more
than skin and bones. Council members have seen such
pictures in the news. Those are not isolated incidents;
they are the reality of children throughout the country.
I said that he was not much more than skin and
bones, because the sad part is that little Mohamed died
yesterday. It is hard to walk through a hospital. In room
after room, one sees these little children dying before
ones very eyes. I remember one little child whose feet

S/PV. 8404

were sticking out of the blanket. As a father, I thought
it was cute and I went to tickle one little foot, hoping
for a smile. But there was no smile. It was like tickling
a ghost. There are no smiles, no laughter; the crying is
weak; they are sick, hungry and dying. The chief doctor
at the hospital told me they are getting about 50 cases a
day of severely malnourished children. They only have
room for 20. When I asked what they do about the other
30, he answered that they send them home to die. Four
years ago, the hospital did not even have an area for
malnourished children.
I will focus this briefing on three main elements:
first, the economic impact of the political and military
crisis; secondly, the deteriorating food security
situation; and thirdly, what the United Nations, the
World Food Programme and other actors must to do get
Yemen on its feet.
First, Yemen is in economic collapse. The people
of Yemen have endured war for years, but what is
dramatically changing the situation on the ground
today is economic collapse. The value of the Yemeni
rial has dropped by a staggering 235 per cent since
January 2015 — from 215 rial to the United States
dollar to 720, give or take. Imagine what that does to
a household — two-thirds of its purchasing power is
just gone. In many cases, the price of simple, basic
food staples has doubled in the past eight months.
That is happening while household incomes are going
in the other direction. Eight million livelihoods have
disappeared; 1.2 million civil servants are without pay
or have had little financial support in the past few years.
Those 1.2 million support households of about 8 million
people out of the entire population of 29 million.
There are massive currency problems, with
no incomes or access to cash. For a country that is
dependent on imports for the basic needs of life, that
is a disaster. Other countries that have experienced
hyperinflation, such as South Sudan and Zimbabwe,
can at least grow their own food, but Yemen cannot.
It relies on imports. That is the primary reason why
hunger is on a dramatic increase.
Second is the deteriorating food security. Based
on our latest assessment, we know for a fact that it is
extremely dire. Of 28 million Yemenis, we believe that
as many as 18 million are food insecure, but as many as
or more than 12 million Yemenis — almost half of the
entire country — are just one step away from famine.
They are on the brink of starvation; they do not know

18-383627/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

when their next meal is coming from. As Mark said,
once you declare famine it is way too late.
Those are children and adults dying every day. They
may not be yet classified as dying of famine, but we are
marching towards disaster. The number has doubled in
the past year and a half, and it is getting worse, largely
because of the currency decline. Our monitoring
systems show that there are 3.6 million more hungry
people in Yemen than there were just three months ago.
In the past month alone, the number of hungry people
has risen by 1.6 million. I believe we do not need to
wait for formal declarations about famine or even a full
report to act.
We must act now. I believe that because of what I
saw with my very own eyes and heard this past week.
Children are already dying across the country. Right
now, the World Food Programme is helping about
8 million people a month in Yemen. We are especially
thankful for the generosity of our donors, the hard work
of about 500 staff members who put their lives on the
line every single day in that country, 30 cooperating
partner agencies and the support of other United
Nations agencies as well.
The World Food Programme currently has enough
food cereals in the country for two months of assistance
to help about 6.8 million people. As of early November,
we have several food shipments en route to various ports
in the country. We have even started to use the port
of Salalah, in neighbouring Oman, as a supplementary
route. We are anticipating any potential catastrophic
situation at any port to assure that we have alternatives
in place to minimize the impact of what is already a
dire situation. We are looking at alternative ports in
Saudi Arabia, as well as in Oman, as I mentioned, so
that the pipeline will not be broken should there be a
devastation of the port in Al-Hudaydah. Hostilities
must stop.
Not only did I go to Aden and Sana’a, but I also went
to Al-Hudaydah. Let me tell the Council about visiting
Al-Hudaydah. What normally is a three- or four-hour
simple, nice, beautiful drive is not so beautiful and
nice any more. It is double that amount of time going
through checkpoint after checkpoint; bridges have been
bombed and, whatever the case may be, because of the
war front we are having to move and go different routes.
It is quite a chore. Lise Grande and I went together.
Al-Hudaydah is like a ghost town. Representatives
will have seen those kind of movies where it is empty.
8/27

16/11/2018

One sees a dog walking here or there, and that is about
the extent of it. The way we are doing food distribution
right now is to give people enough for a whole month
so we minimize their being on the streets, because
people do not want to walk out on the streets because
they are afraid they will get killed. One cannot imagine
the number of people coming up to me and wanting to
hug me and say “Thank you for being here”. But then
they would say, “Please do not leave”. Because while
we were there, there was no fighting. “Please do not
leave. Stay a few days. Give us peace. Give us some
hope.” I said that I had to leave so that I could help
tell the world how bad it really is and that they deserve
better than this.
My third point concerns the humanitarian and
economic intervention is required. I agree with
absolutely everything that Mark was talking about.
This is not just one element. It is a package. We must
work together, but let me clear that starvation is on
the horizon unless circumstances change, and change
immediately. The war has taken its toll over four years,
but the economic crisis will accelerate that damage in a
just a matter of months. We must combine humanitarian
assistance with an all-out effort to restore the Yemeni
economy. Let me be crystal clear — humanitarian
assistance alone cannot reverse the dire situation. We
need a twin-track approach.
First, we need to put more hard currency into the
Yemeni economy and the hands of the Yemeni people,
as Mark referred to. The rial needs to be stabilized to at
least a 450-to-$1 ratio so people are able to buy essential
things again and to get the economy rolling again.
This would require a cash injection of approximately
$200 million per month.
Secondly, we need to scale up our assistance in
order to help 12 million people per month. As I said
earlier, we are helping about 8 million. We need to
scale up to approximately 12 million, give or take 1
or 2 million. That would require about $150 million
to $160 million a month just for food and assistance,
versus the approximately $100 million a month that we
are spending at the World Food Programme. If we are
able to raise the funds of $150 million to $160 million
a month just for the food assistance alone, we hope and
believe that about $50 million of that could be used as
cash-based assistance for the most food-insecure people,
and that cash-based assistance would not only save
lives, but would also help inject much-needed liquidity
into the economy. We work with store owners, family18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

owned businesses to help them provide the liquidity
to stimulate the economy in these communities and to
get that engine going again, which is critical for the
stability of this country.
But as we begin this work, the warring parties must
guarantee access, especially in and out of Al-Hudaydah
port. If Al-Hudaydah port shuts down without
alternatives, it will be a devastation beyond our furthest
imagination. Little boys and little girls will die. We
cannot truly meet the need unless we have much more
improved access throughout the country — for logistics
corridors, ports and the ability to monitor and assess.
We need expedited clearances for our shipments, visas,
equipment requests and personnel.
Yemen is on the brink so, together, we must act. The
international community must use all its power to stop
this war and rescue the Yemen economy and the Yemeni
people. Humanitarian organizations, like World Food
Programme, must get the resources and the access they
need to save the lives of innocent children and families.
Otherwise, at the World Food Programme and other
humanitarian agencies, we will be in the position of
deciding which children eat and which children do not
eat, which children live and which children die. How
would anyone in this Chamber like that job?
Every child deserves better. The words
“heartbreaking” and “tragic” do not do the situation in
Yemen justice. All of humankind should be ashamed of
what is happening in that country. With all the wealth
in the world today, all the intellectual knowledge, and
all the technology the world has today, there should not
be a single child going to bed hungry in Yemen, much
less anywhere else. It is long, oh so very long, past the
time to stop it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Beasley for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Jarhum.
Ms. Jarhum: I thank the Council for providing me
with the opportunity to brief the Council on behalf of
the Peace Track Initiative and the Women’s Solidarity
Network — a coalition of 250 Yemeni women and
women-led organizations working on the protection of
women and peacebuilding in Yemen.
Yemen has been spiralling into a devastating war
for over four years. In our country, there is a bleeding
wound in every home and a story of continuing loss and
despair. Dying children scream “Do not bury me!” as

S/PV. 8404

the conflict rages, but their cries go unnoticed. The use
of explosive weapons by the forces affiliated with the
internationally recognized Government and its allies in
the Arab coalition, as well as the Houthis, has resulted
in many civilian casualties. The warring parties
continue to disregard international humanitarian law
with virtual impunity in Al-Hudaydah, Taiz and across
the country. Meanwhile, actors directly or indirectly
involved in the conflict are disregarding the main
principles of the Arms Trade Treaty. The extensive use
of landmines by the Houthis has resulted in hundreds
of deaths and injuries and is a direct impediment to
accessing aid. Future generations will pay the price.
As we prepare for the upcoming International Day
for the Elimination of Violence against Women, I would
like to remind the Council that Yemeni women were
already suffering from legal, institutional and social
violence. As a result, they now bear the burden of the
multidimensional insecurities of this war. Documented
cases of gender-based violence, including rape, rose by
70 per cent in the first five months of the war. Child
marriages increased by 66 per cent.
Women in the besieged city of Taiz spend long
hours walking through rough terrain or traversing areas
controlled by armed groups, where they are repeatedly
harassed. They do that to provide their families with
basic living necessities and to protect their men
from forced recruitment, abduction, detention and
torture. Young women, including Sana’a University
students, have been subjected to violent repression
by Houthi armed groups, including by women thugs
known as Al-Zaynabiyat. Some women have been
beaten, electrocuted, arrested and released only on the
condition that they refrain from engaging in activism.
Others have had male family members detained on
their behalf.
We have supported many women human rights
defenders in providing their safe exit to neighbouring
countries, assisting in filing for asylum and seeking
resettlement in third countries. Unfortunately, none of
those cases have resulted in resettlement. Although the
Yemen refugee crisis does not in numbers amount to
the Syrian one, it is still a problem affecting hundreds
of thousands of Yemenis. Policies such as the European
Union Dublin Regulation, the United States executive
order to ban citizens from seven nations, including
Yemen, from entering the United States, and the recent
Saudi policies to deport Yemenis have all contributed
to separating families.

18-383629/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

On the situation in the south of the country, we
echo the voices of the southern Yemeni women on the
importance of reaching a just solution to the southern
cause and realizing their right to self-determination.
Today, after three decades of strife, southern grievances
have still not been addressed. We have also seen the
total exclusion of southerners and their cause from the
current peace framework and negotiations, usually
justified by the limitations of resolution 2216 (2015),
which has been interpreted to limit negotiations to
two sides.
We as women have the highest stake in peace.
Members of the Women’s Solidarity Network work
relentlessly to end the bloody conflict over water and
land resources, evacuate schools from armed groups
and restore the rights of our sons and daughters to
education, and we risk our lives on a daily basis to rescue
families trapped in conflict zones. Many members
of the Network play a leading role in alleviating the
suffering of citizens by conducting relief projects and
negotiating the opening of humanitarian corridors.
We are particularly proud to share the news that
the Mothers of Abductees Association, which regularly
demonstrates and calls for the release of its members’
sons while enduring risks and abuse, was able to
secure the release 336 detainees. That is compared to
zero detainees released through the United Nationssponsored process. Other members of the Women’s
Solidarity Network are actively working to stop the
recruitment of children as combatants. They do so
despite the limited means to help those children.
Meanwhile, the United Nations has, since 2016,
suspended its own disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes targeting children, citing
security concerns and awaiting a political solution.
The comprehensive National Dialogue Conference,
organized under the auspices of the United Nations and
supported by the Council, was an important milestone
in the country’s history. Yemeni women participated
effectively to produce a landmark framework and a
charter for their rights and freedoms. That was later
reflected in the draft constitution of 2015 and should
remain fundamental in moving forward with any
political resolution in Yemen.
Although women continue to play a leading role
in peacebuilding, and despite presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/7 of 2017, explicitly calling for the
meaningful inclusion of women, women are still
10/27

16/11/2018

largely excluded from the peace negotiation process.
We attribute that to the patriarchal philosophy of peace
mediation, which rewards violence by granting space at
the negotiation table only to holders of weapons, rather
than the real peacemakers.
We welcome the recent efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen to support the
engagement of women, starting with the expansion of
his gender team and the establishment of the women’s
technical advisory group. However, we emphasize
that women’s engagement must not be restricted to an
advisory role in the mediation efforts. Women must
be meaningfully represented, present at the table and
engaged in decision-making.
We join the many voices calling for a ceasefire and
the resumption of the peace process. We affirm that
there can be no just and sustainable peace without an
inclusive process. As the Council moves forward in its
discussions, resolutions or other actions, we strongly
urge it to adopt the following recommendations.
On security measures, it should demand an
immediate ceasefire, starting by ending the air
bombardments led by the internationally recognized
Government and its allies in the Arab coalition and
pursue confidence-building measures towards restoring
State institutions. It should call for the disarmament of
all outlawed armed groups, demand the relocation of
military camps and depots outside of cities and request
the revival of the local security apparatus.
It should enforce a ban on the Houthis’ use of
landmines, urge them to submit a landmine map,
request the commencement of demining operations
and call for support for landmine victims. It must call
for the prevention of the transfer and use of arms in
Yemen. It should demand the lifting of the restrictions
on ports and the normalization of air traffic in all
governorates, allowing commercial aviation to operate.
It should enforce a ban on child recruitment and request
the immediate revival of the mobilization, disarmament
and reintegration programmes for child combatants. It
should call for the release of all arbitrarily detained and
forcefully disappeared persons, particularly civilians,
politicians, journalists, activists and members of the
Baha’i minority, and demand an end to the issuance of
the death penalty.
It should send peacekeepers to Yemen from neutral
States that have not engaged in any way in the conflict in
Yemen. It must call for immediate action to address the
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8404

logistical challenges preventing the peace negotiations
from taking place, and urge a comprehensive and
inclusive process that is guided by the implementation
mechanism and the National Dialogue Conference. It
should adopt all papers submitted during the National
Dialogue Conference, including the final document
and visions submitted by all groups to inform the
framework for a political solution in Yemen. It must
demand the establishment of an international fund for
the reconstruction of Yemen in a transparent manner,
to be co-financed by the Arab coalition countries and
the international community. It should enact measures
to support economic stability, reconstruction and
the restoration of social services, while urging the
establishment of anti-corruption mechanisms.

representation in the peace consultations process and
address the demands that we sent to him in our letter
of March 2018. It should call for the establishment of
a mechanism to hear the voices of rural women, as
well as women victims and survivors of war, ensuring
that their priorities are integrated into the negotiation
process and the political solution. It should demand
support for women peacemakers and urge the allocation
of funding directly and flexibly to grass-roots women,
activists and women’s movements in order to support
their efforts. It must call for the establishment of a
clear mechanism to protect women and women human
rights defenders and address their integrated protection
needs, including their physical, psychological, digital
and collective security.

It must recognize the rights of southerners through
a just solution that speaks to the demands of the
southern people. It should demand a local ceasefire in
Taiz governorate and support our five-point initiative
to protect civilians in Al-Hudaydah. It must demand
the initiation of resettlement programmes and asylum
facilities to address the situation of Yemenis abroad.
It should request a gender audit of ongoing relief
operations, demand a solution for humanitarian
diversion and reiterate the importance of integrating
gender issues into the humanitarian response plans. It
should demand the establishment of a mechanism to
hold perpetrators accountable within a wider context
of transitional justice and reparations, and impose
individual targeted sanctions against warlords and those
who obstruct the peace process. It should request that
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) include gender expertise and gender-responsive
reporting mechanisms.

We hope that those recommendations will
be adopted and that they will make a significant
contribution to ending the conflict in Yemen. The lack
of action on those recommendations is a moral failure
that contributes to the continued suffering of more than
27 million Yemenis.

On strengthening the engagement of women
policymakers, the Council should recognize the
priorities of women identified in the national agenda
for women and peace and security, submitted in 2016,
and call on the Government to report on the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
It should refer explicitly to resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, as well as subsequent
resolutions, clearly demand no less than 30 per cent
participation by women in delegations and all related
ceasefire and peace processes, and impose vacant seats
if women are not included.
It should mandate an independent women’s
delegation at the peace negotiation table. It should urge
the Special Envoy to ensure that women have equal

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Jarhum for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our four
briefers very much. I do not think that I have ever
heard a more powerful set of briefings and pleas in the
Security Council than those we heard from today. I think
that their words and requests will reverberate around
the Council. So far, the Council has been very united
in its support of the United Nations work in Yemen,
and we expect that to continue. I think, as well, that
there is obviously a very clear joint partnership among
the three United Nations Heads, which is also very
important. If there is any light to be found in this awful
crisis, it lies in their willingness to speak out and work
really closely with one another. Their dedication and
that of their teams and civil society to help the people
of Yemen must be one of the things that the members of
the Council have at the forefront of their minds.
As they described, it is a truly appalling situation
on the ground. The severity of the humanitarian
catastrophe cannot be overstated. Regardless of the
hard work that is needed to redouble efforts in response
to the humanitarian need — and we take into account
everything that was just said about the commercial
needs in order to keep Yemen functioning — it is also

18-3836211/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

clear that we, and they, will not succeed without an
equal effort and commitment on the political track. It
bears repeating once again that only a political solution
will actually bring this dreadful conflict to an end.
We heard about some small positive steps from Martin
Griffiths today, in particular concerning the Central
Bank and the exchange of prisoners. We heard some
good news concerning the United Nations conference
next year. I think that that is very important. But we
have to bear in mind the very sobering descriptions that
David Beasley gave us of what life is like for ordinary
people, including children.
I would like to take this opportunity to say that we
very much agree with what the Special Envoy said about
bringing the parties together without preconditions.
We need the words that we heard to be translated into
concrete action. We need the parties to engage with
the Special Envoy to take part in the consultations that
Martin is setting up and engage constructively so that
ultimately he can pave the way forward towards the
resumption of formal negotiations. What the Special
Envoy said about bringing his framework back to the
Council is very welcome and important. I am sure
that all members of the Council will want to express
their support for all three of his strands of work for the
United Nations, in particular for the political track. It
is obviously vital that talks are inclusive and women
are properly included. The women’s technical advisory
service is a very good step in that direction. It is good
that he is searching for modern ways to put that into
practice. The messages from Rasha Jarhum have been
incredibly important today, and I thank her for taking
the time to come and explain to the Council how it looks
from the perspective of the citizens of Yemen.
My Foreign Secretary was in the region earlier this
week because, like Martin and everyone else here, we
believe that there is a window of opportunity to tackle
this man-made crisis in Yemen. I want to emphasize
the “man-made” aspect by saying that men can resolve
what they have created. I therefore believe that that is
another reason for all possible effort to be put into the
political track. David Beasley exhorted us to act now.
I do not think that there is anyone who can have failed
to have been moved by what David and Rasha told us.
Jeremy Hunt, my Foreign Secretary, has announced
that we will work with Security Council partners.
Mark Lowcock provided us with a very important state
of play with regard to his five asks. Speaking for the
United Kingdom, we support all of them. Secretary
12/27

16/11/2018

Hunt has therefore asked me to say that, as penholder,
we will provide the text of a draft resolution to partners
on the Security Council on Monday, with the intention
of including Mark’s five asks, which all members have
endorsed. I think that it is a very important point, to
include all of Mark’s five asks into practice.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the United Nations World Food
Programme; and Ms. Rasha Jarhum, Founder and
Director of the Peace Track Initiative in Yemen, for
their briefings on the recent developments in Yemen.
In my statement I will underscore two key
issues: developments in the political and security
situation and developments in the humanitarian and
economic situation.
With regard to the political and security
developments, we listened carefully to the briefing by
Mr. Griffiths, who spoke of positive indicators towards
the revitalization of the political track to address the
Yemeni crisis. He said that perhaps an agreement
will soon be reached between the Government and
the Houthis to release prisoners and detainees, a step
which we welcome. It would be an important step
for confidence-building among the Yemeni parties.
In that regard, we welcome the announcement about
the upcoming resumption of political consultations
in Stockholm. We thank the Kingdom of Sweden for
hosting those consultations. At the same time, we hope
that all Yemeni parties will commit to participating
in good faith and without any preconditions in that
round of consultations to allay fears of a repetition
of the consultations in Geneva last September. The
Security Council and the international community, in
particular the coalition States, all supported Geneva
consultations, and those States ceased their military
operations at that time to facilitate the unhindered
participation of Houthis. Unfortunately, the Houthis
failed to participate in the consultations, which left
negative consequences and deepened the catastrophic
crisis at the humanitarian, economic and political levels.
The announcement of the upcoming round of
consultations to be held in Stockholm resulted from
the interest of the coalition States in supporting the
political process with a view to ensuring Yemen’s
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8404

security, stability, unity and sovereignty. That comes
despite major security challenges confronting certain
coalition States by the Houthis, such as threats to
security and safety of the United Arab Emirates and
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which has been struck
by 206 ballistic missiles and more than 68,000 other
projectiles, resulting in the deaths of 112 persons and
hundreds of wounded among the civilian population.

of the Yemeni Government in that regard, and given
the growing challenges, it has responded to the appeals
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs by suspending the implementation of its Decree
75 of 2018 owing to its potential to hinder imports.
The Government has also confirmed its willingness
to continue to cooperate with United Nations agencies
and bodies.

Concerning the latest military operations in
Al-Hudaydah, I recall resolution 2216 (2015), which
in paragraph 1 calls on the Houthis to withdraw from
cities under their control and refrain from any actions
that are the prerogatives of the legitimate Government.
We hope that the upcoming round of consultations will
lead to a political solution based on the three previously
agreed terms of reference, so as to end the crisis and
restore security and stability in Yemen.

The brotherly Yemeni people continue to bear
humanitarian suffering despite the great financial
and in-kind contributions from the international
community, which most recently included the holding
of a donor conference in Geneva in April. Kuwait
donated $250 million at the conference for United
Nations field agencies and international organizations
working in Yemen. That was in addition to the
flexible and cooperative role of the joint leadership
of the coalition States, which issued more than 67,000
permits to ensure aid delivery throughout Yemen.
The international community explains that the reason
for the continued humanitarian suffering in Yemen is
rooted in the deliberate attempts to block, seize and loot
such assistance. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
determination, as stated by Mr. Lowcock in his briefing,
to convene a conference in February 2019 in order to
support the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Kuwait
looks forward to participating in that conference.

With regard to the humanitarian and economic
developments, we are deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, as Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley briefed us, warning of food insecurity
soon, while 14 million of the brotherly Yemeni people
would be at risk of that threat. The reason is the failure
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the persistent armed conflict, which has created a
war-time economy, marked by the inability to disburse
citizens’ salaries and deterioration in the buying power
of the national currency as a result of the unprecedented
collapse of the rate of exchange of Yemeni rial against
foreign currencies. The international community must
therefore shoulder a major responsibility to provide
the Yemeni Government with the needed assistance in
order to ensure the success of its policy to prevent a
further deterioration of the national currency and be
able to continue to pay salaries across Yemen.
In that connection, we commend the significant
and continuing role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
which on several occasions has disbursed considerable
amounts of money to the Central Bank of Yemen,
totalling approximately $3.2 billion. In addition, The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Government of the
United Arab Emirates, in coordination with UNICEF,
have also made $75 million available to support the
payment of salaries for more than 135,000 teachers
across Yemen.
That economic assistance has made significant
improvement in the exchange rate of the Yemeni rial
against foreign currencies. Despite the constructive role

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates its
belief that there can only be a political solution to the
crisis in Yemen. We are keen to support the political
operation that will put an end to the suffering of our
brotherly Yemeni people. Kuwait has expressed its
readiness to provide logistical support to ensure the
participation of all in the round of consultations to be
held in Stockholm. We will also continue to support the
efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths and all other efforts
based on the three political terms of reference, namely,
the Gulf Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015). That would ensure Yemen’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and
non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, as
well as Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their briefings, which provide us with

18-3836213/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

a very clear framework for analysis and action. I also
thank Mr. Beasley and Ms. Jarhum for their important
briefings on the situation in Yemen, which is more
worrisome than ever.
France believes that, when confronted with the
increasingly devastating humanitarian tragedy in
Yemen, we have the collective responsibility, and now
an opportunity, to put an end to the war and pave the
way for a political solution. Despite the scope of the
problems, there is a window of opportunity today
that the Security Council must take advantage of by
doing all it can to support the necessary cessation of
hostilities and the Special Envoy’s mediation efforts. In
that connection, I would like to turn to the situation in
Al-Hudaydah, which is the tipping point for the situation
in Yemen, and touch upon the constant deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.
Recent clashes and bombardments, which have
claimed the lives of many people, are endangering
civilians, especially women and children, as well as
endangering civilian infrastructure and blocking aid
delivery routes. The ongoing daily deterioration of
the humanitarian situation is pushing us ever closer
to total disaster, while the latest estimates point to
widespread famine, a large-scale cholera epidemic
and the possibility that several generations of Yemenis
will be completely deprived of an education. In that
respect, military pauses are a means of reducing the
intensity of clashes and fostering a positive climate for
the resumption of political discussions, but it is clear
that we must go further.
My second point is that it is more important than
ever to respond to Mr. Lowcock’s five specific asks.
That must be our top priority. The Council must call for
a lasting cessation of hostilities as soon as possible and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
especially if it is critical to the country’s economy. The
access and delivery of humanitarian aid and imports,
including between Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah, as well as
the stabilization and recovery of the Yemeni economy,
are essential, as was so eloquently voiced earlier.
Humanitarian and medical personnel who operate
in a high-risk environment must not only be protected,
but must be able to plan their operations and implement
them safely. I would like to reiterate our full support
for the efforts of humanitarian actors, who work in
particularly difficult conditions. We also commend the
14/27

16/11/2018

work of the United Nations and all the teams involved
to develop a single road map on the humanitarian
dimension in relation to the World Bank, the
humanitarian response plan and the new Famine Early
Warning Systems Network, which must be adequately
financed, as Mr. Lowcock indicated. Finally, I would
like to reiterate France’s full support for Special
Envoy Griffiths. I thank him for his tireless efforts to
resume negotiations in order to reach an inclusive and
lasting political solution. France resolutely stands with
Mr. Griffiths.
We believe, again, that there is now a real window of
opportunity to relaunch a credible political process — the
only solution to the crisis in Yemen. The humanitarian
tragedy looming over the country must compel us to
act. As the Special Envoy indicated, several obstacles
have been removed, such as the sensitive issue of the
evacuation of wounded Houthis, which is an important
step towards ensuring that the Houthis are present at the
negotiating table. We therefore encourage the Special
Envoy to continue discussions with all parties with a
view to making further progress on confidence-building
measures. The momentum must be maintained. We are
ready to collaborate on a draft resolution to respond
to the humanitarian emergency by fully endorsing
Mr. Lowcock’s five asks and supporting the efforts of
Mr. Griffiths to reach a sustainable, comprehensive and
inclusive agreement. In that connection, as Ms. Jarhum
noted, women’s participation in resolving the Yemeni
crisis is essential.
We therefore call on the parties to engage with the
Special Envoy immediately, without conditions and in
good faith. We call on all those involved to facilitate
that work, and we welcome the recent announcements
of support for the United Nations process made by
stakeholders in the region. The quest for a solution
is becoming more urgent every day. For millions of
Yemenis, it is now a very real question of life or death.
France will remain fully committed in that regard.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, Mr. David Beasley and Ms. Rasha
Jarhum for their briefings.
We first want to note the reduction of violence
around the Yemeni port of Al-Hudaydah. We believe
it is essential to work to establish a full, countrywide
cessation of hostilities, which is important not only
to ensure the reliable delivery of humanitarian and
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8404

commercial goods to the northern areas of Yemen where
the majority of the country’s population lives, but also
to achieve the successful implementation of the Special
Envoy’s plans to hold a round of negotiations in Sweden.
We welcome the progress that Mr. Griffiths has made
in getting the parties to resume a dialogue and show
flexibility on confidence-building measures, including
the exchange of prisoners and other steps. We hope
the planned talks will be substantive and help to make
the political process sustainable. We do not expect the
disagreements to end quickly. Years of confrontation
have created a gulf that will not be easy to bridge. We
will continue to assist Mr. Griffiths through bilateral
channels, in our capacity as a permanent member of the
Security Council and also a member of the group of 19
States supporting international efforts for a settlement
in Yemen.

Yemen. The fight against terrorism is our shared task
and we must take every possible measure to end its
threat.

Our position remains the same. We continue
to call for a plan for a negotiated solution to the
conflict in Yemen. The parties must show restraint
and refrain from resorting to force. The history of the
Yemeni conflict shows that the military efforts are
not working. Every day of war cranks up the cost of
Yemen’s post-conflict reconstruction. We condemn
the indiscriminate strikes on civilian targets and
ballistic-missile attacks on Yemen’s neighbours. We
support ensuring unconditional compliance with the
relevant provisions of international humanitarian law
and unfettered humanitarian access to all parts of the
country. The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
critical. A majority of the population is in need of
assistance of one sort or another. Millions of Yemenis
are starving and have no way of obtaining the medical
services and medicines they need. We must make
humanitarian assistance to Yemen a priority in our joint
work and it must be provided on a non-discriminatory
basis, regardless of who controls the territories where
Yemenis live.

After four years of fighting in Yemen, the civilian
population is now facing a true humanitarian tragedy.
Millions of Yemenis are living under the threat of food
insecurity and are prey to famine and malnutrition,
while civilians with no access to safe drinking water
and basic or emergency health care are dealing with
waterborne diseases and the risk of epidemics. In
that regard, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its deep concern
about the intensified fighting, as a result of which the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate. We
welcome and encourage the efforts of United Nations
bodies and agencies to bring an end to the deadly
clashes and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and emergency relief.

The international community is actively assisting
the people of Yemen. While Russia is contributing to
that effort, like many other Member States, we realize
that it is impossible to improve the situation in Yemen
through humanitarian measures alone. The solution
must be a political one. We now need to unite around
the Special Envoy and help him work proactively
with all of the actors involved in the Yemeni conflict.
The war is only playing into the hands of the various
terrorists who have been taking advantage of the chaos
to strengthen their positions in central and southern

In conclusion, we want to express the hope
that policies of confrontation, threats and pressure
through sanctions will give way to collective efforts
to create regional dialogue mechanisms, as well as a
comprehensive and indivisible security architecture in
the Middle East, both for the Arab States of the Persian
Gulf and their neighbours. Russia’s vision in that regard
remains relevant and much needed.
Mr. Ipo (Cote d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Mr. David Beasley and Ms. Rasha Jarum for
their informative briefings on the latest developments
in the political and humanitarian situations in Yemen.

In view of this deplorable and disturbing situation,
we reaffirm our support for all the international
community’s initiatives to resolve the crisis in Yemen.
In that regard, we call on all the parties to the conflict
to participate in the consultations soon to be held in
Stockholm, led by Special Envoy Griffiths, to whom we
affirm our full support. In that regard, my country calls
on the opposing parties to observe the ceasefire in the
port city of Al-Hudaydah, the epicentre of the crisis, to
allow both for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and for giving peace a chance. We also urge all the
Yemeni parties to fully engage in frank negotiations
and make the compromises needed to achieve a lasting
settlement to the crisis within the framework of the
parameters established by the Security Council.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls for united action
by the Council with a view to reaching a peaceful and

18-3836215/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

definitive settlement to the conflict as soon as possible
and in the interests of the people.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank all of our briefers.
I really want to echo the point made by my United
Kingdom colleague about what a powerful message
they have passed on to us again today. I thank them
and their colleagues on the ground for all the work they
are doing — and that includes Ms. Rasha Jarum — to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people and bring
an end to that war.
During the most recent Council meeting on
Yemen on 23 October (see S/PV.8379), Mr. Lowcock
warned that 14 million people — half of the Yemeni
population — could risk famine if the military
escalation and economic crisis continued. Should we
reach that point, he added, most of the innocent civilians
losing their lives would be women and children. Since
then, and despite those warnings, the situation has
deteriorated further, as we have just heard. The armed
conflict has intensified, with dramatic increases in air
strikes, shelling, attacks and fighting in residential
areas. I want to express our huge appreciation for the
work of all the humanitarian agencies that are operating
under those terribly difficult circumstances. With
civilians getting caught in the crossfire and civilian
infrastructure coming under attack, there have been
scores of civilian casualties. Hundreds of thousands of
Yemen’s most vulnerable citizens are now trapped in
active conflict zones, and in Al-Hudaydah more than
half of them are children. There have also been further
disruptions to the life-saving distribution network of
humanitarian and commercial goods.
To the extent that there is a certain lull in the attacks,
it must be sustained. A continued offensive would only
prolong the suffering of the Yemeni people and move
us further from a negotiated political settlement. As
we have heard, we have a window of opportunity right
now, and our focus must be on ending the fighting and
getting the parties to the table. Political consultations,
led by the Special Envoy, represent our best chance of
reaching a turning point in the conflict, moving towards
a political solution and alleviating the suffering. We
must focus on that joint objective immediately.
Today, our briefers from the United Nations have
again put the ongoing tragedy on our desks, as well as
presenting us with the immediate steps needed to save
lives, improve the humanitarian situation and create
the conditions necessary for a political solution. As
16/27

16/11/2018

stated before, we fully support the five interventions
outlined by Mark Lowcock and their individual and
collective endorsement. We look forward to working
with everyone to translate that commitment into a
Security Council resolution and we stand ready in that
regard. We believe that there is strong unity in the
Council around such requests. We now need to rally
behind the following.
The first step is a cessation of hostilities around
infrastructure and facilities for humanitarian aid and
commercial imports. All parties have the responsibility
to protect civilians and civilian objects and to take all
feasible steps to prevent and minimize harm, particularly
to schools, medical care and humanitarian personnel.
Secondly, the parties must be called upon to engage
in good faith with the political consultations brought
about by Martin Griffiths. It will be important to
ensure the representation and effective participation of
women in that process from the start for all the reasons
mentioned by Ms. Jarhum today.
Thirdly, it is important to ensure humanitarian
and commercial access. Yemen’s ports and roads
must be kept open and safe. All parties are obliged to
respect international humanitarian law and to ensure
humanitarian access.
Fourthly,
it
is
necessary
to
pursue
confidence-building measures, including those relating
to Sana’a airport, the Central Bank of Yemen and other
economic measures, as well as prisoners. Mr. Griffiths
also has our strong support in all that he is doing in
that regard.
The futile war in Yemen has been going on for far
too long, leading to immense suffering and thousands
dead. The recent developments provide a window of
opportunity that must now be seized. A united and
active Security Council can make a difference. Our
focus should be on supporting the United Nations efforts
to immediately address the dire humanitarian situation
and on ensuring that the political consultations get off
to a good start.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings by Martin Griffiths, Mark
Lowcock, David Beasley and Rasha Jarhum, who, from
different perspectives, have agreed in describing a
distressing situation that needs the urgent support of
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the international community and the rapid action of the
Security Council.
Peru notes with deep concern the destructive cycle
that has taken root in Yemen, where spiralling violence
such as that seen in recent weeks is followed by brief
periods of tense calm, while the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world today and regional instability
continue to worsen. Approximately 22 million people,
three of every four Yemenis, require humanitarian
assistance. The extreme vulnerability of the population,
exacerbated by the collapse of public services and the
economy, is claiming more lives than military action
and creating conditions conducive to violent extremism
that leads to terrorism.
As was pointed out to us, the situation is particularly
fragile in Al-Hudaydah, which, even before the most
recent escalation, saw the worst conditions in terms
of food and health care, including 100,000 cases of
girls and boys under 5 years of age with severe acute
malnutrition. Many of the 300,000 civilians left in the
city live in the worst conditions, unable to pay the cost
of transport to flee the fighting. The bombings in recent
weeks have continued to cause fatalities, including
children, and to destroy the health infrastructure.
We deplore the evil pursuit of the conflict and
the repeated violations of international humanitarian
law that have been committed by all parties, while
the Security Council has failed to fully assume its
responsibility to protect the civilian population by
imposing a humanitarian ceasefire and ensuring
due accountability.
We wish to express our full support for every
humanitarian worker of the United Nations and the
other agencies deployed in Yemen and to once again
emphasize the moral and legal duty to allow their full
access to those in need. At the same time, we must point
out that that will be possible only as we make progress
on the political track.
The looming widespread famine and the exponential
increase in cases of cholera and other diseases show the
urgent need to acknowledge with deeds and actions, not
only with words, that there is no military solution to
the conflict, as well as the necessity for consistency in
prioritizing the protection of civilians.
That requires the Yemeni parties committing to
participating without preconditions and in good faith in
inclusive negotiations sponsored by the United Nations.

S/PV. 8404

We therefore welcome the fact that the members of
the coalition and other actors involved in the conflict
have decided to support that course of action with the
meeting to be held in Sweden in the coming days.
We also emphasize that the members of the Council
are united in supporting a political solution and in
believing that that is possible. That should spur us to
express our full support to Mr. Griffiths, emphasizing
the need to act rapidly, pragmatically and fairly.
We also emphasize the urgent need for the Council
and the parties to the conflict to meet Mr. Lowcock’s
five requests, including implementing an immediate
cessation of all hostilities, and to ensure full access
for the humanitarian assistance and commercial goods
needed by the population.
We wish to highlight the important steps taken
recently by countries with influence over the parties
aimed at building the necessary trust to bring the
parties closer together and take the conflict back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible. We particularly
welcome the confidence-building measures that the
Special Envoy has been supporting, such as the transfer
of the wounded and the exchange of prisoners.
I conclude by reaffirming Peru’s commitment to
achieving a sustainable peace in Yemen and our full
support for the swift adoption of a resolution by the
Council that would help to put an end to one of the
worst humanitarian tragedies created not by nature but
by the violence and callousness of humankind itself.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking all the briefers for their valuable contributions
to our discussion today. My particular thanks go to
Mr. Griffiths for his continued efforts to relaunch the
political process in Yemen. Poland holds in the highest
regard his engagement with the parties to the conflict,
the relevant stakeholders and civil society in order to
pave the way for a political dialogue in Yemen.
As Yemen is on the brink of the worst famine
in 100 years and military operations are escalating
despite the looming humanitarian catastrophe, we
now find ourselves on the verge of a disaster. The
conflict cannot continue any longer. Thinking that
it can be solved by military means and by the use of
force is a delusion. Instead, what is urgently needed
to avert the human-caused catastrophe is diplomacy,
mediation, the engagement of all the relevant parties
and regional countries and the meaningful support of

18-3836217/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

the international community, including the Security
Council. We can no longer limit ourselves to meetings in
the Chamber and discussions of the disastrous situation
in Yemen without taking concrete actions. Words will
not save the lives of the Yemeni children who die from
hunger and disease on a daily basis.
History shows that where there is a will, there is
a way. We therefore strongly urge all parties to the
conflict to show goodwill, flexibility and readiness
to compromise and to engage with the Special
Envoy without preconditions. We call on all relevant
stakeholders to make progress on confidence-building
measures and to participate in the next round of
consultations under the auspices of the United Nations.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our full
support for Mr. Griffiths, in particular his vision for the
political consultations. We also express our appreciation
for the diplomatic efforts undertaken by the members
of the Council aimed at creating conditions conducive
to peace consultations. We are also ready to engage
constructively in negotiations on the draft resolution
proposed by the United Kingdom.
The catastrophic humanitarian situation in Yemen,
as thoroughly described by Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock, and the continuing deterioration of security
conditions in the country require decisive and unified
action by the Council. Therefore, we express our full
support for the five points raised by Mr. Lowcock
during the briefing on 23 October (see S/PV.8379) and
urge their swift implementation.
We particularly call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, especially in and around the infrastructure
and facilities on which humanitarian operations
and commercial deliveries rely. We remain gravely
alarmed by the recent escalation of fighting in the
city of Al-Hudaydah. We urge both the Houthis and
the coalition to immediately de-escalate and cease all
military activities in the whole governorate. I would
like to stress once again that Al-Hudaydah constitutes a
critical supply chain for humanitarian and commercial
deliveries. Any disruption of that vital lifeline will
contribute significantly to the spread of famine, thereby
putting the lives of millions of Yemenis in jeopardy.
We condemn in the strongest terms all actions that
impede the delivery of humanitarian aid to Yemen,
as well as the transfer, storage and distribution of
life-saving supplies.
18/27

16/11/2018

Moreover, I would like to stress the imperative for
the following actions to be immediately taken by all
the parties to the conflict: guaranteeing unimpeded
access and movement for vital imports into and across
the whole country, ensuring the full and sustained
functioning of all Yemen’s ports and the Sana’a airport,
respecting the principles of international humanitarian
law and the ensuring of the protection of civilians,
respecting the principles of proportionality and
distinction, and, finally, ensuring the inclusion and
involvement in the peace process of all relevant groups
of Yemeni society, including meaningful participation
by women in peace consultations.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that all the
parties to the conflict in Yemen and regional actors
have reiterated their commitment to finding a political
solution to the conflict and their readiness to return to
the negotiating table. The time has come to live up to
those declarations.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I especially
thank today’s briefers for their exceptionally sobering,
compelling and powerful presentations. As always, we
are grateful for the hard work that they and their teams
do on the ground every day in Yemen.
While these briefings add devastating clarity to our
view of the crisis, they also reinforce the central lesson
from over four years of conflict: the only enduring
solution to this man-made — yes, man-made — crisis
is a political settlement. This war must end soon, and
it will not end on the battlefield. As United States
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has made clear, the
United States seeks a cessation of hostilities in Yemen.
With that lesson in mind, the United States renews
its call on parties to the conflict to engage with Special
Envoy Griffiths as soon as possible, and its call on all
Member States to assist. We are fully supportive of the
Special Envoy’s work to bring the parties to the table
for consultations to discuss a framework for a political
settlement to this war. The parties need to stop debating
conditions for talks, and instead sit down at the table and
engage on the Special Envoy’s reasonable proposals. We
furthermore welcome the Special Envoy’s offer to share
the framework with the Council when appropriate.
We also welcome reports of progress towards
allowing select wounded Houthis to travel to Oman for
medical care. We expect that the coalition and Oman
will do everything they can to support that arrangement.
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Special Envoy Martin Griffiths has worked for
months to build an environment conducive for the
consultations to begin. The Houthis must reciprocate
immediately, without additional preconditions, and
agree to participate in political consultations with the
coalition in Sweden as soon as possible.
As political talks take place, the parties must ensure
that the flow of assistance and commercial goods
remains unimpeded. Fighting around Al-Hudaydah
has shown us the immense risk of escalation. It is
irresponsible for the Houthis to place their fighters on
the rooftops of hospitals, warehouses and other civilian
infrastructure. Thousands of civilians are threatened by
the fighting, and it is getting harder and harder to move
supplies from the port to the Yemenis who need it.
It is particularly important that the parties take no
steps that could make this precarious situation worse.
The Houthis need to lift the wide range of bureaucratic
obstacles that make deliveries of assistance difficult and
stop interfering with United Nations relief efforts. Both
sides of the conflict must help facilitate the movement
of aid workers and journalists. The mistreatment of
Baha’i and adherents of other religions must stop.
We also call on the Yemeni Government to work
with its partners to stabilize the Yemeni rial and re-build
the capacity of the Central Bank. It is critical that the
Government avoid taking any steps, even inadvertently,
that could make it harder for importers to get food and
fuel into the country.
There can be no more excuses for delaying work
on a settlement. We know that for the millions of
Yemenis facing the risk of starvation and disease
there is no substitute for immediate humanitarian
relief. We commend the tireless efforts, in dangerous
circumstances, by David Beasley, the World Food
Programme and its implementing partners and Lise
Grande and her team on the ground.
The United States will continue its leadership
in supporting critical aid and efforts to address the
economic crisis. We urge all Member States to join us
in that work. It is work that must happen regardless of
the state of the conflict. In the same vein, we remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations under the
law of armed conflict, including the obligation to take
all feasible precautions to minimize the risk of harm to
civilians and civilian infrastructure.

S/PV. 8404

The Security Council remains deeply divided on
many issues, but as we are hearing today, not so on
Yemen. All of us around this table have emphasized
a common theme: that the time for progress on the
political track is now, that we stand behind Special
Envoy Griffiths and his efforts and that we are united
in our demand for Mr. Lowcock’s five asks, including
for unfettered humanitarian access and for a cessation
of hostilities. The United States and the members of
the Council will be watching the situation closely in
the weeks to come, particularly whether the parties
cooperate with the Special Envoy’s work. We must all
use our collective and individual influence to make
sure that they do.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock, Executive Director David Beasley and
Ms. Rasha Jarhum for their respective briefings,
which highlighted how the humanitarian crisis and the
fighting in Yemen remain a source of grave concern.
We are indeed moved by their powerful speeches.
Those of us who have experienced hunger of biblical
proportions in the past heard them loud and clear. The
four of them told us the facts on the ground. They spoke
sincerely and allowed us to rediscover for ourselves
how weak and vulnerable we are of our own making
as humans. We believe it is high time to find a durable
political solution that could sustainably address the
daily suffering of millions of Yemenis.
While there was a marked increase in clashes
at the beginning of this month, particularly in
Al-Hudaydah city, causing civilian deaths and injuries
and displacement, as well as the destruction of civilian
facilities, we note that the intensity of the violence has
now been reduced. Reports indicate that the coalition
has halted its military operations in Al-Hudaydah. We
hope that will lead to a sustained ceasefire.
The increasing number of voices calling for ending
the war in Yemen lately is something that needs to be
welcomed. As the Secretary-General stressed in his
statement on 2 November,
“on the political side, there are signs of hope.
We must do all we can to maximize the chances
for success.”
We concur with the Secretary-General that the
international community should act together
to stop the violence and prevent an imminent
humanitarian catastrophe.

18-3836219/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

We believe that that can be done by fully supporting
the continued diplomatic endeavours of Special Envoy
Griffiths. We appreciate that the Special Envoy has
continued to make preparations for the upcoming
round of consultations to revive the political talks. We
also welcome the readiness of the parties to engage
with him. In that regard, we underscore that the
continued and sustained de-escalation of violence and
restraint would be absolutely vital in order to create an
enabling environment for the political process. We also
encourage the United Nations to re-engage the parties
on a negotiated outcome on the Al-Hudaydah port,
which should remain open and operational, as it is a
lifeline for millions of Yemenis.
We call on all parties to resolve their differences at
the United Nations-facilitated political process, which
we believe is the only solution to address the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Yemen and respond to the
legitimate security concerns of countries in the region.
The Council should also continue to provide its political
backing to the Special Envoy. In that regard, the unity
of the Council is imperative.
While it is time to seize this opportunity to relaunch
the political process, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners should also be supported as they
continue to operate in extremely difficult circumstances.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has pointed out that the humanitarian movement and
access to warehouses and people in need have become
more difficult or impossible in some cases. Therefore,
safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access
remains absolutely vital to enable them to provide the
much-needed humanitarian assistance to all in need.
The protection of civilians and civilian facilities is also
critical. Protecting the supply of food and essential
goods, addressing the economic difficulties, including
the payment of civil servants, and increasing funding
for humanitarian operations would also be critical to
alleviate the humanitarian tragedy in Yemen.
In conclusion, for the sake of civilians, who have
suffered enormously, it is time to accelerate coordinated
efforts to revitalize the Yemeni-owned and Yemeniled political process under the auspices of the United
Nations, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015).
The upcoming peace talks in Sweden will provide an
opportunity to make progress. The parties must be
called upon to demonstrate the necessary political will
and commitment to participating in the talks.
20/27

16/11/2018

The Council should be able to speak with one voice
in calling for an end to the war in Yemen and the need
to address the humanitarian situation as a matter of
urgency. We look forward to engaging constructively
in the upcoming discussions on the proposed draft
resolution by the United Kingdom.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefing
delivered by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, whose presence we
wish to take advantage of in expressing our full support
for his tireless efforts to achieve a solution through
dialogue to the conflict in Yemen. We are also grateful
for the briefings delivered by Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the United Nations World Food
Programme; and Ms. Rasha Jarhum.
The effect of the words of all the briefers cannot
be called anything other than shame. The international
community should be ashamed of the degree of
suffering we have allowed, which continues in Yemen
to this day. The historians of the future will be able
to see the case of Yemen and will be able to study in
this case everything that is wrong and failing in the
economic, political, commercial and international
relations mechanisms of the first decades of the twentyfirst century. If we allow this country to continue on
that course of destruction, suffering and death without
taking effective and immediate action today, I believe
that all of us will have many reasons to feel shame.
My delegation expresses its deep concern about the
alarming escalation of violence in Yemen, especially
the bombing and air strikes that have resulted from
military campaigns in the city of Al-Hudaydah, which
to date have generated more than 445,000 internally
displaced persons. It is disturbing that, while by
the end of 2017 the number of fatalities resulting
from the conflict amounted to more than 10,000
people — according to official data published by the
World Health Organization —at present, even without
an official update, that number could have quintupled.
Moreover, that statistic is dwarfed if we take into
account the victims of diseases and hunger that this
fully man-made humanitarian crisis is generating. On
that point, it is worth reflecting on the technology and
the origin of the weapons, missiles and bombs that are
deployed in Yemen, which are being used in attacks
against hospitals, markets, public spaces, buses full
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

of children and even wedding celebrations and are
costing the lives of thousands of innocent civilians. If
we want to talk about resolving the conflict in Yemen
peaceably and through dialogue, then those transfers
and sale of arms, missiles and bombs must stop. We
appeal to the sense of humanity and responsibility of
the international community in that regard.
We also regret that, as a result of clashes, access
to the port of Al-Hudaydah has been compromised,
while the planting of antipersonnel mines jeopardizes
the integrity and safety of port workers as well as the
humanitarian assistance that enters through the port.
Due to this serious situation, several humanitarian aid
agencies, including the World Food Program and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, can access neither the 51,000 metric tons of
wheat that are stored in the Red Sea Mills nor to the
warehouses where humanitarian assistance goods and
articles are stored.
Also, according to a report by the United Nations
Population Fund, the lives of more than 1,500 of the
10,000 pregnant women trapped in the middle of the
clashes in the city of Al-Hudaydah could be put at
risk if the only hospital in the city that can provide
emergency care becomes inaccessible. We would refer
to the Al-Thawra hospital, which was struck by the
remains of a missile last week and which, despite the
violence, continues to provide its services, including to
59 children, 25 of them in intensive care.
We remind the parties that any attack or military
campaign that targets civilians, public spaces,
homes or medical and educational centres, as well
as the launching of missiles and the deployment of
antipersonnel mines, run counter to international law
and international humanitarian law. As such, those
actions could constitute crimes against humanity that
can be investigated and sanctioned by the corresponding
international tribunals. On the other hand, we see
with great concern that armed forces that are part of
the coalition and have bases on Yemeni territory are
repressing and causing fatalities among civilians who
oppose their presence, as occurred in the Al-Mahrah
governorate in recent days.
We reiterate that an attack or military campaign
against the city and port of Al-Hudaydah would not
only seriously affect the more than 22 million people
currently in need of humanitarian assistance; it
would also increase the number of such people to an

S/PV. 8404

unsustainable scale, thereby dangerously increasing the
number of people at risk of famine from 8 to 13 million.
We therefore call on the parties involved in the conflict
to refrain from attacking or jeopardizing the security,
integrity and operability of the port and the city of
Al-Hudaydah, as well as restricting or preventing
the deployment of humanitarian assistance. We also
call on the Yemeni authorities to avoid restrictions or
administrative obstacles affecting the entry of imports
of essential foods such as wheat, rice, sugar and milk,
among others. The military and military actions in
Yemen only transgress and weaken the efforts that
our Organization, and the Special Envoy in particular,
has been making to establish a dialogue that brings
the parties closer to achieve a negotiated solution to
the conflict.
The Council must therefore emphatically reiterate
to the parties that compliance with its resolutions,
particularly resolution 2216 (2015), is mandatory. We
therefore call on all of the actors and parties involved
to end the violence immediately and engage in all the
Special Envoy’s initiatives to relaunch the dialogue to
reach a political a solution that will satisfy the demands
and aspirations of the Yemeni people, with respect
for their sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. To that end, the commitment of the parties
without preconditions is essential.
In conclusion, we reiterate our delegation’s support
for the consultations and dialogue process initiated
by the Special Envoy as an important step to steer
the political negotiation process towards a peaceful
resolution of the situation in Yemen.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen;
Mr.
Mark
Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the United Nations World Food Programme; and
Ms. Rasha Jarhum, Founder and Director of the Peace
Track Initiative Yemen, for their excellent, enlightening
and poignant briefings.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following the clashes that have characterized the power
struggle in Yemen for years. Their persistence and
development are worrisome to such a degree that they
call for the increased attention of the members of the
Security Council and the international community.

18-3836221/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

Despite all efforts carried out since its beginning,
the situation of the civilian population has not seen
any improvement in stability. Recently, Al-Thawra
Hospital — the main health-care facility serving
Al-Hudaydah — was shut down, and its patients fled
owing to the proximity of the clashes related to the
offensive of the Yemeni Government and its allies
against the Houthi rebels. We are deeply concerned about
the persistent and widespread insecurity encroaching
upon the civilian population of the areas most affected
by the conflict, who live in daily fear of being hit by a
stray bullet and worried that members of their families
will not return home after a day’s work. In most cases
marked by years-long deprivation, inability to pay for
food, lack of health care and inability to attend school
regularly, we would expect to see a people in the throes
of desperation. Although they have been faced by that
reality, we admire the fact that the people continue to
do everything they can to draw on their energy and deal
with the situation despite the fact that war and the fear
of death continue to confront them daily.
My delegation calls on the parties to the conflict to
respect international humanitarian law, while bearing in
mind that, at the most recent Security Council meeting
on this subject in October (see S/PV.8379), Mr. Lowcock
spoke of the more than 5,000 recorded violations of
international humanitarian law since late May — a
significantly large number — including heavy civilian
casualties and the destruction and damage to critical
civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals, electricity
and water systems, markets, roads and bridges, among
others. During that same meeting, he mentioned
delays in issuing visas, restrictions on the importation
of equipment and cargo, retractions of permits,
interference in humanitarian assessment exercises,
interference in monitoring and other obstructions that
limit the ability of humanitarian agencies to provide
vital assistance to innocent civilians.
Given the situation, we are convinced that hostilities
in proximity to all infrastructure and facilities on
which providing assistance and commercial imports
depend must cease. It is undeniable that a humanitarian
ceasefire would reflect the obligations of the parties
to the conflict to uphold international humanitarian
law and to do everything possible to facilitate the
provision of humanitarian assistance. My delegation
acknowledges and is grateful for the efforts of the
World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations
Children’s Fund, the World Food Programme and other
22/27

16/11/2018

agencies to attenuate the threat of cholera and famine,
including WHO’s delivery of cholera vaccines to more
than half a million Yemenis in October.
In conclusion, we support the mediation efforts
of the Special Envoy Griffiths. We believe that his
initiative to launch the negotiation process is important
to our shared goal of bringing peace to Yemen — a
proposal that we hope will enjoy the full approval of the
opposing parties to the conflict. We ask the members of
the Council to remain united and support Mr. Lowcock’s
requests here so that they can work to the benefit of the
Yemeni people.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation joins
others in expressing thanks to Special Envoy Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, Executive Director
Beasley and social protection specialist Jarhum for
their insightful, eloquent and informative updates.
Kazakhstan is closely following the recent developments
and would like to make three points today.
First, Kazakhstan expresses its grave concern
about the humanitarian crisis, which has continued
to worsen because of the recent military escalation
and a severe and rapid economic crisis, bringing the
country closer to the world’s worst famine in more than
a century, while endangering daily the lives of millions
of people in Yemen. We were moved by the grave
assessments of Mark Lowcock and David Beasley of
the horrifying humanitarian situation in the country.
Kazakhstan strongly supports the United Nations calls
on all parties for a ceasefire, to safeguard civilian
lives, prevent deaths and injuries, allow freedom of
movement and protect hospitals, clinics and schools,
in accordance with international humanitarian law
and human rights law. In that regard, we back all of
Mr. Lowcock’s five points to be implemented in order
to avert a humanitarian disaster.
Secondly, we urge all parties in Yemen to find
compromises and reject unilateral decisions that could
harm the peace process. The search for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict should be intensified, and an
urgent, universal ceasefire must be reached without
preconditions. The prospects for talks to end Yemen’s
devastating war have become more real after Saudi
Arabia recently confirmed its willingness to evacuate
50 wounded Houthi fighters, as a confidence-building
measure. Kazakhstan calls on the Yemeni parties to
seize this opportunity to de-escalate tensions and to
participate fully, constructively and in good faith in
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

order to build confidence among them and take a step
towards ending the conflict. In that regard, we were
encouraged by the Special Envoy’s announcement of
the agreement reached by three parties to the conflict
on the exchange of prisoners of war and detainees.
Thirdly, we believe that a revamped, regional
approach is needed to uphold the ceasefire and promote
the peace process. We commend the Special Envoy’s
attempts to involve different States of the Middle
East and the Gulf region in that process. We welcome
the recent productive meetings of the Special Envoy
with the Government of Yemen and regional players,
including the senior leaders of the Houthi Ansar
Allah movement, which will help to reach the desired
agreement. The support of neighbouring countries is
critical and must be sought to work for a violence-free
Yemen. While working on the political front, the
international community should focus equally on
mobilizing resources for alleviating the humanitarian
crisis. Ultimately, the negative impact of the economic
crisis must be overcome with greater financial aid
and investments in development to help Yemen
reach stability.
Finally, Kazakhstan expresses its unconditional
support for the Special Envoy’s efforts and urges parties
to engage in good faith and without preconditions in
the political process. We agree with Rasha Jarhum
that the involvement of women and civil society is
important, and their recommendations should be taken
into consideration. We also call upon the parties to the
conflict to demonstrate flexibility in order to avoid
disagreements and properly resolve complex issues.
We believe that a negotiated, United Nations-facilitated
political settlement, through inclusive intra-Yemeni
dialogue, is the only solution, and that all measures
must proceed in that direction. Kazakhstan is ready to
work on the text of a relevant draft resolution to help
resolve the Yemeni conflict.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Martin Griffiths, Mark Lowcock, David Beasley and
Rasha Jarhum for their impressive and convincing
briefings. They presented us with a grave description
of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Their strong
words underline the urgency of the Security Council’s
action and decision-making. They made it clear that
we need a peaceful, sustainable political solution.
In that context, I will focus on three issues — first,
conflict and hunger; secondly, the responsibility of the

S/PV. 8404

international community; and, thirdly, the urgent need
for a political solution.
On my first point, there is a vicious cycle of conflict
and hunger in armed conflicts around the world. In May
(see S/PV.8267), the Council unanimously adopted a
resolution we facilitated (resolution 2417 (2018)) that
called on all of us to break that cycle. In that context,
the end of extreme hunger in Yemen ultimately depends
on our collective political will.
The situation in Yemen is compounded by
interference with United Nations depots, continued air
strikes and indiscriminate shelling. Those attacks have
led to damage to critical civilian infrastructure and to
water, sanitation and health facilities, as Mr. Lowcock
just described. In general, depriving civilians of objects
indispensable to their survival — indeed, starving
civilians intentionally as a method of warfare — is under
no circumstance permissible; it may even constitute a
war crime.
We took note of Mr. Lowcock’s remarks about
the current lull in the fighting around Al-Hudaydah,
which must become permanent. The year-long partial
blockade is already creating essential shortages. In the
event of renewed escalation, the port of Al-Hudaydah
might become inaccessible to any ship carrying
commodities that are vital to a population in need.
The port is an essential lifeline for millions of Yemeni
people. On many occasions, we have also expressed
our concern over Houthi missiles targeting civilians in
Saudi Arabia. Those missiles attacks should stop.
That brings me to my second point — the
responsibility of the international community. SecretaryGeneral Guterres has said it very clearly: it is time to
act. The international community must do its utmost to
protect civilians in times of conflict. The most effective
way to do so is for the Council to fully support the
five requests from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Let me reiterate them
and express how we see them.
First, as an initial step towards the full cessation of
hostilities, a humanitarian cease-fire is the only way to
prevent mass starvation. Secondly, in order to protect
the supply of food and essential goods across the
country, all routes need to be opened for those goods.
Thirdly, we need a larger and faster injection of foreign
exchange into the economy through the Central Bank.
We welcome the recent injection, as Special Envoy
Griffiths just described. Fourthly, the humanitarian

18-3836223/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

16/11/2018

operation needs increased funding. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands is doing its share in that regard.
And, fifthly, there must be full engagement with the
Special Envoy to end the conflict. The Council should
support those five asks. We therefore welcome the
announcement just made by the United Kingdom that
it will circulate a draft resolution on Monday endorsing
those five asks.

call on the parties to include women in their delegations.
We are pleased that Mr. Griffiths has already attended
meetings with a number of women representatives. The
fact that the men are the ones fighting does not mean
that only the men must make peace. We need the proud
women of Yemen to be fully involved in the peace
process. They know what is needed for all of the people
of Yemen.

It is the Council’s responsibility to take a firm
stance against the persistent violations of international
humanitarian law, like the ones we see on a daily basis in
Yemen. We need to stand up for the brave humanitarian
personnel; they should never be the target of attacks.
Humanitarian access must not be politicized by the
parties to the conflict. And all parties should make it
possible for the United Nations to collect objective data
in order to draw up reliable needs assessments based on
the real needs of the people.

In conclusion, we are extremely concerned
about the millions of Yemeni people on the brink of
starvation. We call on all parties to work together to
make humanitarian access possible and to bring about
a humanitarian ceasefire now so that people in need
can be reached. It is urgent that the Council support
OCHA’s five asks. Following the advice of the Group
of Eminent Experts on Yemen, we also call upon the
international community, including the countries of
the League of Arab States, to stop delivering arms to
this theatre of war and its main combatants. We must
now focus on immediately addressing the famine and
finding a peaceful and sustainable political solution to
this terrible conflict. The Council should fully support
the efforts of Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Griffiths. That is
what the people of Yemen need from the Council.

The international community should continue to
raise its voice against impunity. Perpetrators must, and
will, be held accountable, not only to provide justice for
victims in the future but also to deter offences in the
present. In that context, we are grateful for the ongoing
work of the Human Rights Council’s Group of Eminent
Experts on Yemen and of the sanctions committee
Panel of Experts on Yemen.
My third and final point is the need for a political
solution. To respond to OCHA’s fifth ask, I can say
that both the European Union and the Netherlands
fully support the tireless efforts of Mr. Griffiths to
achieve a sustainable political solution. As others
have said, all parties should participate in the talks in
Sweden without preconditions. And they should work
with Mr. Griffiths in good faith and in a constructive
manner. The countries with influence over the parties
to the conflict should use their position to ensure
successful talks. The talks must be inclusive and should
also address local grievances in Yemen. We commend
Sweden for its willingness to host the talks, we thank
Kuwait for its offer of logistical support and we thank
Oman for its constructive role.
We thank Ms. Jarhum for her briefing, which
underlined both the conflict’s effect on women and the
determination of women to contribute in a meaningful
way to peace and a better Yemen. Resolution 1325
(2000) can guide us in that regard. First of all, the
horrible violence against women and girls, as described
by Ms. Jarhum, must stop, but that is not enough. We
24/27

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Executive Director Beasley for their comprehensive,
timely and convincing briefings. I highly appreciate
their unrelenting efforts to restore peace and stability
and improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen. I
also wish to thank Ms. Rasha Jarhum for her briefing.
At present, the political security and humanitarian
situation remains grave in Yemen. The recent escalation
in the armed conflict in the country has not only led to
civilian casualties, but also destroyed roads, hospitals
and other infrastructure. Moreover, it has hampered
humanitarian assistance and further increased the
risk of famine and the spread of cholera. We are truly
saddened by the suffering of the Yemeni people, and we
express our concern about the situation in Yemen.
Yemen’s problems can be resolved only politically.
Military means cannot achieve lasting peace. The
international community should safeguard Yemen’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, support the mediation efforts of the United
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Nations and arrive at an inclusive solution through
dialogue and negotiation, based on resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its implementation mechanism, and the outcome
documents of Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference.
We welcome the recent efforts of the international
community and Special Envoy Griffiths to advance
the peace process in Yemen. Thanks to the joint
efforts of the Special Envoy and the relevant parties,
progress has been made on such issues as the release
of prisoners and the evacuation of the injured, thereby
creating conditions for dialogue. The Special Envoy
has conducted intensive shuttle diplomacy. Closely
engaged with the relevant parties on this matter, he
has encouraged them to meet each other halfway and
to return to the negotiating table. The Special Envoy
is working to advance a framework for political
negotiation, and China appreciates his efforts.
The Security Council and the relevant parties
remain united and continue to support the mediation
efforts of the Special Envoy, including intensified
efforts to promote peace and dialogue and to nudge
parties in Yemen to put aside their differences with a
view to starting a new round of peace talks in Sweden
as soon as possible. We urge parties in Yemen to work
closely with Special Envoy Griffiths to return to the
track of dialogue as soon as possible and to sustain their
participation in negotiation. We call on the international
community and countries in the region to continue their
constructive assistance to that end.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Yemen has attracted the close attention of the region
and the world at large. The international community
should increase humanitarian assistance and assist in
a targeted way by providing goods such as food and
medication as well as funding support to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. The international
community should also support Yemen in its efforts
to improve its economy, stabilize prices, ensure safe,
timely and unhindered humanitarian access and meet
the basic needs of the Yemeni people.
We welcome the indefinite postponement by the
Yemeni Government of restrictions on certain imports.
China will continue to work with the international
community to jointly and expeditiously bring the
issue of Yemen back on the track to seeking a political
settlement so as to achieve peace, security and stability
in Yemen as soon as possible.

S/PV. 8404

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Binmubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. I wish you and the friendly delegation of
China every success. I would also like to thank you for
giving us an opportunity to speak before the Council. I
also thank Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley
for their briefings and for their efforts.
I would like as well to thank the humanitarian
workers, in particular local teams present on the
ground in Yemen. I thank the activists, humanitarian
workers and our sister Ms. Rasha Jarhum, and through
her Yemeni women, who deserve our gratitude given
their steadfastness despite the suffering and difficulties
inflicted upon them.
We are meeting today at a time when the
humanitarian situation in my country is more difficult
than ever. It is deteriorating from one day to the next.
I will not go into the reasons, but the Council knows
that the situation is the result of certain factors. That
is why we cannot stop this disaster without resolving
its causes.
I would briefly like to address the economic,
humanitarian and political situation on the ground
so as to move together towards lasting solutions and
understand who is working for peace, stability and
ending the suffering of Yemenis and who, on the
contrary, is hindering peace.
From its provisional capital in Aden, the Yemeni
Government has undertaken a series of economic
measures with the assistance of the Economic
Committee and the Central Bank. One of those
measures is Decree 75, which aims to put an end to the
deterioration of the economy and the depreciation of
the national currency. Those measures have allowed for
an increase in the exchange rate of the Yemeni rial. It is
now 648 rials to the dollar, as compared recently to 860
rials to the dollar.
Decree 75 also aims to put an end to the smuggling
of oil-derived products on the black market at double
the price, while also allowing Yemeni traders to enjoy a
preferential exchange rate for the rial to the dollar. The
Central Bank is thereby trying to control the exchange
rate so that citizens can access essential foodstuffs at
a reasonable price instead of having to resort to the

18-3836225/27

S/PV.8404

The situation in the Middle East

black market and get them at high price. However,
the Federation of Yemen Chambers of Commerce
and Industry, upon the request of humanitarian
organizations, has suspended its mechanism for
the approval of foodstuff imports so as to facilitate
their entry and enhance the foodstuff reserves in the
various governorates.
The Central Bank has facilitated the issuance
of letters of credit for foodstuffs across Yemen. That
was made possible by Saudi deposits. We have thereby
been able to finance the import of wheat, rice and other
essential foodstuffs to the amount of $266 million.
Seventy-five per cent of those foodstuffs have been
delivered to governorates that are controlled by the
Houthi militias. Indeed, the Government of my country
gives the same treatment to all our citizens without
any discrimination.
In the light of the economic difficulties in my
country and urgent needs of the population, we call
on United Nations agencies in Yemen to address
themselves solely the Yemeni Central Bank — and the
commercial banks that are under its supervision — for
all financial transfers to Yemen. We also expect that
international humanitarian organizations working
in Yemen will support our economy by purchasing
the various products and foodstuffs from our local
markets. That would strengthen the Yemeni currency
and allow the Central Bank to carry out its oversight
functions, in particular when it comes to implementing
international resolutions concerning sanctions, the
fight against money laundering and the financing of
terrorism. That will also allow for the creation of jobs
and help strengthen the private sector, on which more
than 6 million Yemeni citizens depend.
The Yemeni Government welcomes the Riyadh
declaration of 14 November, which aims to identify the
necessary and urgent measures to resolve the economic
and humanitarian situation in Yemen with the support
of brotherly and friendly countries, in order to provide
the salaries for all civil servants in Yemen based on 2014
data. I would like to thank the coalition countries and
all brotherly and friendly countries that have supported
our country’s economy. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has provided more than $60 million on a monthly basis
to support oil-derivative products for power generators,
achieve rial stability and combat money laundering in
oil products, which constitute more than 60 per cent of
the demand on foreign currency in Yemen. Meanwhile,
Iran continues to support Houthi militias with ballistic
26/27

16/11/2018

missiles and land and sea mines, which are used against
our people and neighbouring countries. That is a serious
violation of Security Council resolutions, according
to the reports issued by the Panel of Experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014).
On the humanitarian and political front, the
Government of my country is committed to international
law, international humanitarian law and human rights.
We call upon the international community to put
pressure on Houthi militias to allow for the quick
and safe delivery of humanitarian assistance and to
help humanitarian workers get access to the different
regions of the country in order to deliver medical and
humanitarian assistance to those who are in need of
them. The Houthi militias must respect and protect
schools and medical facilities, and they must not use
Yemeni civilians as human shields or recruit children
to send them to the battlefields.
Our people have had enough of constantly hearing
talk of the violations that they are subjected to and
the crimes committed against them by the Houthi
militias. Suffering is inflicted upon our people on a
daily basis, and the Yemenis are bitter when they see
the blood of their children spilled by executioners that
go unpunished. Our victims are killed twice. The first
time by criminal militias and their leaders, and the
second time when those crimes are ignored and the
militias are allowed to continue the conflict. Victims of
children and women are saying: “Do not kill us twice”.
How can those who seek true peace fail to
participate in the peace consultations? How can those
who seek true peace take civilians, doctors and patients
as human shields? How can those who seek true peace
lay millions of land mines? How can those who seek
true peace recruit children and youngsters who are the
pillars of the future and send them to death? How can
those who seek true peace besiege populated cities and
their snipers kill children and women daily? How can
those who seek true peace kidnap journalists, activists
and teachers, throw them into prison and torture them?
I would like to respond to what Mr. Beasley
said a while ago about the need for foodstuffs. The
Houthi militias have just set fire to foodstuff depots
belonging to a Yemeni company in Al-Hudaydah,
despite suspending military operations. According to
documented and media reports, Houthi militias have
recruited thousands of children and taken hostage
18-38362

16/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

doctors and patients of the 22 May Hospital in
Al-Hudaydah. They have used those people as human
shields and laid millions of mines in buildings, on roads
and even in trees, according to the Associated Press.
Mines have even been laid in Al-Hudaydah port at a
time when they have besieged the city of Taiz for more
than three years. The Houthi militias kill more women
and children in Taiz every day through shelling and
sniping.
The city of Taiz is waiting for international
organizations to visit with delegations so that our
children can tell them about their suffering. Two
children, Hani Al-Ra’i, who was six years old, and Jalal
Abdul Khaleq, who was eight years old, were killed by
Katyusha rockets launched by Houthi militias. Nobody
knows who they were; nobody knows their names.
Farid Shawqi, who was five years old, cried out after
being hit by a Houthi shell. He kept shouting “do not
leave me”, and yet he regrettably died. Dozens of other
children are killed in Yemen every day as a result of
sniping or shelling. Unfortunately, nobody remembers
those children.
The Yemeni Government, on the other hand, has
made considerable efforts, through the office of the
Special Envoy, to reach an agreement on the exchange
of prisoners, in particular arbitrarily detained persons,
as well as those under house arrest. The Government
has accepted the exchange of Houthi prisoners with
those people who were arrested for nothing to do with
the war. We agreed to do so because we know that our
prisoners are living in extremely difficult conditions.
We are ready to accept all proposals pertaining to
confidence-building measures. We are ready to take all
measures that would help build confidence and alleviate
the suffering of our people. We appreciate the sincere
efforts of the Special Envoy in this regard.

S/PV. 8404

The people of Yemen expect the Security Council
to do more than simply denounce the situation, issue
statements and even adopt resolutions. What we expect
is that the resolutions of the Council will be translated
into concrete action on the ground. We still have an
opportunity to reach peace. We actually have thousands
of opportunities to reach just, comprehensive,
sustainable and genuine peace on the basis of the three
agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference,
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, notably
resolution 2216 (2015). We need peace in order to put
an end to the consequences of the coup d’état that my
country has suffered and to restore States institutions.
Heavy and medium weapons must be surrendered to the
legitimate military institution, which has the exclusive
right to own such weapons.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its position in
support of the efforts of the Special Envoy to achieve
peace. He intends to hold a new round of consultations,
hoping that the coup party would participate in good
faith in order to discuss .the confidence-building
measures which are proposed by the Special Envoy.
His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and the Yemeni Government are working
hard, sincerely and in good faith to achieve peace
because Yemen is the country of civilization, history
and wisdom. Yemen deserves to live in dignity, peace
and prosperity while united, strong and independent.
We will never accept Iranian influence or the replication
of the Iranian experience in our country.
The Council should stop cursing the darkness of
war and humanitarian tragedies. It has to light the
candle of peace and silence the guns forever.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

18-3836227/27
