THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

st

MEETING:

2 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

:Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2371)

., . .. .. .,.. . ... ... ., . ,.......,....... 1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

.. .. .... ,. . .... ....I........ 1

.Adoptionoftheagenda

,....

..,,,...............

.,., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i, of the Permanent Mission of Panama to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15145). , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SlPV.2371

:

:

,,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Aeccz~A of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions qf’ Ihe Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

-

2371st MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 2 June 1982, at 4 p.m.
Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

Pwsider?t:

de NANTEUIL

P~scnt: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2371)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Question concerning the situation in the region of
the .Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 From the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Panama to the United Nations addressed to
the President
of the Security Council
(S/15145)

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT
(i/ltcrpr’ettrtio/l from Frcr~ch):
As this is the first meeting of the Council in June,
I should like to pay a tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to Mr. Ling Qing, the representative of China who
served a,s President of the Council during the month
of May. As President, Mr. Ling guided the work of
the Counlcil last month with great diplomatic skill and
tact and unfailing courtesy.
Adoption of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
Letter dated 31 May 1982 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Panama to
the IJnited Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15145)
2. The l?RESIDENT
(intcrpwtotion
afhl
FwIK~):
1 should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina
and Brazil, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,

3. The PRESIDENT
(ilzterprct~ltion
ji-om French):
The Council is meeting today in response to the letter
dated 31 May from the representative of Panama to
the President of the Council.
4. I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/lSlSl, which contains
the interim report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas).
5. Members of the Council have received copies of
three letters dated 2 June from the representative of
Argentina to the President of the Council, distributed
under the symbols S/15152, S/15153 and S/15154.
6.

1 now call on the Secretary-General.

7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL
(i/?te~ppi’etfitiot?
j~o/n Spctnish):
Mr. President, while the interim
report has already been distributed to members of the
Council and does not, I think, require further explanation, I wish, with your permission, to read it out.
” I. The present interim report is submitted in
pursuance of resolution 505 (1982), which the
Security Council adopted at its 2368th meeting, on
26 May 1982. In resolution 505 (1982), the Council
requested the Secretary-General
to undertake a
renewed mission of good offices, bearing in mind
resolution 502 (1982) and the approach outlined in
his statement of 21 May 1982; to enter into contact
immediately
with the parties, with a view to negotiating mutually acceptable terms for a cease-fire,
and to submit an interim report to the Council as
soon as possible and, in any case, not later than
seven days after the adoption of the resolution.
“3-. In the afternoon of 26 May, 1 met separately
with the parties and requested that each provide
within 24 hours a statement of the terms it con-

necessary, 1 urge him to continue with those efforts.
despite the fact that the report he has just submitte3
to us is not really hopeful. In any case, in our profep
sion, in diplomacy and particularly in this building. WC
must always be hopeful and not fearful,

sidered acceptable for a cease-fire. It was my hope,
as I explained to the parties, that on the basis of
their replies terms could be developed
which
would be mutually
acceptable. 1 indicated that
arrangements for the dispatch of United Nations
observers to monitor compliance with the terms of
a cease-fire as mentioned in resolution 505 (1982)
could be made on short notice, with the approval of
the Security Council.

12. My delegation has taken part in the debate on I
this subject on several occasions, most recently an
26 May, when resolution 505 (1982) was adopted.
I wish to recall the following points from the statement
we made then:

“3. On 27 May, I received a message from the
British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, providing an indication of the terms
acceptable to the United Kingdom for a cease-fire.
On the same day, I received a first response from
the Argentine
Government,
which
was supplemented on 28 May by a communication
on the
terms for a cease-fire acceptable to Argentina,

“The draft resolution submitted to us now doss
not order the immediate cessation of hostilities. It
contains only one formula, under which the Secrr- 1
tary-General is to enter into immediate contact wiB f
the parties ‘with a view to negotiating mutually
acceptable terms for a cease-fire’.

“4. I have had extensive exchanges with the
parties, including conversations by telephone with
the Minister for External Relations and Worship of
Argentina. During these exchanges, which continued until this morning,
I explored
various
approaches in seeking the degree of agreement
necessary for a cease-fire.

“In the view of my delegation, it would have
been preferable for this body, which has been
entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security, to have ordered an immediate cease-fire and
to have given a more specific mandate to the Secretary-General.”
[236&h ~necting, palv~s. 6/-62.1
13. Unfortunately,
those words have now been COP
firmed. It would seem that wisdom has deserted
us and that this body, which is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, has
no authority,
because there is an attempt to block
something as noble and worth while as a cease-fire.

“5. It is my considered judgement that the positions of the two parties do not offer the possibility
of developing at this time terms for a cease-fire
which would be mutually acceptable. In accordance
with the mandate given to me by resolution SOS
(1982), I shall nevertheless maintain close contact
with the parties if an opportunity can be found in
which the exercise of my good offices can contribute to bringing this tragic crisis to an end.“’
[S//.5151.]

14. Those of us seated at this table should not
accept that the only way to put an end to a conflict
is through force of arms.
15. In this connection,
and bearing in mind the
seriousness of the situation, the victims who have
already fallen and those who may fall in the immediate
future, my delegation; together with that of Panama.
has decided to submit, as a matter of urgency, in order
that it be put to the vote today, the following draft
resolution:

8. The PRESIDENT
(infPrprctatior?
fhm
French):
I should like to thank the Secretary-General
for his
statement and also pay a tribute to him for the outstanding efforts he has made with such devotion,
intelligence and imagination
to resolve the conflict,
I have no doubt that his experience and authority will
continue to be of the greatest use to the Council in this
matter.
9. Mr. de PINIES (Spain) (intrrpret(~tiofl,fi-oln
Spuniuh): Sir, it is indeed an honour for me to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. There is no need to reaffirm the friendship which
unites our two peoples and Governments;
hence, in
the performance of your tasks you can be assured of
the co-operation and assistance of my delegation.

“Rcqffirnzing
its resolutions 502 (1982) and 505:
(1982) and the need for implementation
of all Parts
thereof,
” I. Rcyrrests the parties to the dispute to Cease
fire immediately
in the region of the Falkland
Islands (lslas Malvinas);

JO. I should like also to pay a tribute to the representative of China, whose skill, ability, zeal and competence were all that we expect of the President of the
Council, and I congratulate him.
II.

I thank the Secretary-General
he has been making and, although

“2.

Autkorizc.~

the Secretary-General

to use

such means as he may deem necessary to verify the

cease-fire;
“3. Rrqucsts the Secretary-General to report to
the Security
Council on compliance
with the
present resolution within 72 hours.” [S/15/561.

too for the efforts
it might seem un2

16. Members will observe that this draft resolution
does not bring the Council’s action to an end, since
we ask the Secretary-General
to report to us with
regard to compliance with it within 72 hours of its
adoption.

23. My delegation has nevertheless asked for this
urgent meeting because we believe in the Security
Council and because we believe in the understanding
of its members. We believe that its members are
aware of the magnitude and seriousnessof the problem
in the region of the Malvinas Islands. That is why,
together with the delegation of Spain, we have submitted ;I draft resolution with the sole aim at this
time of calling upon both parties for an immediate and
unconditional cease-fire so that opportunities can be
opened up to move forward with the peace-making
process which we all hope will take place without
delay.

17. This will allow us to adopt a draft resolution on
the immediate withdrawal
of the forces, and from that
moment negotiations can begin with the least possible
delay on full compliance with resolution SO2 (1982),
which is basic to the settlement of the present conflict
and palragraph I of which demands an immediate
cessatialn of hostilities, and with resolution SOS(1982).

24. The position of Panama on the question of the
Malvinas has been clearly and categorically expressed
in the Council. It is therefore not necessary for me to
reaffirm the staunch and vigorous support of Panama
for the legitimate claims of the Argentine nation to
the Malvinas. With equal vigour we deplore the fact
that the United Kingdom persists in its rash venture
of trying by force to reimpose on our continent
an obsolete colonial system. As we have so often
said, that action is an aggression which that country
has attempted to pass off as self-defence. That concept is completely at variance with the spirit of the
times. We cannot accept that the concept of selfdefence can be used as a pretext for actions designed
to reimpose colonialism in our region or to maintain
colonialism in Latin America.

18. To prevent a cease-fire would be to assume a
very
heavy responsibility
before the international
community
and, of course, would show that what is
desired
is not to end the conflict but to defeat the
other party. This would open a breach between two
countries
of the same culture, both Western, which
could have disastrous consequences
and destroy the
balance through which international peace and security
are today maintained.
19.

Mr. KAM (Panama) (i/ttnpr,rttrtiorl
jinnr SptrnFirst of all, Sir, my delegation congratulates you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
yesterday.
at a time which is indeed difficult. We
trust tha.t your great skill as a diplomat and your vast
talents will enable us to move forward and succeed in
the difficult tasks before the Council this month,

is/r):

25. Our own experience has shown, as we have
so often said, that no form of colonialism will last
150 years in Latin America and that no Latin American
would endure it, and the Argentines have proved as
much. We are faced with this conflict precisely
because this is what can be expected when peoples
lose patience and colonial Powers run out of excuses.

20.
My delegation would like to pay a tribute to
Mr. Ling Qing. of China, who as President of the
Council last month did honour to the best traditions
of the great nation he represents. My delegation
extends its gratitude to him,
21, My delegation also wishes, to express its sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General for the report which
he has formally submitted to us this afternoon. We
wish to thank him for his tireless efforts to find a
peaceful solution to this dispute, which has gone on
fur far too long and which has caused heavy loss of
life and thrown a dark shadow over international
peace and security. That is why the Government of
Panama Itook the step of requesting an urgent meeting
of the Council, a meeting which we are happy to see
taking place today, I should like to thank the members
of the Council for agreeing to hold this meeting.

26. My delegation simply wishes to repeat that we
have taken the step of submitting this draft resolution
in the hope that it can be voted on this afternoon, in
view of the urgent nature of the action which we are
asking the Council to take.
27. We have already said that we were placing a very
heavy burden on the shoulders of the SecretaryGeneral and that we fully trusted in his experience
and abilities. Unfortunately, his efforts have been
hampered by the lack of co-operation from one of
the parties, which should have co-operated in ensuring
the success of the Secretary-General’s efforts, The
Secretary-General has reported to us on what he has
done, although he has not, of course, been able to
give us the full details, but I believe there would be
no point in dwelling on those details.

22. I have listened with great interest to the report
of the Secretary-General, a report which is not at
all encouraging. My delegation would have greatly
preferred
an encouraging report, one proffering
hopes for peace in that region of our continent. There
is no doubt in my mind that if we do not have an
encouraging and hopeful report, it is the domineering
and intransigent attitude of the United Kingdom in
continuing its colonial aggression against Argentina
that has prevented us from having one.

28. My delegation wishes to appeal to the members
of the Council to shoulder the responsibility which
the internntionnl community has entrusted to them.
The Council should not continue IO delegate its
functions, but should begin to act promptly and
3

effectively, and we hope it will do so on the draft
resolution that Panama and Spain have submitted for
its consideration.
Mr. NUSEIBEH
[Jordan): I should like to
extend to you, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil,
of
friendly France, my warmest congratulations
and
best wishes on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. I am certain that the great diplomatic
traditions of France will be fully reflected in your
incisive wisdom and extensive experience at this
trying period.
29.

30. It also gives me great pleasure to pay the highest
tribute to your predecessor in the presidency, Mr. Ling
Qing, of the friendly People’s Republic of China,
whose wisdom, patience and versatility
shone so
brightly in the bleak and troubled days of May when
the Council and the world at large found themselves in
the throes of conflicts which unhappily remain precariously and dangerously unresolved.
3 1. That the Council and the international
community are stil1 so deeply disturbed by what is
happening is certainly not because of any lack or
dearth of trying, as the report of the Secretary-Genera1
so starkly shows. My delegation shares the very
profound appreciation and gratitude of all the Member
States for the tireless, judicious and dedicated efforts
of the Secretary-General,
who has laboured
indefatigably to fulfl the mission of peace which he has
been carrying out over the past two months, at his
own volition but with the full blessing of the Council,
reinforced by a formal mandate contained in resolution 505 (1982).

35. Whatever the outcome of the armed conflict.
with tens of thousands of troops on both sides, no1 13
speak of aircraft, ships and everything else, it is th2
considered view of my delegation that it is not tm
late to contain the conflict and to save numerous lives,
as well as gradually to restore goodwill.
36. We are fully cognizant of the logistics and the
configuration
of the battlefield. We are, furthermore.
fully aware that a prompt cease-fire cannot magically
be implemented
by pressing r button. And this is
where the experience and ingenuity of the SecretaryGeneral come in. We support, a: we are obliged to do
under the Charter, and in good conscience, any call
for a prompt cease-fire, not only in order to prevent
further loss of precious lives on both sides but aIs0
to make possible a cessation of hostilities and
implementation
of the relevant provisions of resolution SO2 (1982), and, last but not least, the resumption
of diplomatic efforts in an atmosphere of tranquillity
after aroused and understandable
passions have
subsided. The Secretary-General
will no doubt act
with the same dedication and statesmanship that have
marked his ongoing efforts.
37. This is an immediate
remedy to which there
seems to exist no alternative except intensified and
prolonged hostilities.
Whether this sincere approach
is found acceptable or not, as members of the Council
we can at least draw comfort from the fact that KC
have been supportive
of a peace effort based on
Charter principles,
justice and long-range amity
between two friendly nations,
38. The PRESIDENT
(intcJrpreturio/~ jhrn FIYJM~):
The next speaker is the representative of Argentina.
on whom I now call.

32. It is deeply saddening that all these efforts have
been of no avail, since it is necessary for the two
parties to the dispute to achieve a confluence
of
minds for any good offices of the Secretary-General
to succeed. Tragically, this has not been obtainable,
and today we find ourselves making additional efforts
and assessments to stop the hostilities,
the bloodletting and the long-range ramifications which a failure
of dipIomacy inevitably generates.

39. Mr. ROS (Argentina) (intc~rprctrrtion jkw Spryis/z): You are, Sir, called upon to assume the presidency of the Council in especially difficult circumstances, since this is the third time that the Council
has had the responsibility
of considering the situation
in the Malvinas, South Georgia and South Sandwich
Islands, a situation
whose present characteristics
seriously affect the maintenance
of international
peace and security.

33. There are in the Charter of the United Nations
principles to which we are all pledged and which must
be paramount in all our deliberations and the shouldering of our responsibilities.
My delegation voted for
resolution 502 (1982) in all its aspects because it is
totally consonant with the Charter. Jordan’s position
in this regard remains unchanged, and we are still
anxiously awaiting its implementation.

40. In conveying to you the cordial greetings of my
delegation, we are convinced that you will lead the
Council with the same ability and dedication as your
predecessor,
the representative
of the People’s
Republic of China. To Mr. Ling Qing I wish to express
the sincere appreciation
of my Government for his
efforts and the dignity with which he faced his
important and delicate functions during the month of
May.

34, Since the adoption of that resolution, disagreements over its implementation
or even the nature of
the conflict have aborted the Secretary-General’s
efforts to bring about a diplomatic solution. Hostilities
have broken out, with grievous loss of valiant lives
on both sides, which has saddened all of us. The
armed conflict has inevitably generated a momentum
of its own which has aggravated the situation.

41. 1 also wish to express the deep appreciation of
the Government
of the Argentine Republic to the
Secretary-General
for the dedication with which he
has tirelessly sought a peaceful solution to the cO[l4

flict. I allso wish to express our appreciation for the
report he! has read out to us on the results of the steps
he has talken in compliance with the mandate given him
by resolution 505 (1982), in paragraph 4 of which he
was requested “to enter into contact immediately with
the parties with a view to negotiating
mutually
acceptable terms for a cease-fire”.
42. Whien resolution 505 (1982) was adoptLd, we
told the Council that it should have been up to this
organ to decide upon a cease-fire, in accordance with
the direct responsibility
vested in it under Article 24
of the Charter of the United Nations, but that:
“the Council has been prevented by the intransigence . . . of more than one permanent member
of the Council from taking such a decision and is
now transferring
a heavy responsibility
to the
Secretary-General”
[2368rh meeting, paw. 1141,
43. The experience of my delegation throughout the
negotiations
conducted through the Secretary-General
has shown that that opinion was correct and that in
the United Kingdom there was no intention at any
time to accept the appeal made to it and that its only
purpose was to continue its military aggression for the
sole purpose of once again establishing on American
soil another shameful example of colonial imperialism
through aggression. The United Kingdom is attempting
to establish on the islands a military presence in order
to control
the South Atlantic. This unmasks the
alleged defence of the “wishes of the inhabitants”
and clearly
shows that the Government
of the
United
Kingdom
has tried to deceive the international co~mmunity by rhetorical statements to the
effect that it is acting in defence of principles, when
its chief interest is that of ensuring its military predominance
in the South Atlantic.
44. Indeed, the British Foreign Secretary said, in a
statement published in Thp NW York Times on 24 May:
“And I think we, at the same time, would want
perhaps to talk to lots of other countries to see
whether, on a broader basis, we could establish
some pattern of defence.”
45. Acclording
to statements
transmitted
by UP1 on 28 May:

by British

officials

“Under
consideration is the idea of solving the
Malvin;as Islands crisis by asking the United States
of America to install troops on the islands on a
perman,ent
basis once the islands have been
recaptured.”
The dispatch

continued:

“The Ascension Island solution has been discussed at a high level by Prime Minister Thatcher’s
Government.
The idea is, once the United Kingdom successfully
retakes the islands that were

invaded by Argentina on 2 April, to convince the
United States of America that it should build a
major air-naval base on one of those wind-swept
islands.”
46. The British newspaper Tl7c~ Gucrrtlicrn also discussed this matter in an article dated 31 May on a
“solution
envisaging a status comparable to that of
Ascension Island”.
47. The British Foreign Secretary also said that for
his part, he was “in favour of obtaining the assistance
of other countries, in particular the United States, to
guarantee the future security of the islands”. He
added: “Under this theory, the Malvinas would continue to be British and would be the site of a major
naval and air base built by the United States for the
defence of the South Atlantic.”
48. In an article in The NLW York Times on 30 May,
Flora Lewis wrote:
“The war has also drawn attention to the fact that
while the [Malvinas]
haven’t much strategic
importance now, they could be vital if the Panama
Canal were ever denied to the United States or if
the Soviet Union or others violated the treaty forbidding militarization
of the Antarctic.”
49. The reasoning underlying al1 those and other
arguments is not unknown to us.
50, The United Kingdom, in the nineteenth century,
besieged and attacked the Malvinas Islands because
it considered them to be vital for controlling the
maritime communication
lanes in the South Atlantic.
Unfortunately,
now, in a different political context,
history repeats itself.
51. Responding
to the appeal addressed to the
parties in paragraph 3 of resolution 505 (1982) “to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General in his mission
with a view to ending the present hostilities in and
around the . . , (Islas Malvinas)“, the Government
of Argentina
promptly
replied to the SecretaryGeneral by submitting
a proposal related to paragraph 2 of that resolution so that, simultaneously with
the agreement on a cease-fire, negotiations would
begin on a withdrawal of forces of both parties
and on the interim administration
of the islands by
the United Nations.
52. The Argentine proposal consisted of a simple
cease-fire procedure, in accordance with paragraph 4
of resolution 505 (1982), and on the basis of a strict
interpretation
of paragraph 2 of that resolution,
which:
“Requests the Secretary-General,
on the basis of
the present resolution, to undertake a renewed mission of good offices, bearing in mind resolution 502
(1982) and the approach outlined in his statement
of21 May 1982.”

objectives had been attained: (N) repossession of the
islands; (h) restoration of the British administration.
that is to say, a return to the status LIIIO mtc; (c> reconstruction; and (d) consultation with the inhabitants,

53. The main points of the Argentine proposal were
these: simultaneously with the beginning of the ceasefire, negotiations would resume on the withdrawal of
both forces and on the interim administration
of the
islands by the United Nations.
54. Regarding the cease-fire, the following
were set forth.

62. The withdrawal could take place once these four
stages had been met and in the context of an international security arrangement
for the islands which
would include the participation
of United States
forces.

elements

5.5. First, it would be unrestricted, with the suspension of all operations by troops, vessels and aircraft, which would remain in the places where they
were at the beginning of the cease-fire.

63, Those were the British ideas. The intransigence
of those ideas and their firm military objective continually blocked the various alternative formulas for
negotiation through systematic rejection of a cease-fire
implying a cessation of military action; rejection of
any form of United Nations presence in the implementation of a cease-fire; rejection of the participation of the “blue helmets” and of their take-over of
the areas occupied by the Argentine forces upon
their withdrawal-in
short, rejection of the ceasefire.

56. Secondly, simultaneously
with the acceptance
of the cease-fire by the parties, a United Nations
mission would be dispatched to observe compliance
with it.
57. Thirdly,
if necessary, disengagement
would be established on land and sea.

zones

58. Fourthly, in no circumstances would the parties
be able to undertake military reinforcement
operations in the areas of operation and in the areas of
communications of the respective forces.

64. The situation is clear: the Council, in the view of
the United Kingdom, should validate the restoration
of a colonial situation, with a military force to secure
it, and the United Nations would not necessarily
participate
in that force, but a super-Power, a permanent member of the Council and an ally of the
United Kingdom
in this conflict, would participate
in it.

59. Fifthly, the United Nations would facilitate
operations for the supply of food, clothing and health
services to the personnel of the land, air and sea forces
and the inhabitants of the islands, for the period of
time the negotiations would require.

65. Thus, one can quite clearly see the constant
line which the Government
of the United Kingdom
has followed as its policy with regard to this serious
question: threat and aggression.

60. Sixthly , the cease-fire would begin at “W”
hour, which would coincide with the arrival of United
Nations personnel.
61. Those points show that the Government of Argentina made a genuine effort to enable the SecretaryGeneral to comply with the difficult mandate given
to him by the Council. Argentina accepted the ceasefire and emphasized its readiness to negotiate. The
British took the opposite attitude. In explaining its
vote on resolution 505 (1982). the British delegation
stated that the objective of its Government
was to
obtain Argentina’s commitment
to undertake practical and irrevocable arrangements for the unilateral
and immediate withdrawal of the Argentine forces.
This distorted the basic concepts contained in that
resolution, as well as those contained in paragraph I
of resolution 502 (1982). But the British claim would
go even further, by trying to use the means established in paragraph 4 of resolution 505 (1982) to
set forth an ultimatum.
In fact, the points which were
submitted by the United Kingdom to the SecretaryGeneral and transmitted by the Secretary-General
to
my delegation were the following: first, the primary
British condition for the cease-fire is the withdrawal of
the Argentine troops within a deadline; secondly, the
concept of simultaneous withdrawal of troops is not
accepted; and thirdly,
the withdrawal
of British
troops would be considered only after the following

66. This behaviour began with the usurpation in 1833
and the expulsion of the Argentine inhabitants of the
islands. It was repeated this year when the E~tc~urctrtw
was sent to the South Georgia islands to expel the
Argentine workers. It was &affirmed by the presence
of nuclear submarines
in the same region, the
launching of the punitive fleet and the declaration Of
illegal blockades. And it persists today through all
kinds of military
actions, attacks and bombings,
which have already sowed death and destruction.
67. At the conclusion of the meeting of the Council
on 26 May [2S68rh meting],
we said that the Secretary-General
was being given a mission which depended solely on the positive attitude of the parties.
68. That mission, as the Council knows, ended with
the British ultimatum
to which I have referred. We
now see the latest British claim, which reveals the
true purpose that now guides the United Kingdom: a~
international
security agreement on the islands which
would include the participation
of United States
forces in order to perpetuate the violation of the
territorial
integrity
of my country. This is sadly
reminiscent
of other situations,
such as that of
6

Guantanamo, and is dangerously similar to the cases
of Diego Garcia and Ascension Island. The Council should not forget that the latter island is the key
point for aggression against Argentina. We all know
what these situations of force mean for third-world
countries.

“5. To urge the Government
of the United
States of America to order the immediate lifting of
the coercive measures applied against the Argentine Republic
and to refrain from providing
material assistance to the United Kingdom,
in
observance of the principle of continental solidarity
recognized in the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance;

69. The Council, the Argentine nation and, above
all, the whole of Latin America must have the
assurance of the United States that its Government
will not accept that adventurist proposal to build a
military base on the Malvinas and that it will not be
dragged into this dangerous adventure, which would
widen even further the serious breach in hemispheric
relations.
If some United
States strategists are
considering
establishing
troops under a bilateral
arrangement with the United Kingdom on the Argentine territory of the Malvinas Islands, which is Latin
American territory, this would be to disregard the
resolution
adopted on 29 May, by the Twentieth
Meeting of Consultation
of Ministers of External
Relations of the States parties to the Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance. That resolution,
which is mandatory on the States signatories to the
Treaty, was voted for by Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico,
Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and
Venezuel’a. The resolution decided, i/zrpr crlicr:

“6. To urge the members of the European
Economic Community,
and the other States that
have taken them, to lift immediately the coercive
economic or political measures taken against the
Argentine Republic”.
[S//5143, NIZI~CJX.]
70. My country is confident that this resolution
adopted by a basic organ of the inter-American
system, of which the United States is a part, will cause
the Government of that country to reflect.
71. The Council must once again decide whether or
not to fulfil its primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, which was entrusted
to it by the peoples of the United Nations when
adopting the Charter at San Francisco.
72. We are facing concrete facts with their terrible
sequel of horror and death. We are facing a total
escalation of aggression, which neglects no means for
attaining its objective. That aggression is in addition
to the continued aggression committed by the United
Kingdom
against the territorial
integrity
of my
country, since colonialism
is, to all intents and
purposes, a form of permanent aggression. As the
Argentine Foreign Minister said in the Council on
25 May [2366rh meering], colonialism is an act of
force and it is permanent aggression; it is the opposite
of genuine peace; it has been and will be, as long as it
persists, the root cause of conflicts and violence. This
is why the Argentine Republic will never negotiate
the restoration
of colonialism
to Argentine and
American soil.

6‘ 1. To condemn most vigorously the unjustified
and disproportionate
armed attack perpetrated by
the United Kingdom, and its decision, which affects
the security of the entire American continent, of
arbitrarily
declaring an extensive area of up to
12 miles from the American coasts as a zone of
hostilities, which is aggravated by the circumstance
that when these actions were taken all possibilities
of negotiation
seeking a peaceful settlement of
the conflict had not been exhausted;
“2.
To reiterate its firm demand upon the
United
Kingdom
that it cease immediately
its
acts of war against the Argentine Republic and
order the immediate
withdrawal of all its armed
forces detailed there and the return of its task force
to its usual stations;

73. This is the reality in Latin America today on
Argentine soil, and it is precisely on this matter that
this body, the Council, must focus its attention and its
decisions so as to put an end to a state of war and to
limit its grave international effects, which undoubtedly
endanger international
security, in particular that of
Latin America.

“3, To deplore the fact that the attitude of the
United Kingdom has helped to frustrate the negotiations for a peaceful settlement that were conducted
by Mr. Javier Perez de CuCllar, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations;

74. If the abusive attitude of the United Kingdom
prevents the Council from complying with its serious
and pressing duty, it will once again be shown that
that Government bears the responsibility for the continuance of the military action which is resulting in the
loss of so many lives and has such dramatic implications for international
relations.

“4.
To express its conviction that it is essential
to reacli with the greatest urgency a peaceful and
honourable
settlement of the conflict, under the
auspice;5 of the United Nations, and in that connection., to recognize the praiseworthy efforts and
good offices of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations,
and to lend its full support to the task
entrusted to him by the Security Council;

75. In conclusion,
I should like to recall that the
Argentine title is inalienable and has been recognized
by the vast majority of the international community.
7

If Great Britain chooses the path of armed violence to
disavow it, the resulting war that is imposed on us will
be as long as may be necessary and Great Britain
alone will bear the responsibility
for having discarded the path of peaceful negotiations; but the only
historic outcome will be the ultimate incorporation
of
the islands into Argentine territory.

80. From the moment that the Secretary-General
undertook a process of mediation between t6e parties,
even without a formal mandate from the Council, the
Government
of Brazil continuously
supported his
determined efforts. We all know that the SecretaryGeneral was so close to reaching agreement that it
is all the more regrettable that one of the parties, the
Government of the United Kingdom, chose to break
off the negotiations unilaterally, opting for a military
solution, while the other party, the Argentine Republic, never ceased to express its clear readiness to seek
a diplomatic
solution. All of us could already foresee
what were the Secretary-General’s
chances of success
in trying to carry out the vague and imprecise mandate
entrusted to him by the Council in resolution 505
(1982). The unwillingness
of one of the parties to
negotiate was made clear immediately after the adoption of that resolution and is reflected in the Council’s
records,

76. The PRESIDENT
(iat~~rp~rt(itior1 fiorr? FrcJnc,k):
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
77.

Mr. CORRl?A da COSTA (Brazil) (intcrpretc~tim
firm7
Sprrru’sh):* First, Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and the other members of the Council for
allowing me to take part in this debate. It is a great
pleasure and honour to do so at a time when you have
just assumed the presidency of the Council. 1 do not
doubt that, with your diplomatic qualifications,
you
will lead this body to success in its work during the
month of June. I should also like to thank the representative of the People’s Republic of China, who
conducted the proceedings
of the Council very
correctly and impartially during a particularly troubled
month in international relations.

81, Resolution 502 (1982) contained three elements:
the cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal of Argcnline
. ^
forces from the Malvinas Islands and the search tar a
diplomatic solution. Both parties accepted that resolution. It was precisely for the purpose of ensuring its !
implementation
that the Secretary-General
made 1
tireless efforts, which have deserved our deepest i
gratitude and admiration. But it is clear that the implementation that was sought was a complete and not a ’
selective implementation,
never a unilateral imple;
mentation.
If it was the British Government’s
:
opinion that the resolution was not being implemented,
the British Government
should have returned to the
Council to have it adopt the necessary measures to :
ensure compliance
with resolution 502 (i982), in
keeping with the provisions of the Charter of the [
United Nations. Therefore, it did not have a right :
unilaterally
to assume the task of ensuring implej
mentation, as it affirms it is doing, while the Council
had the matter under consideration.

78. Unfortunately,
this is the third time that the
delegation of Brazil has had to address the Council
on the question of the Malvinas Islands. I say “unfortunately” because ever since the beginning of the
present crisis my Government
kept hoping that a
political and diplomatic
solution could speedily be
found, so as to avoid armed confrontation and bloodshed. Unfortunately,
all efforts to that end were
thwarted, and the international
community
is now
faced with a grave breach of the peace in the South
Atlantic, with serious implications
for the future of
international relations, especially in this hemisphere.
79, I shall not repeat what I have said on previous
occasions about my country’s position on the substance of the problem.
For Brazil, the Malvinas
Islands were, are and always will be part of the territory of the sister Argentine Republic, regardless of
the immediate
result of this conflict. Neither shall
1 repeat the efforts that my Government has made to
bring about a peaceful settlement of the dispute
between the United Kingdom
and the Argentine
Republic. Not only did President Joho Figueiredo
make a personal, direct appeal to President Galtieri
and to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, calling for
peace and harmony, but my country’s Minister for
External Relations, in a letter to the President of the
Council dated 24 May [,S/l5/08],
made specific
proposals that in my Government’s
view could
serve as a basis for a peaceful settlement
of the
conflict,

83. As an initial measure, the Council should decide
on an immediate cease-fire and envisage the participation of the United Nations as an essential element in
the context of a just, honourable and lasting peace, to
put an end to an anachronistic situation which has
extremely serious implications
for world peace, as
proposed in the draft resolution submitted by the
representative of Spain.

* The speaker
spoke in Portuguese. The Spanish
statement
wassupplied by the delegation.

84. The ultimate solution to the problem must be
sought in the context of negotiations between the
parties, as envisaged in resolution 502 (1982). For the

version

1

82. My country is convinced that a peaceful, diplomatic solution may still be found. We do not think that
a solution based on force can be a lasting one. Aware
that an act of force leaves scars which often do not
heal, the Council is duty-bound to find an honourable
solution, acceptable to both parties. It cannot allow
events to follow their course and the already heavy
loss of life to increase.

of his

8

Brazilian
Government,
it is unacceptable to try to
impose formulas on the future of the Malvinas which
may extend great-Power confrontation to the South
Atlantic.
In fact, the Brazilian Government remains
convinced that the fate of the South Atlantic can only
be one of friendly and peaceful co-operation among
the coastal developing countries of Latin America
and Africa, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. In the present
crisis, therefore, any solutions not likely to contribute
to the attainment of that objective and any that attract
to the South Atlantic interests or activities alien to it
must be avoided.
85.
Sir Anthony
PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
First let me extend to you and your delegation, Sir,
Our
warmest congratulations
on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. It is of
course a great pleasure for us to have the delegation
of your great country, our friend and ally, presiding
overour proceedings during this particularly difficult
period. I should like also, at the same time, to extend
our most heartfelt thanks to the representative of
China and his delegation for the patience and diligence
with which they looked after our affairs during an
exceptionally
busy month,
86. I pay a tribute once again to the SecretaryGeneral for the efforts he has made during the past few
days to bring about the implementation
of resolutions 502 (1982) and 505 (1982). The fact that it has
not proved possible to negotiate mutually acceptable
terms for :a cease-fire is in no way the fault of the
Secretary-General.
We has again displayed the
highest qualities demanded of his office.
’
87. I have said before-but
it cannot be repeated
too often--that
the current breach of the peace was
caused by Argentina. It was Argentina that closed
the diplomatic
channel on 1 April, It was Argentina
that remained
silent in the face of the Council’s
appeal not to use force, issued later that same day
[2345& nzeefing, pnrn. 741. It was Argentina that the
next morning invaded the Falkland Islands. It was
and is Argentina that has failed to comply with resolution 502 (1982), which demanded the immediate
withdrawal
of all Argentine troops. Far from withdrawing them, Argentina reinforced them.

full detail, and I shall not weary the Council by
repeating all my arguments, which I believe effectively
refuted some of the more extravagant distortions
advanced today by the representative of Argentina.
But I must repeat once again that it was Argentina
that first used force and began the present crisis.
Everything we have done since has been in exercise of
our inherent right of self-defence. We have never
argued that the United Kingdom was assuming the
task of executing a mandate from the Council. The
true position is that, in the face of Argentina’s
flagrant and open violation of resolution 502 (1982),
the United Kingdom is simply exercising its inherent
right of self-defence, for which no mandate from the
Council is required by the terms of the Charter of the
United Nations.
90. Our objectives have been clear. Aggression must
not be allowed to pay. Peoples must not be subjugated
against their will. Peoples must enjoy the right to selfdetermination.
Politicai problems must not be settled
by armed force. These are principles which my Government has not been prepared to compromise. They
have nothing to do with “colonialism”,
“imperialism”
and outworn shibboleths of that kind.
What conceivable reason could my country have
for wishing to establish British or other military power
in the South Atlantic? If we had had such extraordinary pretensions, I suggest to the Council that we
would have kept a larger garrison than 40 Royal
Marines on the Falklands before the Argentine
invasion.
91. We have done everything in our power, short of
compromising
the principles I have set out, to bring
about the peaceful implementation
of the central
element of resolution 502 (1982), namely, the unconditional
Argentine
withdrawal from the islands,
This has not so far proved possibie, and we have been
left with no choice but to defend these principles by
other means. We have never broken off or interrupted
negotiations. We have negotiated fully and in good
faith throughout this long period.
92. I turn now to the recent negotiations for a ceasefire. These negotiations were held in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 505 (1982). As members of
the Council will recall, this resolution reaffirmed
resolution 502 (I 982), by which the Council, now as
long ago as 3 April, demanded the immediate withdrawal of all Argentine forces from the Falkland
Islands.

88. It is the United Kingdom that was the victim of
the Argentine
act of aggression. It is the Falkland
Islanders
who have been the victims of the Argentine
use of force to occupy the islands. I do not propose
now to dwell on the traumatic experience the islanders
have suffered over the past two months. The reports
so far are necessarily incomplete,
but from those
areas where the islanders have been able to talk freely
of their
experiences under Argentine occupation
some very sombre and disturbing facts are beginning
to emerge.

93. The United Kingdom’s
position was that it
would welcome a cease-fire which was inseparably
linked to the commencement
of the withdrawal of
Argentine forces and to the completion of their withdrawal within a fixed period. This position was based
squarely on resolution 502 (1982).

89. I have had occasion at previous meetings of the
Council
to set out the United Kingdom’s position in

94. The representative
of Argentina has set out in
full the responses of his Government during the past

week. He has also purported to set out the positions
of my Government. I do not intend to follow him down
that particular road of controversy. The SecretaryGeneral has maintained a unique confidentiality about
the nature of his negotiations since the outset, and,
even in the face of the statement by the representative of Argentina, I do not intend to breach that confidence. I would only say this: that the statement, the
explanation,
by the representative
of Argentina
makes clear, in my judgement, that if Argentine preconditions had been accepted they would have led us
back into the morass of procrastination
and evasion
which my Government has experienced on the part
of the Government
of Argentina over the past two
months of extremely intensive negotiation.
95. The plain fact is that until the Government of
Argentina changes its position, it is clear that the
conditions for a cease-fire do not exist.
96. Against this background, the call by the representatives of Spain and Panama for an unconditional,
immediate cease-fire is not acceptabIe to my delegation, A cease-fire which is not inseparably linked to
immediate
Argentine
withdrawal
would not be
consistent with resolution 502 (1982), because that
resolution demands the immediate withdrawal of all
Argentine forces from the Falkland Islands. The call
for an unconditional
cease-fire would leave Argentine
forces in position.

100. In conclusion, at the risk of repeating myself,
1 should like to emphasize one thing. The objective of
my Government is to set free the people of the Falkland Islands from Argentine occupation, which, by
their own democratic
decision, they never, never
wanted. All we wish to do is to enable those people
to resume their peaceful, harmless and inoffensive
lives and make up their own minds, in freedom and
without constraint, regarding their long-term future.
When we talk about security arrangements for the
future, we are talking about security arrangements to
shield the islanders against any threat of renewed
aggression. That is all.
101. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (int~~rpretution jkm Russirrn): First
of all, Sir, I should like most sincerely to congratulate
you on your assumption
of the presidency of the
Council for this month. The Soviet delegation would
fike to assure you of its willingness to co-operate with
you as you discharge this difficult duty, We should
also like to pay a due tribute to your predecessor, the
representative
of the People’s Republic of China,
who discharged his duties as President during the
month of May in an extremely professional manner.
102. The Council is meeting again today to consider
the dangerous military conflict in the South Atlantic.
When on 26 May it adopted resolution 505 (1982) on
a cease-fire and peaceful settlement of the conflict in
the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas MaIviaas).
the Council proceeded from the premise that this resolution should lead to the restoration of peace. To that
end, the Council instructed the Secretary-General
once again to undertake
a mission of good offices,
and it called on the parties to the conflict to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-Genera1 with a view to the
cessation of hostilities in and around the islands.

97. As I indicated earlier, the United Kingdom is
perfectly prepared for a cease-fire so long as it is
inextricably linked to implementation
of the demand
in resolution 502 (1982) for Argentine withdrawal.
We have no wish to inflict or to suffer further casualties. We are ready to discuss honourable arrangements for the departure of Argentine forces in accordance with resolution 502 (1982). But the Council’s
demand to withdraw must be heeded. Because the
call for a cease-fire contained in the draft resolution
read out by the representative of Spain does not link
that cease-fire with withdrawal, my delegation will be
obliged to oppose it.

103. However, as can be seen from the report submitted today by the Secretary-General,
his efforts for
a settlement of the conflict and the removal of this
hotbed of armed confrontation
have once again been
blocked,

98. A resolution better fitted to the needs of the
present situation would, I suggest, contain the following elements: a reaffirmation
of resolutions 502
(1982) and 505 (1982) in all their parts; an expression
of appreciation to the Secretary-Genera1 for his continuing efforts towards peace-making; a reiteration of
the demand in resolution 502 (1982) for Argentine
withdrawal; and a call for a cease-fire which would
come into effect as soon as watertight arrangements
existed for Argentine withdrawal within a fixed period
in dignity and on an honourable basis. These arrangements would, as a practical matter, have to be agreed
between the military commanders of the two sides in
the islands,

104. It must be said that the members of the Council
could not but have been alerted by the statement that
the representative
of the United Kingdom
made
immediately
after the Council adopted resolution 505
(1982) [2368th mwing].
105. At that time, the British representative virtually
rejected the approach supported by the Council aad
the negotiations
between the parties and virtually
struck out everything positive that had been achieved
with the help of the efforts of the Secretary-General
during those negotiations. He said outright that under
changed circumstances
his Government
could net
agree to the withdrawal of Argentine troops in aaY
manner whatsoever being linked with a parallel &parture of the British troops. Once again the demands of
Britain for conditions relating to the cease-fire were

99. Those are the essential elements of a cease-fire
resolution which I commend to the Council.
My
delegation could support such a resolution.
IO

delivered in the form of an ultimatum.
And I must
say that once again, today, the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom was delivered in the
similar form of an ultimatum.
106. Thus, the current round of negotiations, like
the preceding one, has ended in failure. The reason
for this is clear: it is the stubborn unwillingness of
the British Government to settle the problem of the
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) by peaceful means,
by negotiations in good faith, Disregarding a]] appeals
for a peaceful settlement of the conflict, and decisions
of the Council, the British Government at every stage
chose to build up its armed forces in the region of the
conflict and to broaden the scope of its military
actions.
107. No one can doubt that responsibility for the
failure of thle efforts of the Secretary-General lies with
the British Government, which, as can be seen from
developments
in the conflict now, relied exclusively
on armed force and unleashed in the South Atlantic a
large-scale
colonial war. London’s actions demonstrate quite clearly the insincerity of its declared
willingness
to resolve the dispute with Argentina
over the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) by negotiations. The manoeuvring of British diplomacy with
the adoption by the Council of the two resolutions
and the ne,gotiations through the Secretary-General
-all of this has proved to be simply a smoke-screen
for the unleashing of large-scale military operations
in the South Atlantic. The policy adopted by Britain
is to restore by force of arms the colonial status of the
islands and to keep a land base for imperialism in the
South Atlantic.
This return to the policy of the
Empire is a direct challenge to the world community,
which has unequivocally
condemned and rejected
colonialism
as a flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and of the basic principles and
norms of contemporary international law.
108, As has already been noted during consideration
of this item in the Council, the British Government
would not have ventured to issue such a bold challenge to Argentina-and,
really, to all of Latin America-had
it not been assured of the comprehensive
support, not only moral but very real support, which
has been fully provided by the United States. In this
difficult hour for the people of Argentina in their
struggle to eliminate the vestiges of colonialism, the
United States has thrown its political-and
not only
its political--weight
to its ally in the North Atlantic
Treaty Orgcmization
(NATO).
The role of neutral
mediator as:sumed by United States diplomacy was
continued just as long as London needed it, in order
to gain time for its military preparations; since then,
with a firmness that does deserve a better cause, the
Sovernment
of the United States has supported the
British Government
as best it could in its feverish
nilitary activities.
109. Some things are not forgotten and, as has been
;aid here by representatives of Latin American coun-

tries, the events of the last two months and the role
of various States in these events cannot be forgotten.
110. Recently, still another reason has appeared for
this demonstration
of British-American
solidarity:
there are reports-and
this has been said here as well
by the representative of Argentina today-that one of
the parties to the conflict-and
naturally this party is
not Argentina-claims
that the problem of the islands
cannot be resolved without the appearance on them
of American troops. It seems that British colonialism
in the islands must now be supplemented by a permanent American military presence. Thus, they want
to add to the many military enclaves of the United
States in Latin America still another-this
one in the
South Atlantic.
I] 1. Other NATO countries have also taken action
in this spirit of solidarity with their ally, Great Britain:
illegal economic sanctions against Argentina have
been introduced, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, and have been presented almost as
support for diplomatic efforts to settle the conflict.
One might well ask oneself: since when have economic aggression and violation of the Charter of the
United Nations come to be considered a method of
strengthening the principles of that very Charter?
112. We can conclude from the foregoing that we
are, in fact, witnessing attempts to extend the sphere
of activities of the North Atlantic bloc to conflicts
taking place far beyond the confines of Europe and
involving the interests and security of the developing,
non-aligned countries. This is an extremely dangerous
trend, and it deserves very careful attention on the
part of the United Nations.
113. The military fever that has now engulfed the
leading circles in London has already taken hundreds
of lives, British as well as Argentine. International
peace and security are threatened. The Council, in
accordance with its responsibility under the Charter,
must call for an immediate cease-fire; it must stop
the bloodshed in the South Atlantic so as to pave the
way to a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
114. Mr. de PINIl&
(Spain) (interpwtutiou
fkom
Spcznish): Regarding the statement made by the
representative of the United Kingdom, I should like
to make some things clear, because it is my impression that either the interpretation did not follow very
clearly what I said, or, if it did, I am rather surprised
by his remarks concerning my statement. Of course,
1 do not intend to go into the substance of the question
of the Malvinas, to which I have referred in days
past. I might add that I was present when resolutions 2065 (XX) and 3160 (XXVIII),
among others,
were adopted by the General Assembly. I have
participated widely in the discussions of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declarati,on on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and of

L,’

the General Assembly and the Assembly’s Fourth
Committee, but I do not think this is the appropriate
forum. We are here considering a situation of war, a
situation of active belligerency and a series of hostile
acts.
1 IS. For the information of those present, and in
view of the fact that the draft resolution sponsored by
Panama and Spain [S/15156], has not yet been distributed, I shall read it out again, making the points
clear and explaining the scope and meaning of each
of its paragraphs.
116. The preambular

paragraph reads as follows:

“Renflirw/i~rg its resolutions 502 (1982) and 50.5
(1982) and the need for implementation
of all parts
thereof,“,

1 of the draft resolution

122. That is the purpose of the draft resolution
which we are submitting as a matter of urgency. The
representative of the United Kingdom says that he
will vote against it. Of course, he is free to do as
he wishes. But I should not like his vote against it to
be cast on assumptions contrary to those on the basis
of which the delegations of Panama and Spain have
decided to submit it. For us, human lives are precious,
and we believe that no effort should be spared to
save a single life, regardless of whose it is.

reads as

“1. Rcqrr~~sls the parties to the dispute to cease
fire immediately
in the region of the Falkland
Islands (Islas Malvinas);“,

123. Mr. LING
Qing (China) (interprctntion JWH
Chinese): Sir, first of all I wish to express warm congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of June. Although
June will be a rather arduous and turbulent month,
we are certain that your wealth of diplomatic experience and skills will enable you successfully to discharge your duties.

In other words, a cease-fire is requested but not, as
yet, the cessation of hostilities,
because that has
already been called for in resolution 502 (1982), and
the concept of “hostilities”
is different from that of
a “cease-fire”.
118. Paragraph 2 reads as follows:

124. A week has elapsed since the Council adopted
resolution 505 (1982). The armed conflict over the
Malvinas Islands has not ended or been reduced but
has been exacerbated.

“Authorizrs
the Secretary-General
to use such
means as he may deem necessary to verify the
cease-fire:“.

125. During this period, the Secretary-General,
acting on the mandate entrusted to him by the COUP
cil and specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 505
(1982), entered “into contact immediately
with the
parties with a view to negotiating mutually acceptable
terms for a cease-fire”.
Paragraph 3 of the same
resolution

In other words, the Secretary-General
is called upon
to verify the cease-fire in whatever way he considers
necessary, practicable or possible.
119. Finally,

120. TO what end? For what purpose? Simply for the
Council then to instruct the Secretary-General as to
what the next step should be and to give him instructions. While the Secretary-General
has not succeeded
so far in bringing both parties closer towards a solution of the conflict, it is very likely that, if the assumptions which have prevailed so far should change, the
Secretary-General
may then be able to bring positions
closer and be moving towards a solution of the dispute.
121. I repeat and reaffirm before the Council that
for us what is most serious is the dangerous confrontation and the loss of life. As far as my delegation is
concerned, I wish to say that we absolve ourselves al
any responsibility
for the number of victims of a
further military
confrontation.
Enough blood has
already been shed in this conflict, a conflict which
should have been ended a long time ago.

In my view, that means, of course, that the withdrawal
of the Argentine forces from the Malvinas, the cessation of hostilities and the beginning of negotiations are
all three required. In other words, there are three
parts to resolution 502 (1982), and it would not be
proper to refer exclusively to paragraph 2 of that
resolution, which demands an immediate withdrawal
of all Argentine forces from the Falkland Islands
(Islas Malvinas). That is why the preambular paragraph
of the draft resolution sponsored by Panama and
Spain refers to the need for full implementation
of
both resolutions 502 (1982) and 505 (1982). That is the
preamble of the draft, with a reaffirmation of the two
Council resolutions referred to,
117. Paragraph
follows:

It is precisely that period of 72 hours which enabled
me to say in my statement:
“Members
will observe that this draft resolution
does not bring the Council’s action to an end,
since we ask the Secretary-General
to report to IIS
with regard to compliance with it within 72 hours
of its adoption”
[pa~cr. 16 &HYJ].

paragraph 3 reads as follows:

“Reymsts the Secretary-General
to report to the
Security Council on compliance with the present
resolution within 72 hours.”

“U~~LJS
the parties to the conflict to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General
in his mission with

12

,

#&

a view to ending the present hostilities in and
around the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas);“.
One of the parties, however, relying on its superior
military strength, has no intention to effect a ceasefire. The Secretary-General
has thus found it impossible to c,arry out his mission and had to report back
to the Co:uncil today about the situation. The Chinese
delegation deeply deplores this development. Nevertheless, we wish to reiterate our appreciation to the
Secretary-General
for all that he has done and to
express our understanding of the difficulties he has
encountered.
126. We should like to point out here that the
resort to a show of military might, without any regard
to the persistent call of the international community
for an immediate
halt to the hostilities or to the
national sentiments of the people of Argentina and
Latin America, might gain temporary success for the
party concerned, but this course of action entails farreaching dire consequences which will ultimately hurt
the interests of its own people.
127. We are of the view that, in order to fulfil its
lofty duty of maintaining
international
peace and
security, the Council should urge the parties concerned to halt all military actions immediately and
agree to an unconditional
cease-fire and the resumption of ne,gotiations. The Council should extend the
Secretary-IGeneral’s
mandate for mediation.
128. In accordance with the above position, the Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by Panama and Spain.
129. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(Unit,ed Kingdom):
1 shall be very brief. I just wish to make one or two
observatioms in response to certain statements made
by my colleague from the Soviet Union. He accused
us of stubborn unwillingness. Yes, we are stubbornly
unwilling
to compromise on certain principles, and
I set out those principles very clearly in my earlier
statement.
But we have been equally stubbornly
willing to exert every effort to bring about the peaceful implementation
of a mandatory resolution of the
Council.
130. With a sense of anticipation
which I never
realized that I possessed, I think that I replied to some
of the more archaeological comments of my Soviet
colleague about colonialism,
imperialism
and such
like in the statement I made before he made his.
1 would like only to re-emphasize one point, and that
relates to the strategic fantasy which my Soviet
colleague wove before our eyes. I can only repeat
what I said at the end of my statement. Our only
reason for requiring adequate security arrangements
in the long term in the Falkland Islands is to shield
the islanders against the threat or actuality of further
aggression. That is our sole purpose.

13 1. The PRESIDENT
(intc~rpr.ptntiorz~~om
I call on the representative of Argentina.

Frenc*h):

132. Mr. ROS (Argentina) (inte,pretationJ~om
S,mnis/?): I shall try to be as brief as possible and take up
very little of the time of the Council. I have taken note
in passing of some of the remarks made by the representative of the United Kingdom. He used the word
“procrastination”
because during the last two
months we have been unable to reach an understanding, despite the enormous efforts and flexibility
of the Argentine position. I wonder how the Government that he represehts can use that word when fol
17 years it ignored the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly in 1965, 1973 and 1976.
133. He used the word “principles”.
The use of
the word “principles”
generally has a certain political and propaganda value, but for that there must be
a sufficiently clear basis so that those who hear the
word can know that those principles have always
guided the political behaviour of the Government of
the United Kingdom. I need only recall the example
of the island of Diego Garcia, and I seriously wonder
whether those principles apply only when it is a question of a handful of Anglo-Saxons and are ignored
when the people involved are of other races or other
ethnic origins.
134. The word “extravagant”
has been used to
refer to some parts of my statement. The extravagance
is found in the statements formulated in London. It is
precisely in London, at the highest levels of the
British Government, that there is talk of a Camp Davidtype solution, of an Ascension Island-type model.
That is where the destiny of those territories is
handled, as if we were back in the nineteenth century.
135. I have just been brought some extracts from an
interview given by the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom to the London television company ATV.
One need only read them to realize that the United
Kingdom is reiterating the importance of a Sinai-type
multilateral
force with the United States and other
countries. I wonder which are the other countries.
If they think that they will be Latin American countries, obviously they are not listening to the statements
coming from Latin America. What other countries
could they be referring to? Could it be countries of
Western Europe, members of NATO? I wonder if
they are in fact thinking of implanting a defence system
which would bring to the South Atlantic waters a
European military system. The extravagance is found
in those assertions.
136. Resolutions adopted by the Council have been
quoted, but always with the skilful mention of one
paragraph while ignoring others. Actually, those
resolutions form a whole, a doctrine through which to
find a solution to these very serious problems which
affect the lives of many human beings and the peace
and security of Latin America.

137. In the end, what we find in the statements of the
representative of the United Kingdom is that they are
not interested in the presence of the United Nations,
they are not interested in the presence of United
Nations observers. To understand that we need
only look at the statements that are coming out of
London.
138, Finally, I need only add that the word “conwas also used. “Confidentiality”
is a
fidentiality”
word which astonishes me when I think of the tremendous display of British propaganda covering the
whole spectrum of the situation. Such confidentiality
applies only while the talks are under way. Once the
talks have ended, the parties are free to present their
positions, because the Council must know exactly
how the negotiations
were carried out. We understand the insuperable
difficulties
the SecretaryGeneral faces in presenting the terms of the negotiations to the Council, but we are duty-bound to tell the
Council the truth. That explains why we said what we
did in our statement.
139. The PRESIDENT
(inrP,pr’ercrlic.,n.~ot?? French):
We have before us a draft resolution submitted by
Panama and Spain [S/1.5156]. The representatives
of
Panama and Spain have expressed the wish that this
draft resolution be put to the vote as quickly as possible, possibly even today.
140. I should add that during the contacts that I had
with a large number of members of the Council before
this meeting, I was informed that some members would
prefer that there be some time for reflection-not
more
than 24 hours-and
that the draft resolution not be
put to the vote until tomorrow.
141. If postponement
of the vote until tomorrow is
acceptable to the Council, I would suggest that the
vote on the draft resolution of Panama and Spain be
postponed until the next meeting, the time of which
will be established in consultation with the members of
the Council.

representative of the United Kingdom wishes to submit the draft resolution to his Government and to
receive appropriate instructions,
on the assumption
that he has now been able to read it and has realized
that his first interpretation
of the draft resolution is
not correct. I should like to know the views of the
representative of the United Kingdom, if that is passible.
145. Mr. KAM (Panama) (intcrpretrrtion fk~u ,!Qwis/t): As a sponsor of the draft resolution, my delegation, when it spoke earlier, said that the draft resoletion was being submitted as a matter of urgency, in
view of our alarm about the intensification
of the
conflict in the region of the Malvinas and the increasing
bloodshed. I also expressed the hope that the members
of the Council would be responsive to the situatioa.
146. However, Mr. President, you have said that
after consultations with several members of the Council it seems to you that we could vote tomorrow.
I understand that these consultations took place and
these views were given before the text of the draft
resolution was distributed. I am also aware that many
countries thought they should see the text before they
expressed their views in a vote.
147. Since the text has now been distributed in all
the working languages and since this would not be the
first time that a draft resolution had been voted on
on the day of its submission-although
I have been a
member of this body for only a short time, I have
witnessed draft resolutions submitted by permanent
members of the Council being put to the vote on the
day of submission-I
should like to urge, if the rnem
bers of the Council will permit me, that in view of the
urgent nature of the draft resolution and of its aims,
the Council could consider the possibility of voting OR
it today, unless you, Mr. President, decide otherwise.
148. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion fro/n Fre~dfJ:
I note that the representative of Panama wishes the
draft resolution to be put to the vote today. May
I ask for the views of the Council on this matter?

142. Mr. de PIN&S
(Spain) (iuterpretortion
frwm
Spcrrrislz); I know that it is usual for there to be an
interval of 24 hours after the submission of a draft
resolution before it is put to a vote, At the beginning
of this meeting, I myself said that my delegation would
have no objection to waiting 24 hours,

149. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): I should like first of all.
Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am quite
sure that under your able guidance the Council
meetings will proceed smoothly.

143. But I wonder whether there is any need for us
to wait 24 hours or whether, now that the draft resolution has been distributed,
the representative
of the
United Kingdom may not have realized that his first
interpretation
of the draft resolution as I read it out
was not correct, and that the draft resolution in fact
reaffirms resolutions 502 (1982) and 505 (1982).

150. At the same time, I would pay a high tribute to
your predecessor, Mr, Ling Qing, of China, for the
admirable way in which he conducted the Council’s
business last month. It was indeed the busiest 01
months, and many problems arose, one after another.
But Mr. Ling Qing dealt with them skilfully and
efficiently.

144. ln short, I should like to know whether that
delegation has already decided on its stand, in which
case there is no need to wait 24 hours, or whether the

15 1, I should also like to express my great admiration
and deep gratitude to the Secretary-General
for the
tireless and dedicated efforts he has made to bring

about a peaceful settlement of the dispute between
Argentina and the United Kingdom. Although his
efforts have not so far produced the desired results,
my delegation still hopes that those efforts will
eventuaily be successful.

I would suggest that we do not defer our decision on
the timing of the next meeting. Rather, let us agree on
the time right now. The representative of Japan has
said that he does not need 24 hours, that he would need
less time than that. Perhaps we could agree now to
meet tomorrow morning.

152. With regard to the draft resolution presented
orally by the representative of Spain and later supported by the representative of Panama, now duly
circulated in written form and sponsored by Panama
and Spain, my delegation fully realizes the urgency of
the matter, but, in view of the importance of the
problem, my delegation must naturally seek instructions from my Government.

156. The PRESIDENT
(intalpr’cttrtion ,fi-om French):
I thank the representative of the Soviet Union for his
constructive statement, but if I understood the representative of Japan correctly, the time most suitable
for him might perhaps be the early afternoon. Perhaps
we could agree to meet at 3 p.m. tomorrow.

153. Bot.h my Prime Minister and my Foreign Minister are now in an aircraft on the way to Paris to
attend the Western summit meeting, In the circumstances, my delegation feels constrained to request
that the voting take place tomorrow rather than today.
In saying tomorrow, I do not think that we have to wait
until 7.15 p.m., 24 hours from now; the vote could
perhaps take place a little earlier than that in’view of
the urgency of the matter.
154. The PRESIDENT
(interp~etrrtian~om
Fwrvh):
The representative of Japan has proposed deferring
until tomorrow, though not for 24 hours, the vote on
the draft resolution submitted by Panama and Spain. If
there is no objection, I would suggest that we postpone the vote on the draft resolution until our next
meeting, which will take place tomorrow at a time to
be set in consultation with the members of the Council.
155. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretutinn
from
Russian):

157. Mr. KAM (Panama) (interpr’etution ji-om Spanish): My delegation is sympathetic to and understanding of the difficulties
or limitations
other
delegations might have in casting their votes on draft
resolutions. Accordingly, out of courtesy, I shall not
insist on my request for a vote this afternoon, since
I wish to make a gesture of co-operation to the
delegation of Japan.
158. However, in view of what you have said,
Mr. President, I should like to propose formally that
the meeting be held tomorrow at I1 a.m., if that is
acceptable to the members of the Council, it being
understood that the Council will be meeting in order
to vote.
159. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpwtation from French):
The representative of Panama has proposed that the
Council meet tomorrow at 11 a.m. Since I hear no
objection, it is so decided.
The meeting

row rrt 7.20 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

pnhlications
ycl:r bookstore

NATiONS

may be obtained
t’rom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: UnitedNations,
Sales Section,
New

SE I’ 7OCIJRER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dl s Natrons
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes,
New York ou Cen&e.

COMO

CONSECUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES NATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estin
en venta en libren’as
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sent cn vente dam les librairies
et les agences
de votre
libraire
ou adressez-vous
21 : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
to&s
parks
del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

dCpositaires
du
Units,
Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,
