V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling also resolution 94 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 153
Recalling further Trade and Development Board
resolutions 132 (XV) of 15 August 1975 154 on the
increasing burden of debt servicing in developing
countries, adopted by the Board at the first part of
its fifteenth session, and 165 (S-IX) of 11 March
1978 155 on debt and development problems of developing countries, adopted at the third part of its
ninth special session, at the ministerial level,
Taking note of the report of the Trade and Development Board on its eighteenth session156 and of the
provisional agenda for the fifth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 157
Having considered the statement of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development with regard to work on the elaboration of detailed features for future operations concerning debt problems undertaken within the Conference,
Concerned that many developing countries are experiencing great difficulties in servicing their external
debt and are unable to pursue or initiate important
development projects,
Noting with concern that official development assistance flows are stagnating and that balance-of-payments support facilities to developing countries have
been inadequate,
Convinced that net capital inflows, especially those
relating to development assistance to developing countries and in particular to the most seriously affected,
least developed, land-locked and island developing
countries, must be increased substantially and rapidly,
Aware that the majority of developing countries
do not enjoy proper access to international capital
markets and that, in any event, loans in such markets
are available at high interest rates and on short maturities,
l. Welcomes the decision of some developed countries which have adopted measures for the adjustment
of past bilateral official development assistance in
respect of the least developed countries;
2. Notes, however, that such measures have not
been made applicable to many of the developing
countries specified in paragraph 2 of Trade and Development Board resolution 165 ( S-IX), which are
facing serious problems;
3. Calls upon all developed countries to implement
in full the agreement on debt problems contained in
Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX)
in respect of the most seriously affected, least developed, land-locked and island developing countries,
particularly the least developed among them;
153 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
154 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (Al 10015/Rev.1), part three,
annex I.
155 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15),
vol. I, part two, annex I.
1 56 Ibid., vol. II.
157 Ibid., annex II.

119

4. Further calls upon all developed countries and
competent international institutions to implement the
provisions of Trade and Development Board resolution 132 (XV) on the increasing burden of debt
servicing in developing countries;
5. Welcomes the inclusion in the provisional
agenda for the fifth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development of the following
items:
(a)
Review of implementation and further action
that may be required pursuant to Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX);
( b)
Detailed features for future operations relating to the debt problems of interested developing countries;
6. Recommends that additional financial resources
should be committed by multilateral development finance institutions to the developing countries experiencing debt servicing difficulties;
7. Urges all developed countries to work towards
the adoption at the fifth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development of actionorientated decisions on the debt problems faced by
the developing countries.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/160.

United Nations Conference on a Convention on International Multimodal
Transport

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Trade and Development Board
at its eighteenth session authorized the Intergovernmental Preparatory Group on Multimodal Transport,
should it complete its work at its fifth session, to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session, through the Economic and Social Council,
its recommendations concerning the convening of a
conference of plenipotentiaries on a convention on
international multi modal transport, 158
Noting that the Intergovernmental Preparatory
Group did not complete its work and consequently
has not submitted any recommendations concerning a
conference,
Noting further that the Intergovernmental Preparatory Group will now hold a sixth session from 26 February to 9 March 1979 at Geneva,
l. Decides that a conference of plenipotentiaries
on a convention on international multimodal transport
be convened;
2. Requests the Intergovernmental Preparatory
Group at its sixth session to make recommendations
concerning the appropriate dates, either in 1979 or
1980, for the convening of the United Nations Conference on a Convention on International Multimodal
Transport;
3. Requests further the Trade and Development
Board at its tenth special session, in March 1979, to
consider this question on the basis of the recommendation of the Intergovernmental Preparatory Group.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
158 Ibid.,

annex I, decision (h).
