20

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Sesaion

1. Condemns the use of napalm and other incendiary weapons in armed conflicts in circumstances where
it may affect human beings or may cause damage to
the environment and/or natural resources;
2. Urges all States to refrain from the production,
stockpiling, proliferation and use of such weapons,
pending the conclusion of agreements on the prohibition of these weapons;
3. Invites all Governments, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the specialized agencies and
the other international organizations concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General all information about the
use of napalm and other incendiary weapons in armed
conflicts;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report on this subject, based on information received
under paragraph 3 of the present resolution, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.

2309th pleMry meeting
9 December 1974
3256 (XXIX). Chemical and bacteriological
(biological) weapons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of
20 December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December
1969, 2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2827 A
(XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2933 (XXVII) of
29 November 1972 and 3077 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
Convinced that the process of detente in the world is
conducive to the implementation of further disarmament measures and of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Stressing the contribution that early agreement on
the complete prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on
their destruction would make to general and complete
disarmament under effective international control,
Recalling that it has repeatedly condemned all actions that are contrary to the principles and objectives
of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War
of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva
on 17 June 1925, 20
Reaffirming the need for the strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives of that Protocol,
Convinced that the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction 21 constitutes an important step
towards agreement on the effective prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their elimination from the arsenals
of all States,
RecaUing, in this connexion, the undertaking contained in article IX of the Convention to continue
negotiations in good faith with a view to reaching
early agreement on effective measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpMing
of chemical weapons and for their destruction,
20 League

p. 65.,

of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,

21 Resolution

2826 (XXVI), anne:11.

Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament,22
Noting that draft conventions on the prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their destruction ·as well as many
other working documents, proposals and suggestions
have been submitted to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,
Desiring to contribute to the successful conclusion
of negotiations on effective measures for the complete
prohibition of the development, production ~nd stockpiling of all chemical weapons and for their destruction,
1. Reaffirms the objective of reaching agreement
on the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
on their elimination from the arsenals of aH States;
2. Urges all States to make every effort to facilitate
agreement on the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction;
3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations as a matter of
high priority, bearing in mind existing proposals, with
a view to reaching early agreement on effective. measures for the prohibition of the development, production
and stockpioling of all chemical weapons and for their
destruction;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
sign and ratify the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, with a view to its entry into force
and effective implementation at an early date;
5. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to or ratify the Protocol for the Prohibition of
the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other
Gases, and of, Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, in the course of
1975 in commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of
its signing, and caMs anew for the strict observance by
all States of the principles and objectives contained
therein;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents of the First Committee relating to questions
connected with the problem of chemical weapons and
chemical methods of warfare;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2 309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3257 (XXIX). Urgent need for cessation df,. nuclear and thermonuclear tests und conclusion
of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban

The General Assembly,
Gravely disturbed at the continuance of nuclear
weapon testing since the twenty-eighth session of the
General Assembly,
22 A/9708-DC/23'7. For the printed text, see Official Records
of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 27 (A/9627).

21

R«-solutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject,
Recalling the stated aim of the parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water23 and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 24 to seek to
achieve the discontinuance of aM test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time,
Taking note of the special report of the Conference
of the Committee on Disarmament on the question of
a treaty banning underground nuclear weapon tests, 25
Believing that the continuance of nuclear weapon
testing will intensify the arms race, thus increasing the
danger of nuclear war,
Convinced that cessation of nuclear weapon testing
would be in the supreme interest of mankind, both as
a major step towards controlling the development and
proliferation of nuolear weapons and to relieve the
deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences of radio-active contamination for the health
of present and future generations,
1. Condemns all nuclear weapon tests, in whatever
environment they may be conducted;
2. Reaffirms its deep concern at the continuance
of such testing, both in the atmosphere and under
ground, and at the lack of progress towards a comprehensive test ban agreement;
3. Calls upon all States not yet parties to the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water to adhere to it forthwith;
4. Emphasizes once more the urgency of concluding
a comprehensive test ban agreement;
5. Reminds the nuclear-weapon States of their special responsibility to initiate proposals to this end;
6. Calls upon all States to -refrain from the testing
of nuclear weapons, in any environment, pending conclusion of such an agreement;
7. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to give the highest priority to the conclusion of a comprehensive test ban agreement and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session
on the progress achieved;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "lJrgent need for
cessation of nuclear and thermonuclear tests and conclusion of a treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974

·3258 (XXIX). Implementation of General Assembly resolution 3079 (XXVIU) concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol U of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
28 United Nations.

Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.
2373 (XXII), annex.
sect. III. For the printed text, sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth Session,
S"pplement No. 27 (A/9627).

of 7 December I 970, 2830 (XXVI) of I 6 December
1971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972 and 3079
( XXV 111) of 6 December 1973, in six of which appeals have been made to the nuclear-weapon States regarding the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tiatelolco},26
Reiterating its conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
I. Notes with satisfaction that Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which entered
into force for the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America
in 1969 and 1971, respectively, has entered into force
as well during the current year for France and the
People's Republic of China, whose Governments deposited their respective instruments of ratification on
22 March and 12 June 1974;
2. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to
sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of. the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), as has already been done
by the other four nuclear-weapon States to which the
General Assembly began to address its appeals in
1967;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3258 (XXIX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tiatelolco) ".

2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3259 (XXIX). Implementation of the Declaration
of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a
Zone of Peace, contained in resolution 2832 (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, and recalling also General
Assembly resolutions 2992 (XXVII) of 15 December
1972 and 3080 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
Firmly convinced that further and continuous efforts
are required to fulfil the objectives of the Declaration,
and thus to contribute to the stren1>thening of regional
and international peace and security,
•·
Noting the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the
7
Indian Ocean,2
Further noting the factual statement of the great
Powers' military presence in all its aspects, in the
Indian Ocean, with special reference to their naval
deployments, conceived in the context of great Power

24 Resolution

2 5 A/9708-DC/237,

26 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.
21 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth

Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/9629 and Add.I).
