UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1771

st

NEW

COUNCIL

MEETING.:

29 MAY

1974

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l77 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/l 1294) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

1

WPV. 1771

.

.’

_.

,.,

NOTE

:

.
Symbols of United Nations documents are com$sed of capital letters combined
with.figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of, the Security Council (symbol S/...j are normally published’&
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council,-numbered’in
accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
,,

,.
I.

..._P

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 29 May 1974, at 10.30 a.m.
&esident:

Mr. Charles Gatere MAINA

(Kenya).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northerriheland,
United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l771)
1. Adoption

of,the agenda

.I

2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the, United Nations
addresse,d to the President of the Security
Council
. . .~
(S/5488):;
Report of the Secretary-General
on.the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/11294)
The meeting was called to order at Il.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

at this time. As a result of tnose consultatrons, a draft
resolution has been prepared and is now before the Council
[S/ZZ302]. The text follows closely those of the resolutions
the Council has previously adopted on this question and,
like them, is very carefully balanced in its presentation. As it
appears from consultations that this text is generally acceptable, it is ‘my intention to put it to the vote now, as the
’ Council has often done in the past and, after the voting has
been completed, to call upon representatives who wish to
speak.
3. Accordingly,
S/l 1301.

I’shall now I put to the vote draft resolution

A vote was taken bj, show’ bf hnnds.

‘lnfmour: Australia, Austria, ‘Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Costa Rica, France; Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya,
Mauritania, Peru, Union‘ of Soviet Socialist Republics,
‘United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United States of America.
Against: None.
Abstciining: China.

fire draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none, with
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/11294)
1. The PRESIDENT:
The representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, in letters addressed to the President of the
Security Council, have requested to be invited to participate,
without the right to vote, in the discussion in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council. Accordingly,
I propose, in accordance with the usual practice, under the
provisional rules of procedure, and if there is no objection,
to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece
to take places at the Council table in order to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rossides (Cyprus),
Mr. Okay (Turkey) and Mr. Megalokonomos (Greece) -took
places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Prior to this meeting, consultations
were held among all members of the Council and also with
the representatives of the parties concerned in order to
prepare a draft resolution which the Council could consider

1 abstention. *
4. ‘The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, upon whom I now call.
5. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, I should like
at the outset to thank you and the members of the Council
for inviting my delegation to participate in this meeting.
May I also congratulate you on your assuming the presidency of the Council. We are convinced that with your high
personal qualities you will guide the deliberations of this
august body in the best possible way. It is a source of
gratification -for my delegation that the presidency of the
Council is held this month by the representative of a friendly
and forward-looking
country which has played a constructive and leading role within the great continent of Africa and
on global issues in the United Nations, as shown by its
hosting of the United Nations Environment Programme.
Kenya and Cyprus, which have had a great deal in common
in their struggles for independence, have always maintained
friendly relations, and co-operation in many fields of common endeavour, both in international forums such as the
United Nations and the non-aligned group and on a bilateral basis. This is particularly true of the close relations
between my President and the President of Kenya, Mr. Ken’ See resolution

349 (1974).

yatta, a towering figure of this century and a living example
of the struggle for freedom and human dignity. It is also for
that reason that it gives my delegation particular pleasure to
appear at this meeting of the Council.

hope that UNFICYP will continue its patient and commendable efforts towards eliminating or reducing confrontation and that the Turkish Cypriot leadership will see the
advisability of a more co-operative spirit in this respect.

6. We have before us the report of the Secretary-General
[S/Z1294 regarding the situation and the development of
the United Nations operation in Cyprus. We are happy to
note from the report that the implementation of the second
phase of the reduction of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
has been carried out in a
manner leaving unaffected the ability of the Force for
deployment and interposition, an essential function under
the mandate of resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964. We
have also noted with understanding and appreciation the
Secretary-General’s considered view that it would be wise to
allow time to access the effects of the reductions already
made and that he does not contemplate an additional reduction of the Force at the present moment.

10. In regard to freedom of movement. a&in the relevant
posture ofthe Turkish Cypriot leadership his been the same
unchanging pattern of non-compliance with the repeated
appeals of the Secretary-General over the years and the
proposals of UNFICYP for the lifting of checkpoints, proposals with which the Government has all along expressed
its willingness to comply. But there has been a considerable
improvement in that respect since 1968. Unfortunately,
however, the trafIic has been only one-way. Thus in order
more effectively to assist the efforts of UNFICYP ,for freedom of movement, the Government in 1968 took the initiative of unilateral action to eliminate all checkpoints and
restrictions, despite the risk involved in the situation, in the
expectation by the Government and UNFICYP of a reasonable response from the other side. As the Secretary-General
pointed out in his report of 9 March 1968:
6‘ . . . Now that the Government of Cyprus has extended its normalization measures to the whole of Cyprus,
the Turkish Cypriot leadership should find it possible to
make those necessary concessions for a full return to
normal conditions and, as a first step, to abandon its
policy of preventing Greek Cypriotsfrom moving freely
in the Turkish Cypriot-controlled areas”. [S/8446para.
155.1

7. Ten years have elapsed since the Council adopted its
main resolution on Cyprus in the effort to bring peace and
normality to the island and provide the means for a peaceful
solution of the problem. A glance at the reports of the
Secretary-General over this period may serve as a useful
guide in seeing an integrated picture of the situation and its
development and assessing its significance.
8. It may be pertinent to recall at this juncture that resolution 186 (1964) provided for a two-pronged effort: first, that
of peacekeeping, which includes deconfrontation and normalization through the establishment of the United Nations
‘Force in Cyprus; and, secondly, that of peacemaking
through the appointment of a mediator for the solution of
the problem. That was the position at the time of the
adoption of the resolution from which we started. The
former task, namely that of peacekeeping, for which
UNFICYP
was established, has been and is being performed in respect of the maintenance of peace in a most
useful and effective way. However, in respect of military
deconfrontation, normalization and freedom of movement,
consecutive reports over this period have expressed the
concern of the Secretary-General at the lack of progress in
this field. It is, however, on record in all those reports that
the Government of Cyprus has consistently and fully cooperated with UNFICYP in all its relevant efforts towards
peace and normality.

In the same report it was pointed out:
“The relaxation of restrictions [on freedom of
movement]“-by
the Government-“has
unmistakably
demonstrated that Greek and Turkish Cypriot people
desire to live in peace and harmony and seem already
prepared to accept and support reasonable compromises”. [ibid, para. 153.1
In the same report it was stated that the increased cooperation in economic matters among various sections of
the Cyprus population and the progressive extension of
public services to the Turkish Cypriots were among the few
really encouraging features of the period under review.
11. Regrettably, the repeated appeals of the SecretaryGeneral in that tenor-appeals which continued in the following reports-fell on deaf ears, as the Turkish Cypriot
leadership’s action was rather to clamp down upon these
positive and hopeful developments. Thus the important
improvement
in the freedom of movement resulted in
the imbalance of only one-way freedom of movement, as
pointed out in the report of the Secretary-General, whereas
Turkish Cypriots have freedom of movement over the whole
island, the Greek Cypriots are prevented not only from entering the enclaves but also from entering a great number of
public roads, among which are main communication roads.
Yet the initiative of the Government has had a very happy
consequence, and the Government is assisting in this effort by
taking all possible initiatives towards improving the situation,
in spite of the pattern of noncooperation on the part of the
Turkish Cypriot side.

9. Regarding deconfrontation, my Government has on all
occasions shown its willingness and readiness to accept
general and island-wide deconfrontation as proposed by
UNFICYP and has itself also taken all possible initiatives
and proposals in this respect from the earliest period. It has
also accepted partial or phased deconfrontation as suggested by UNFICYP,
including its last proposals which
appear in the report [S/11137of I December 19731. Regrettably, the relevant posture by the Turkish Cypriot leadership has been an unchanging pattern of non-compliance
with the repeated appeals of the Secretary-General over the
years for at least a measure of deconfrontation. This longcontinuing military confrontation, still persisting at close
quarters, is wholly unnecessary; it is a source of tension and
danger and, at the same time, involves a most wasteful
expenditure that could profitably be used otherwise. We

12. Similarly, in the economic field-and I am still talking
about this IO-year period-the
appeals of the Secretary2

independent, sovereign and unitary State with the adequate participation of the two communities.” [S/10842,
para SO.]

General for the necessary mtegration of the economy in the
vital interest of the whole population of Cyprus and more
particularly of the Turkish Cypriot community met with
the same unalterable pattern of non-co-operation on the
part of the Turkish Cypriot leadership and an illogical
resistance to all measures for economic co-operation, as
emerges from the reports of the Secretary-General. The
unchanging pattern of separatism and segregation imposed
on Turkish Cypriots by their leadership extends to all fields
of life, including ordinary social contacts and trade and
commercial relations with their co-citizens of Greek origin.
This policy unavoidably has its adverse impact on the progress towards solution of the problem.

16. As indicated in the present report, there was a measure
of progress on the outstanding questions concerning the
structure and functions of the local government on which
the two constitutional experts were engaged in an effort
towards a package deal.
17. The talks, however, came to an abrupt standstill following upon a statement at Ankara by the Prime Minister of
Turkey interjecting from outside the concept of a federal
State for Cyprus, contrary to the basis on which the talks
had been conducted until then. The statement brought
sharp reaction from Cyprus, as described in paragraph 61 of
the report. This, however, was inevitable, particularly bearing
in mind, apart from other aspects, the partitionist connotations that the concept of federation is considered to have
when used by Ankara with respect to Cyprus. My Govemment has made it abundantly clear that it rejects outright
any concept of federation.

13. To turn now to the actual development of the United
Nations effort towards solution through mediation and the
good offIces of the Secretary-General, the Mediator appointed in 1964, Mr. Galo Plaza, submitted an objective report
[S/4235 of 26Mczrch Z%Sl fully endorsed by the SecretaryGeneral for a realistic and balanced solution of the problem.
Regrettably, for reasons that I need not enter into now, the
report was rejected by one side. Because of its intrinsic merit,
however, that report is ever alive as a useful guide for a just
and lasting solution of the problem in accordance with the
Charter and the United Nations resolutions on Cyprus.

18. Furthermore, it should be pointed out that, aside from !
the agreed basis of a unitary State, a federal structure is
entirely inapplicable in Cyprus-and
this ought to be
known by all who have studied the question of Cyprus-by
reason of the realities of an intermingled population
throughout the island, with a Greek majority and a Turkish
minority in every one of its six districts and cities. There
exists, therefore, no pattern of territorial separation on
which a federal structure could possibly be based or even
conceived. This was emphatically declared by the eminent
constitutional authority, Lord Radcliffe, who was commissioned by the British Government in 1956 to study the
constitutional
possibilities for Cyprus. Lord Radcliffe
declared2 that Cyprus could not be organized in a federal
way for, as he actually said, there was no pattern of territorial separation between the two communities and the idea of
federation of communities which would not involve federation of territories was not practically feasible. Mr. Galo
Plaza, in his studied report, came to exactly the same
conclusion.

14. Now we are following another course, that of negotiations through local talks, begun in 1968, on the basis of an
independent, sovereign and unitary State. This agreed basis
was more than once expressed by both sides, and the relevant consensus was recorded by the Secretary-General in his
report of 2 December 1970:
“The two sides have also indicated that a settlement can
be worked out on the basis of an independent, sovereign
and unitary State of Cyprus in which the two communities participate. This limited consensus indicates that
there is a basis for at least some kind of accommodation.” [S/10005, para. 220.1
The substance and correctness of the foregoing statement
was not questioned and was accepted by both sides at the
1564th meeting of the Council that followed on 10 December 1970, the representative of Turkey at that time having
referred specifically to paragraph 120 of that report in terms
of full approval. Subsequent reports of the SecretaryGeneral confirmed that basis for the talks [See S/Z0199 of
20 May 1971, S/10401 qf 30 Novembr 1971. WI0842 of
1 December I972 and S/11137 of 1 December 19731.

19. The concept of federation in Cyprus was considered to
be wholly abandoned. Its recent mention, therefore, has
naturally caused no little surprise and disappointment as a
move towards putting up barriers of impossibility to an
agreed solution at a time when the talks were progressing
hopefully, according to the report. My Government, I must
say, has made it crystal clear that it will not accept or
consider any deviation from the agreed basis of an independent, sovereign and unitary State of Cyprus on which the
talks have been conducted, and on which alone a solution
can be found. Any such deviation would in reality completely frustrate the very foundation upon which the talks
have been conducted for over five years and upon which
they are based, thus rendering their continuance nugatory
and useiess.

15. When these talks, as they proceeded, ran into diffculties over the structure and functions of local government,
they were reactivated in a procedurally expanded form by
the Secretary-General’s aide-mCmoires of 18 October 1971
[S/lO4OZ, para. 791 and ‘18 May 1972 [S/10664, para. 621,
which provided for the participation in the talks of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
presence of two constitutional experts from Greece and
Turkey in an advisory capacity. With this expanded form it
was hoped that the difficulties could eventually be smoothed
out. The Secretary-General, in his report of 1 December
1972, following those aide-mCmoires, stated:

20. However, it is fortunate that through the energetic
action of the Secretary-General and his assistants, Under-

“I have no doubt that the reactivated intercommunal
talks are the best instrument for achieving a satisfactory,
lasting and agreea soluuon based on the concept of an

2 Constitutional
Proposals for
tionery Office, 1956). para. 28.

3

Cyprus,

Cmnd.

42 (London,

HM

Sta-

._

.

Secreuuy-General Mr. Guyer’ and his Special Repmsentative Mr. Osorio-Tafall, an agreed formula was arriied at, by
which the talks will be resumed on the same basis on which
they have been so far conducted. This formula aims at the
resumption of. the talks started in 1968, which are to be
continued, with regard to procedure-on the basis of their
expanded form of participation in accordance with the
aide-memoires of 18 October 1971 and 18 May 1972-and
with regard to substance-on the same basis on which the
talks were being conducted before they were suspended.
That basis is that, of an independent, sovereign and unitary
State as established in the .consensus, expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report of 2 December 1970
[S/ZOOO~, to which I have already referred.

26: Before I conclude, it is my pleasant duty to express my
Government’s profound appreciation to the’ SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Waldheim, and to his assistants, both here and
in Cyprus for the constructive and dedicated work they have
been carrying out in discharging the responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to the question of Cyprus. More
particularly,
our gratitude goes to Under-SecretariesGeneral Guyer and Urquhart and to General Prem Chand,
the Commander of the United Nations Force in Cyprus. A
special tribute is due to Mr. Bibiano Osorio-Tafall, who
carried out with outstanding dedication his functions as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus
for seven and a half years. Mr. Osorio-Tafall has consistently discharged ,his functions in the best traditions of the
international civil service, as we have had recent occasion to
witness in connexion with his efforts for the resumption of
the local talks-efforts which were crowned with success.
My, Government and I personally wish to extend to him our
best wishes for his future activites. The one consolation for
the vacuum left by his impending departure is that his
successor, Mr. Luis Weckmann-Mufioz,
with his outstanding personal qualifications and long experience in intemational affairs, will, we have no doubt, fill the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General at a correspondingly high standard. We wish to extend to him our best
wishes for success in his new post and to pledge our sincere
co-operation in this regard.

21. The agreed formula i thus a positive step in the right
direction leading to the resumption of the talks and at the
same time eliminating any confusion by providing that the
basis of the talks shall remain unchanged from that on
which the talks have been conducted until now.
22. We express the hope that with the resumption of the
talks on 4 June there will be a rebirth in a new and more
co-operative ‘spirit towards a common purpose: that of the
establishment of a sound and workable constitution within
the universally established constitutional norms and with
the adequate participation of the Turkish Cypriot community. It should be realized that the interests of that community do not lie in artificially perpetuated antagonism and
friction but in goodwill and co-operation for the common’
:
good of all concerned.

27. I would also wish to express once again our deep
appreciation and gratitude to those countries which, by their
noble dediation to the concept of peace keeping by the
United Nations, make the continuation of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus possible through their contributions in men and money.

23. In our present time and age of a rapidly evolving
interdependent world when there has never before been such
widespread recognition of the necessity for unified political
and social structures, Cyprus could not be compelled to
move regressively and perilously in the opposite direction;
nor could it do so without dire consequences to its people
and to the cause of peace. In an age of growing integration,
Cyprus cannot be driven to its internal disintegration. .^

28. * The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

I call upon the representative of

29. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Mr. President, although I have
had the honour to meet you on previous occasions, it gives
me great pleasure to express to you the’satisfaction of my
delegation at seeing you preside over the Security Council. I
am sure that under your wise guidance the Council will
successfully complete the work it will have to do during your
tenure of office. The excellent relations between our two
countries guarantee the full co-operation of my delegation
with you during the consideration of the present agenda
item, in which my delegation is participating.

24. The solution of the problem cannot be advanced
through the negativeness of division and the sterility of
imposed separatism, but only through genuine co-operation
in a spirit of conciliation and mutual understanding.’ This
spirit, I am happy to add, is ever alive in- the hearts and
minds of the Cypriot people, Greeks and Turks alike, and
has been pointed out in five consecutive reports by the
Secretary-General. In that spirit a just, ,democratic and
enduring solution of the problem in accordance with the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
can well be reached to the benefit of all the Cypriot people.

30. For more than 10 years, it has been customary for my
delegation to make its appearance before the Council every
six months because of a conflict which was created neither
by Turkey nor by the Turkish Cypriot community. This is
my own fifth’appearance in the two years I have been here.
The search for a peaceful solution has been going on for
quite some time and my delegation feels that a great deal of
time has been lost over semantic arguments because of
efforts to introduce unacceptable terminology into the literature of the intercommunal talks. I shall elaborate on this
later on.

25. We are not unmindful of the pervading influence of
outdated habits of thinking and the effects of their momentum. In fact this is one of the main sources of difficulties and
troubles in our fast-changing world of today. But I would
appeal in the Security Council to the leadership of our
co-citizens of Turkish origin to reconsider in a broader spirit
and in a more positive way the excessive separativeness in
their policy with a view to more reasonable and workable
limits, so that positive progress may by achieved towards a
just solution in the interest of all concerned and that of
peace.

3 1. My delegation has again carefully studied and considered the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations .operation in Cyprus [S/11294] which constitutes
4

..I.

i.

.

I

:

:

ti,z basis of the Security Council’s deliberations. As regards
the reduction of UNFICYP, I should like to emphasize that
the views and reservations of my Government mentioned in
paragraph 13 of the report remain unchanged. We are not
able fully to share the satisfaction expressed by the Force
%ommander with regard to the possible effects of the operational changes resulting from these reductions. It goes without saying, therefore, that we endorse entirely the
Secretary-General’s view that “a further reduction would be
premature at this stage”, that, despite the present quiet, the
situation in the island is still tense and potentially dangerous
and that “it would be wise to allow time for an assessment of
the effects of those reductions before making further moves
in that direction.‘: [Ibid., para. 79.1 Furthermore, the need to
avoid reductions in the sensitive areas of the island, underlined in our reservations, is not compatible with the idea of
further reductions in the Force, which we consider already
reduced to its minimum level of effectiveness.
32. In several paragraphs of the report there are references
to disturbances and “anti-Government’*
demonstrations
within the Greek community. The report was carefully drafted so as not to offend any particular quarter in mentioning
those disturbances. This careful language, however, compels me to dwell briefly on the nature of those disturbances
and demonstrations so that the causes for concern by the
Turkish community can be better understood by the
Council.
33. Those disturbances and those demonstrations within
the Greek Cypriot community have one professed goal: the
realization of enosis. The Greek community continues to be
engaged in extensive arguments over how, when and by
whom enosis will be achieved. The outcome of these arguments is irrelevant from the Turkish point of view as long as
all the Greek contestants agree about the ultimate goal:
unification of Cyprus with Greece. Although Archbishop
Makarios freely speaks of Cyprus as “the territory of southern Greece” and never ceases to emphasize that his ultimate
objective is the realization of its unification with.what he
calls “the northern Greece”, it seems that certain more
impatient Greek quarters are not content with the way and
the expediency with which this issue is being handled. They
fail to see that under the disguise of the concept of “a unitary
State”, the Archbishop is pursuing the very same national
goal. Some of these Greek quarters which create the disturbances do not understand his stage-by-stage approach to
enosis which in the first instance requires getting rid of the
hi-communal structure of the State and replacing it with a
unitary State. This is, unfortunately, a common misunderstanding arising from the confusion of the Greek Cypriot
policy with the Greek Cypriot propaganda, which in the
instance of the Greek Cypriot community results in violence
and disturbances. These disturbances include large amounts
of arms thefts from the military camps of the Greek Cypriot
National Guard, which the report does not mention, shootings and bomb explosions, the creation and expansion of a
paramilitary
Police Tactical Reserve Unit, which has
already been used once ,in an intercommunal situation, as
reported in paragraph 30 of the said report, smuggling and
importation of new arms by all sections of the Greek corn--munity, whose ultimate use may be against the,Turkish
community and, last but not least, an actively hostile and
extensive campaign against the Turkish community. Even

schoolchildren have been used in demonstrations where
they were made to carry placards asking the Greek Cypriot
administration to expel the Turkish Cypriots from Cyprus.
34. What was really deplored by what is described in
paragraph 35 of the report as “most sections of the Greek
Cypriot press” was the fact that those demonstrations’were
also directed against the Greek Cypriot administration; it
was certainly not their anti-Turkish character. As reported
in the same paragraph, there have been incidents of Greek
Cypriot National Guardsmen acting in a provocative
manner against the Turks. It was only,through the restraint
exercised by the Turkish Cypriots that a serious clash was
avoided in the .particular incident given as an example.
35. In the light of all those developments, I hope it will be
better understood why no progress has been made towards
achieving a measure of military deconfrontation, “regrettable’! as this may be, to quote paragraph 28 of the report. The
true nature of the developments within the Greek Cypriot
community which I explained cannot but cause concern, an
increased sense of insecurity and a reluctance within the
Turkish Cypriot community to reduce its military precautions; This is only natural in the light of its hard experience
for ‘the past 10 years. I shall revert to this subject.
36. There are refereuces in paragraphs 33 and 77 respectively of the report to the indications and reports that “‘arms
have been brought into the‘i.+land recently” and that “additional weapons are being introduced into the island”. The
answer to the question which first comes to mind, “by whom
were these weapons introduced into the island?‘+ is not
readily available to the reader of the report. I would therefore try to clarify it on the basisof Greek Cypriot press
reports, which point to one or the other faction of the Greek
Cypriot community. Probably both versions are correct.
And they are as correct as they are disquieting to the Turkish
community. I should like to place on record once again my
Government’s deep concern over these developments.
37. Paragraph 32 of the report, speaking about the present
arrangements to prevent the use of Humber armoured
trucks imported by the Greek Cypriot Administration, once
again ‘indicates that the UNFICYP Commander does not
consider these arrangements satisfactory. Furthermore, at a
time when there are widespread rumours that the armoured
vehicles already imported will be turned over to the abovementioned Police Tactical Reserve Unit and that new ones
are on their way, such a vague undertaking as “the Govemment . . . is hopeful .of being able to assist’ in finding a
satisfactory solution in the near future” cannot be a source
of satisfaction for my delegation.
38. On the question of the return to normal conditions, the
report mentions the hardships and deprivations endured by
the Turkish community for over 10 years because of the
political conflict. Ambassador Rossides tried a moment ago
to reduce the whole problem .to a ‘kind of whim of the
Turkish -leadership in Cyprus not to allow the Greeks- to
enter Turkish sectors. No mention could of course be expected from him of the reasons which led the Turks to entrench
themselves behind barricades to defend their very existence.

made impossible in Cyprus they are of course very important. And, as I had occasion to mention before in the
Council, the Turks of Cyprus have no other voice in this
chamber but mine. I am therefore bound sometimes to
explain various problems.

39. The list of the hardships resulting from the political
situation created by the Greek Cypriots is a long and sad
one, and the report speaks for itself. The Greek Cypriot
Administration,
which obviously is not the Government
envisaged in the Constitution of Cyprus, cannot of course
expect to gain recognition for its unconstitutional authority
by coercive methods.

46. With regard to section IV of the report of 22 May
1974, on intercommunal
talks and good off&s of the
Secretary-General, I have several observations which I think
will supplement and complete the picture, especially after
the description of the situation that we have heard from
Ambassador Rossides.

40. Pending a political solution which could hopefully
resolve all questions of a return to normal conditions, these
humanitarian problems require practical solutions which
would not affect the political position of the parties. It is to
this end, rather than to the freedom of movement of what
the report calls “government oflicials in Turkish Cypriot
areas” [lb& para. S7J, that UNFICYP
should, I think,
direct its efforts.

47. The 1960 Constitution-I
am sorry to have to go back
to history but it seems that that is what we have to doestablished a hi-communal State based on the partnership of
the Turkish and the Greek communities under a functional
federative system. A brief review by anyone of the institutions of that Constitution can establish this fact. The Turkish side has never accepted any change in these basic
principles of the 1960 Constitution on which the independent Republic of Cyprus was born and on which alone it can
survive as an independent State.

41. Before concluding my remarks on this chapter I shall,
for the benefit of the members of the Council, supplement
the report on some problems whose existence is not adequately reflected. The lengthy nzmarks made by Ambassador
Rossides on the subject of freedom of movement and
normalisation compel me to give some more clarification.

48. In 1968 the Turkish community benan exploring with
the Greek community the possibilities, for a package deal
under which it would acquire local autqnomy as an additional safeguard in the light of its past experience and give up
certain of its rights under the 1960 Constitution, without
however renouncing its basic principles. In this connexion I
have to place on record here that the words “degree of local
authority”, used in paragraph 60 of the sport, do not prop
erly describe the Turkish position. The .Turkish Cypriots
have always used the words “local autonomy”.

42. For instance, there is the question of the Turkish
Cypriot refugees. It has not yet been possible to make
progress on this question. The Greek Cypriot Administration continues to reject the Turkish proposal to set up a joint
committee under United Nations chairmanship to arrange
the rehabilitation of the Turkish Cypriot refugees, free from
all political motivation and bias. The Greek Cypriot side is
doing everything possible to impede the return of the Turkish Cypriot refugees to their villages by creating artificial
difficulties such as the refusal to supply their homes with
drinking water, electricity and other facilities and claiming a
variety of accumulated prohibitive sums as taxes or dues for
water, rural constable fees and so on, in respect of which the
refugees have had no benefit for the last 11 years.

49. In 1968, when the intecommunal talks started, there
were no terms of reference for these talks. They were conducted without any pre-conditions and in an exploratory
manner. Against this background, it is a grave mistake for
anyone to think that the idea of a unitary State was ever
accepted by the Turkish side as a framework for discussions.
The fact that the former Secretary-General made several
statements-which I consider unfortunate-about
the intercommunal talks, which he should not have done without
first getting the agreement of the parties, could not impose a
framework for the intercommunal ~talks, which started
much before the first of those statements.

43. Some of the Turkish Cypriots who have returned to
their villages with the help of the Turkish Cypriot Administration are being harassed by the Greek Cypriots and their
Administration. This is the case in three of the four villages
mentioned in paragraph 51. The prohibition on the return
of the Turkish Cypriot refugees to six major villages is still in
full force. The Turkish inhabitants of these particular villages are also being denied access to their properties, even
for agricultural purposes.

50. It was the Greek Cypriot intransigence, encouraged by
these statements, which brought the talks to a deadloclc in
1971. It became very clear that the Greek Cypriot policy of a
unitary State was meant to reduce the Turkish community
from an effective element and a partner in safeguarding the
continued independence of Cyprus :to that of an insignificant minority. It was meant to alter the basic principles of
.T
the 1960 Consititution.
.
51. Both in my private conversations with the former
Secretary-General and in my public statements in the Security Council, I have emphasized many, many times, and with
some authority at that time and with firzt-&nd knowlcdg:e,
that a unitary State has never been-the agreed basis of the
talks and that it will not be accepted at any stage. During
these official conversations with .-!he former Srcretary-

44. With reference to paragraph 52, concerning normaliz&ion of the postal services, I would add-again to complement the report-that
UNFICYP is well aware that the
Greek Cypriot Administration
is not honoring the ad hoc
arrangement of 15 October 1966 on postal services [S/7612
and Add I, para. 1453 in that it opposes its extension to the
full implementation level. Under these circumstances, the
Turkish side had no alternative but to establish an interTurkish areas service to serve villages and Turkish areas
which were not benefiting from the ad hoc arrangement.
45. I have perhaps dwelt too long on this subject and I
apologize for it. Some of these things may seem to be
questions of mere detail, but for those whose daily life is
6

General we agreed to reactivate the intercommunal talks,
and he issued an aide-memoire dated 18 October 1971
[S/10402, para. 791. Nowhere had there been any mention
of a unitary State. Several consultations then took place
between the Turkish delegation and the present SecretaryGeneral and his assistants.

isiand. And here again I have to make a clarifications’
Ambassador Rossides referred today to the divisive attitude
on the part of Turkey or the Turkish Cypriots and in doing
so he also referred to the Cypriot people’s wish. Now, let us
see what his own head of State has to say on the subject. I
have here a copy of the Cyprus Mail. Archbishop Makarios
recently gave an interview to a correspondent of a Federal
Republic of Germany newspaper, Frankfurter Rundrchau.
The correspondent observed that, despite the existence of an
independent Cyprus for IO years, seldom could one see a
Cypriot flag and that there was the Greek flag on the one
side and the Turkish flag on the other. The correspondent
than asked: “What is the Government doing to promote a
Cypriot national consciousness?‘? Archbishop Makarios
responded: “It is only in governmental buildings that .the
Cypriot flag can be seen”. The Greek inhabitants of Cyprus
use the Greek flag and the Turkish inhabitants use the
Turkish flag. This way they express their national feelings,
because, in fact, the Cyprus Republic is a new State but not a
new nation, and it is not the intention of the .Cypriot
Government to create a Cypriot national feeling. What is
important-and
to be correct I have to read out the end of
his sentence-is the peaceful coexistence of Greek and Turkish Cypriots in the Cyprus State. I could not agree more
with Archbishop Makarios.

52. I distinctly recall having been told when I came here,
after I started taking part in the consultations, of the request
of the SecretaryGeneral that the talks should be reactivated
without any pm-conditions. The talks were therefore and
thereafter reactivated on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
aide-mCmoires of I8 October 1971 and I8 May 1972
[S/10664, para. 64, as stated in paragraph 58 of the report.
These aide-mtmoires, which were duly negotiated, with all
the parties, do not include any pre-conditions and reaffhm
the exploratory nature of the talks. Accordingly, the participants in the enlarged intercommunal talks began exploring
satisfactory constitutional arrangements in 1972, and very
substantive proposals were made.
53. Now, the new Turkish Government, which was elected
to of&e early this year-that is to say, two years after the
talks had already begun-favours an independent, sovereign and federative system for Cyprus. This Government
found the substantive proposals made long before by the
Turkish side in the discussions over the future of the Cyprus
Constitution satisfactory, and the talks continued for yet
another two months on the same basis. I must emphasize
once again that there have been no changes in the substantive proposals of the Turkish side since they began, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General must bear
witness to this fact.,.
54. In view of the allegations of the Greek Cypriot leadership mentioned in paragraph 61 of the report, the Turkish
Prime Minister and the Turkish Foreign Minister have made
several clarification$ of which I am sure the Secretariat is
aware. They have explained that in favouring a federative
system the Turkish Government does not intend to create a
geographic basis for it, nor does it envisage a population
exchange between various areas of Cyprus. They have contended that the Greek Cypriot allegations that Turkey has
partitionist intentions are therefore entirely baseless. They
have emphasized that’s federative system is ,the only safeguard of the continued independence of the island because it
is the only way for the side which does not want this independence to end to make itself felt in the decision regarding the
future of the island.

57. Now, let us seewhat Vice-President Denkw has to say
on the same subject, and here I shall quote from paragraph
61 of the report:
“There is no change of policy. In a State like Cyprus,
where the nationalism of the two communities is so deep
while the necessity for coexistence is so necessary, the
idea of ‘federalism’ is not incompatible with the idea of
peaceful coexistence, cooperation and the ultimate realization of a common identity. . . . Turkey believes that
this is a reasonable way of settling the problem. As the
Turkish Premier explained, it does not involve a geogra,phical division in Cyprus in any sense.”
58. I draw the Council’s attention to the fact that, while
the President of the Republic of Cyprus says that it is not the
intention of the Cypriot Government to create a Cypriot
national feeling, the Vice-President speaks of the ultimate
realization of a common identity. So much for this aspect of
the problem for the time being.
59. In conclusion, may I avail myself one+: more of the
opportunity offered to me to express our appreciation to all
the members of UNFICYP as well as to the Governments
that make this operation possible. I wish also to pay a tribute
here to the Secretary-General, his assistants and his Special
Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, who, we understand, is
now leaving his post and the service of the United Nations
after 25 years of a distinguished career. We have known him
in his present post, and under the most difficult and trying
circumstances. I know I am expressing the views of both my
Government and the Turkish community in Cyprus when I
say that his dedication to the cause of peace will long be
remembered.

55. Before concluding my supplementary remarks with
respect to the report, I wish to refer to paragraph 66 and to
state most unequivocally that the Turkish side shares the
Secretary-General’s hope “that the parties will return to a
consideration of the substance of the problems that face
them; and seek to reach agreement on constitutional
arrangements that will be &tisfactory to all concerned.”
And it is in this spirit that the Turkish side will continue the
talks when they are resumed on 4 June 1974.
56. I think that at this stage, as the talks are about to be
resumed, I also have to indicate that Turkey has never had
and will never have-and I have had occasion to proclaim
this here- any arri&e-pen&e with regard to partition of the

60. On this occasion I should like also to congratulate
Ambassador Weckmann-Mtioz,
who has been appointed
by the Secretary-General to succeed Mr. O&o-Tafall
as
7

\

tlon ot the two communities’. When these statements
were first made, the framework of an independent, sovereign and unitary State seemed generally acceptable to all
parties. In 1971, however, Mr. Denktq expressed his
opposition to the continued use of the term’unitary’. He
contended that the Greek Cypriots had a diierent interpretation of the term and that he could not tie his side to
any terminology, the exact interpretation of which had
not been agreed upon.”

his Special Representative in Cyprus. I wish him successand
the best of luck.
61. The PRESIDENT:
Greece.

I call upon the representative of

62. Mr. MEGALOKONOMOS
(Greece): Mr. President,
it is a particular honour for me to participate in the debate of
the Security Council under the presidency of the representative of an African country whose relations with Greece have
always been friendly and excellent. I should on this occasion
like also to thank all the members of the Council for allowing my delegation to take part in the deliberations conceming the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus.

In the opinion of my delegation, that paragraph sheds ample
light on the matter of the basis of the intercdmmunal talks
and certainly clears up the confusion created by much that
has been said on the subject. It is clear from that paragraph,
first, that the concept of a unitary State, together with the
concepts of an independent and a sovereign State, has right
from the beginning been the basis of the discussions and in
the opinion of the Secretary-General was accepted by all
parties conceded, and, secondly, that the Turkish‘Cypriot
side expressed their opposition to the -term”unitary”
not
because they had set their face against the concept itself but
because “the Greek Cypriots had a differeAt interpretation
of the term”.

63. The report of the Secretary-General of 22 May 1974
[S/Z1294 once more provides proof that the Cyprus problem is a complex one and its solution calls for a great deal of
patience, tenacity in peace-minded efforts and a serious
display of statesmanship in its handling. In fact, the last
semester was a period during which feelings of hope and
disappointment
succeeded each other repeatedly. The
report of the Secretary-General clearly exposes the develop
ments concerning the intercommunal talks on the island.
Hopes were revived in the first months of this year when, as
stated in paragraph 60 of the report of the Secretary-General
“it appeared that a measure of agreement was being reached
on a ‘package deal’ concerning the structure of the State, the
division of powers and the degree of local authority”. At
that very moment, when everyone concerned with the
Cyprus problem was gaining assurance that after so many
years of difficulties a solution was perhaps not so far away,
came an official statement advocating federation as a solution to the Cyprus problem. It came not from the negotiators themselves but from a high-ranking personality whose
influence upon the Turkish Cypriot leadership cannot be
questioned. That was done in disregard of the fact that, the
Republic of Cyprus being an independent State, the solution
of its constitutional problems should have been left to the
Greek and Turkish Cypriots. The details and a quotation of
that statement are carefully given in paragraph 61 of the
report of the Secretary-General, and need not be elaborated
here.

66. However, the official Turkish statement, as well as the
subsequent Turkish Cypriot statement, both quoted in paragraph 61 of the Secretary-General’s report, do not contain a
new interpretation of the term “unitary” but an attempt to
substitute for that generally accepted principle the concept
of a federative State. Such a substitution was unacceptable
to the Greek Cypriot side and quite naturally caused the
interruption of the talks.
67. My delegation would like to open a parenthesis here in
order to express its deepest appreciation for the untiring
efforts made on this occasion by the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General
for Special ,Political Affairs,
Mr. Roberto Guyer, and the Spedial Representative,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, aimed at finding a formula which by
confirming that the basis of the talks had never changed
would permit the negotiators to continue their work.
Thanks to those efforts, a formula was agreed upon, and
that happy development will permit the talks to continue in
the next few days and at the same time assure the parties that
no shift has taken place from the original basis of the talks.
This temporary crisis nevertheless showed once again the
great importance attached by all concerned to the intercommunal talks, a fact pertinently pointed out in the report of
the Secretary-General.

64. Following that development, the Greek Cypriot side
considered that they had the right to know clearly and
without any ambiguity whether the talks were to continue
on the same basis on which the parties had been working for
almost six years or whether they were in fact facing a change
in the position of their interlocutors doricerning the very
basis of the discussions. It was the confusion created by the
Turkish side’s statements on federation that brought about
the suspension of the discussions.

68. The Greek Government, continuing a long tradition
of seeking solutions in the context of and in conformity with
international law, is hopeful that a solution will be found
and agreed upon in Cyprus by the in&rested parties within
the framework of the Charter and in accordance with Council resolutions 186 (1964) and 244 (1967 )--a solution that
will take into due consideration not only the interests but
also the well-being and the right to happiness of the whole
Cyprus population. To that end my Government expects
that the intercommunal talks, regaining, as soon as they
begin, the momentum they had during the first three months
of the year, and taking into consideration the progress
made on the outstanding questions concerning the structure
and the functions of the local government bodies, will hope-

65. In that respect, my delegation would like to lay stress
on the contents of paragraph 65 of the Secretary-General’s
report, which reads as follows:
“In previous reports to the Security Council, the
Secretary-General has said more than once that in his
view ‘the reactivated intercommunal talks are the best
instrument for achieving a satisfactory, lasting and
agreed solution based on the concept of an independent,
sovereign and unitary State with the adequate participa8

including UNFICYP, would be in fuller compliancewith the
objectives of the Charter since it is well known that peaceespecially in that sensitive region-is indivisible and crises
nowadays cannot be easily withheld in limited geographic
spaces.

fully result in a solution that will govern the fate of the
Republic of Cyprus.
69. My Government attaches great importance to respect
for and observance of all and of every one of those three
basic concepts of the Republic of Cyprus-that is, independence, sovereignty and unity-concepts so many times confumed by the reports of the Secretary-General as the basis of
the intercommunal talks. In that context, the solution to be
adopted should comply with the result of the talks between
the two communities, because we believe that only the
outcome of the understanding between the parties immediately concernedI,’ could be a viable solution.

77. Before concluding I should like to express once again
my Government’s feelings of gratitude and appreciation for
the unrelenting efforts of our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, as well as of Mr. Guyer, Mr. Urquhart and General
Chand.
78. Last but not lea&my delegation would like to refer to
paragaraph 7 of the report, by which we are informed that,
after seven and a half years of distinguished service, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus,
Mr. OsorioTafall, is scheduled, at his request, to retire on
30 June 1974 and that the Secretary-General has decided to
appoint Mr. Luis Weckmann-Mtioz,
of Mexico, as his
Special Representative in Cyprus as from 1 July.

70. In that respect we fully agree with the observation of
the Secretary-General, who very rightly considers the talks
to be the most constructive way of carrying out the search
for an agreed settlement to the Cyprus problem.
71. We also share the feelings of the Secretary-General
expressed in paragraph 28 of the report, and we equally
regret that no progress has been made towards achieving a
measure of military deconfrontation.

79. Let me say that the Greek Govemment.fully shares the
feelings of the Secretary-General, so aptly expressed in paragraph 82:

72. Another main point my delegation would like to make
concerns the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus. We had the occasion, during the consultations
which preceded this meeting, to stress the necessity of maintaining UNFICYP in Cyprus for another six-month period;
we are now very happy that a new resolution has been
adopted by the Council to that effect.

“Mr. Bibiano F. Osorio-Tafall . . . is about to relinquish
his post and to leave the service of the United Nations
after 25 years. For seven and a half years he has served
UNFICYP with great distinction and unswerving dedication. For this work, as well as for his earlier contributions
to the Organization, the United Nations owes him a great
debt of gratitude.”
_‘
I should like to add that indeed all the parties concerned in
the Cyprus problem owe Mr. Osorio-Tafall a great debt of
gratitude for this tireless, constant and impartial efforts
towards an agreed solution to the problem.

73. My delegation would like to express its satisfaction at
the fact that the so-called second phase of the reduction of
the Force was carried out smoothly and without decreasing
the effectiveness of the Force, thanks to the diligence of the
Secretary-General and of the Force Commander, General
Chand, and to the co-operation of the parties concerned.

80. Furthermore, my delegation wishes to ‘express its
confidence that the presence in Cyprus of Mr, WeckmannMuiloz, whose long and rich experience in international
affairs is well known to us, will not fail to contribute towards
a happy conclusion of the’problem.,

74. The Greek delegation is aware of the fact that some
Member States would like a further reduction of the Force.
Although the reasons for such a trend are fully comprehensible, we nevertheless agree with the Secretary-General that
such a further reduction would be premature. Greece,
having contributed vastly to this operation and continuing
to contribute to an extent disproportionate to its own budgetary means, is very well aware of the dificulties faced by all
the contributing countries.

81. Our expression of gratitude is also addressed to the
Governments and the men that take part financially or send
contingents in order to safeguard the noble objective of
peace in Cyprus.
82. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom voted for the resolution we have just adopted because
we agree with the Secretary-General that in present circumstances it is necessary for the United Nations Force in
Cyprus to be maintained for a further period of six months.
And we are therefore ready, subject to parliamentary
approval ,in Britain, to maintain our troop contingent in
Cyprus for the period up to 15 Recember. Subject to the
same provisos, I also pledge continued British logistic support for UNFICYP at the level appropriate to the size of that
Force following the reductions reported by the SecretaryGeneral.

75. That is why we think that a new effort should be made
in order to bring more Member States to contribute to the
budget of UNFICYP. The Hellenic delegation has repeatedly expressed its disappointment that so few Members of
the Organization felt the need to finance the Force. My
delegation has the honour to refer once more to the proposal
made by the representative of Canada, in his statement of
28 November 1973, at. the 899th meeting of the Special
Political Committee,
regarding guidelines for United
Nations peace-keeping operations. That statement by the
representative of Canada was quoted at the last meeting of
the Security Council o? Cyprus [2759th meeting, para. 633.

83. My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
explaining in detail, in paragraph 78 of his report, how the
second phase of the troop reductions has been carried out

76. In fact we feel that a generally agreed equitable system
of financing the United Nations peace-keeping operations,
9

.
7’

Over the past six mom& We ftily support his decision to
implement these reductions in the way he explained in the
Council last December [1759rh meeting, para 167).
84. The reductions have had a welcome effect on the
financial situation of the Force. But the need for further
economies remains. Whatever the size of the Force, it is
essential that there should be stringent control over expenditure. This is an aspect to which I am colifident that the
Secretary-General and liii able staff will continue to pay
very close attention indeed.
85. The Secretary-General has said that he believes it
would be wise to allow time for an assessment of the effects
of the reductions before making futher moves. He evidently
intends to keep the question under. review. We hope he will
make his views on possible further reductions known to the
interested parties well before the mandate of UNFICYP
expires in December. We look forward to receiving a considered report and further recommendations
from the
Secretary-General by that time.
86. I make no apology for speaking about Force levels and
expenditure. Despite the welcome, if slight, improvement in
the UNFICYP Special Account following the troop reductions, the financial burden carried by the individual troop
contributors continues to grow. The cost of the British
contribution to UNFICYP is now estimated to be running
at close to E2.5 million per year. When the basic costs of the
British contingent are included, the total value of our contribution is something in excess of $5 million a year.
87. I wish to make only one further comment on the
financial situation. We look to others to contribute voluntarily and to do so generously. The small financial improvement reported by the Secretary-General must, in our view be
maintained. In paragraph 69 of the Secretary-General’s
report, one sentence reads: “The costs to be borne by the
United Nations for the operation of UNFICYP for the
periods from the inception of the Force to 15 June 1974 are
estimated at $172.1 million.” That, of course, is only the cost
to the United Nations. If one then considers the additional
burden to Member States that have contributed the cost of
maintaining contingents in UNFICYP over the decade it has
been in Cyprus, the full costs must be running at somewhere
near $350 million. It is perhaps sobering but not inapt to
bear that figure in mind when one considers that we have
just emerged from a special session of the General Assembly
at which we have considered the problems of some of those
nations of the world most grievously affected by the present
economic situation.
..---

89. Indeed I would wish to join those who have paid a
tribute to the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General,
the Force Commander and all those who have worked both
here and in Cyprus to try to achieve a peaceful settlement of
the dispute. In particular, the role played by the United
Nations in achieving agreement between the parties concerned on a resumption of the intercommunal talks has been
of great value. Those talks, in our view continue to offer the
best approach to the solution of the problem.
90. It should be sr!d that we really do now look to the
parties to the intercommunal talks to achieve an agreement
which would be acceptable to both the communities in
Cyprus itself. It would be unfortunate if the continued
presence-of a United Nations Force in Cyprus were in any
way to lessen the sense of urgency with which those intercommunal talks should be approached. We could not really
be satisfied with a situation whereby a virtually permanent
force stationed in Cyprus holds the ring while intercommunal talks drag on indefinitely and indeterminately. It is
perhaps not reasonable that the international community
should be expected to acquiesce in such a situation.
91. My Government therefore feels that it is entitled to
join in asking for a renewed and a sustained effort to find
solutions for the outstanding problems by reason of the fact
that we have provided now for many years the principal
military contingent to the Cyprus peace-keeping Force and
we have also made substantial annual voluntary contributions towards the cost of the Force.
92. If those words are familiar to some of the older representatives in this room today, it is not surprising; they were
in fact uttered by my predecessor, Lord Caradon, as long
ago as 11 December 1969 [I52Zst meeting, para. 83. It is
perhaps a reflection on the way in which the Cyprus situation has progressed-or perhaps one should say has not
progressed-in the last four and a half years, that a paragraph uttered by the British representative in this chamber
four and a half years ago is as apt today as it was apt then.
We therefore do look to the parties to make the mutual
concessions which are required to reach a settlement and to
co-operate in the measures UNFICYP suggests for building
confidence.
93. Last, but by no means least, my delegation would wish
fully to subscribe to the tributes which the SecretaryGeneral pays to Mr. Osorio-Tafall on his retirement from
the service of the United Nations. His long and varied career
has been one of great distinctions; his wisdom and his
statesmanship will be greatly missed in Cyprus. I think the
United Nations, the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and, not least, Cyprus itself owe him a very real debt of ~
gratitude.

88. I shall refer only briefly to the substance of the Cyprus
problem itself, on which we have now heard the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey. It is deplorable that we
should be celebrating-if
that is the right word-the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of UNFICYP. Successful
as the Force has been in contributing to the maintenance of
peace, in our view a return to normal conditions is long
overdue, The fault cannot be laid at the door of those who
are conducting the United Nations operation in Cyprus
itself.

94. May I therefore welcome his successor, Ambassador
Weckmann-Mufioz.
He is now undertaking a grave and a
difficult task. I am sure he will discharge it with great
distinction.
95. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, neither my delegation nor I have
previously had an opportunity to congratulate you officially
10

on occupying the presidency of the Security Council for the
present month. In the informal consultations and at the
formal meeting over which you have presided, we have had
occasion to appreciate your fine qualities as a diplomat, and
I would like to wish you complete success in your term of
office as President of the Security Council, and in your
future work as the Permanent Representative of your country to the United Nations.

be undertaken by all the parties concerned to ensure that a
final settlement of the Cypriot disputes is speedily achieved.
As the Indonesian representative to the Security Couricil
observed at the 1759th meeting, on 14 December 1973, it is
the hope of my delegation that the two communities on
Cyprus may find themselves able to exert further efforts in
order to achieve a permanent solution of this sensitive issue.
Such a solution will ensure the integrity and sovereignty of
Cyprus as an independent and non-aligned country, and will
enable all of its people to live in peace, unity and harmony.

96. My delegation very carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus, and we would offer the Secretary-General our sincere congratulations on the orderly and detailed nature of
that report.

103. My delegation welcomes the efforts towards the
reduction of UNFICYP and the evidence that the plans for
this reduction of forces are being carried out in accordance
with the terms set forth in the previous reports of the
Secretary-General to the Council.

97. The contribution that the United Nations is making to
the maintenance of peace in Cyprus is further proof of the
efficiency and the need for this body. But we.seewith some
concern that over 10 years have elapsed since the United
Nations Force first went to Cyprus and that an agreement
among the parties has still not become possible. However,
we fully share the hope of the Secretary-General that the
renewal of the conversations will bring about a lasting settlement in the region.
98. We are sure that the good faith of the parties and the
goodwill of the people, both Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot, will contribute to the achievement of a solution
that will satisfy the interests of all.

104. We are pleased to note that the concurrence of the
interested parties to this reduction has been obtained. At the
same time, however, Indonesia is concerned that no progress appears to have been made with regard to securing the
reduction of the conditions of military confrontation in
Cyprus. It is most regrettable, as the Secretary-General
notes in paragraph 28 of his report, that neither side is
prepared to reduce its military preparations for fear that
military security will be threatened. These attitudes clearly
show the need for a spirit of accommodation and new
determination to achieve a settlement which has so far been
lacking in this dispute.

99. My delegation is extremely gratsed at the nomination
by the Secretary-General of Ambassador WeckmannMufioz who, during the Iraq-Iran dispute gave sufficient
proof of his great capacity as a negotiator, and therefore we
have no doubt that his efforts as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Cyprus will also be the cornerstone of the future negotiations.

105. The same regrettable conditions prevail with regard
to efforts to develop a basis for unity between the two
Cypriot communities. The Secretary-General observes in
paragraph 44 of his report that “the trend towards the separate development of each community has continued
unabated”, and this, surely, is a formula for continued
conflict.

100. We supported the resolution that the Security Council has just adopted, because we consider that it is
necessary-well-nigh vital-to prolong for a further period
the existence of the United Nations Force in Cyprus, and
particularly in the light of the Secretary-General’s statement
in paragraph 79 of his report, that “despite the present quiet,
the situation in the island is still tense and potentially
dangerous’*.

106. Clearly, these attitudes greatly hinder the development of the complex constitutional and institutional framework which is required if the two communities are to live in
harmony with one another. It is greatly to be hoped that
additional efforts will soon produce a new determination
among the members of both communities to co-operate for
the common good of all the people of Cyprus.
107. Indonesia’s view remains that the goal of peace, uniiy
and harmony is the goal towards which all our efIorts should
be directed. It is our hope that in the talks between the two
sides which are soon to be resumed, the negotiators will be
able to produce a‘ workable solution to the problems which
face them and will achieve a constitutional stnicture which
will satisfy the needs of the people of Cyprus as a whole.

101. Mr. KUSUMASMORO
(Indonesia): My delegation
has little tq add to what has been said on the numerous
occasions in the past, when this question was considered.
There are, however, one or two points concerning the
Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus which, in Indonesia’s view, deserve
some further comment. In the light of the information
contained in the comprehensive and enlightening report of
the Secretary-General, for which we congratulate him, we
are aware of the necessity for extending the mandate of
UNFICYP, especially in view of the slight progress that has
been made in the efforts to arrive at a final settlement of the
issues in Cyprus to date.

108. I cannot close without remarking on the retirement of
Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
the Special Representative 01 the
Secretary-General, from the service of the United Nations.
We are all indebted to him for his untiring efforts in seeking
the solution of the problem in Cyprus and for his other
contributions to the work of the Organization. All the States
Members of the United Nations are greatly in his debt. It is a
matter of great satisfaction that his place is now entrusted to
Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz,
whose services in the
Iran-Iraq dispute have earned the Council’s admiration.

102. My delegation feels, however, that in voting for the
draft resolution to extend the mandate of UNFICYP, it is
important to stress the need for greatly increased efforts to
11

109. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (zranhion from Russian): In connexion with the
adoption by the Security Council of the new resolution on
the Cyprus question, the delegation of the USSR would like
to state that the Soviet Union has always believed and
continues to believe that the problem of Cyprus should be
settled by peaceful means and in the interests of the people of
Cyprus as a whole. Such a step would contribute to an
easing of tension in that important part of the world.
.llO. As to the position of the Soviet Union on the substance of this problem, I should like in this regard to recall
the statement made on 7 May 1974 at Nicosia by A. A. Gromyko, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.
He stated that the Soviet Union had pursued and continued
to pursue a consistent and principled policy designed to
strengthen the national independence and sovereignty of the
Cypriot State.
111. In the yiew of the Soviet delegation, the settlement of
the Cyprus problem should be based upon the maintenance
of freedom and upon respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus as a
State Member of the United Nations which has consistently
pursued a policy of peace, non-alignment with military blocs
and the fostering of friendship and co-operation among
peoples. It is quite obvious that the strengthening of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus,and the elimination of foreign bases in
its territory will make an important contribution to the
cause of peace in the eastern Mediterranean.
112. In advocating a peaceful settlement of disputes in the
interests of all Cypriots and in helping them to achieve that
end, we must accept the principle that the .solution of the
internal problems of Cyprus is a matter for the Cypriots
themselves, and in‘that sense the legitimate rights of every
Cypriot, without regard to his nationality or the community
to which he belongs, must be observed and respected by ‘all,
under conditions of an independent sovereign State of
Cyprus.
113. The Soviet Union has always opposed attempts to
settle the Cyprus question by means of external intervention
or by means of attempts to infringe the sovereignty of that
country and has also always opposed any intentions to
resolve this problem against the will of the people of Cyprus,
behind their backs, to the detriment of their vital interests
and for the benefit of external imperialist forces. It is quite
obvious that the elimination of foreign bases in Cyprus
would represent an important step towards ensuring the
genuine independence and integrity of Cyprus as a sovereign
State.
8
114. Having studied the Secretary-General’s report on the
United Nations operation in Cyprus for the period from
2 December 1973 to 22May 1974, the Soviet delegation
notes with favour the efforts of the Secretary-General to
achieve progress in the intercommunal talks. Those talks are
extremely important, and it is precisely such talks that will
make it possible to reach an agreed settlement of the questions still outstanding. In that connexion, the delegation of
the USSR would like to express the hope that the agreement
between the parties for the resumption of the intercommu-

nal talks on 4 June will give impetus to the process of
overcoming the remaining difficulties in the course of the
forthcoming meetings between the representatives of the
parties. A successful conclusion of those talks will truly serve
the interests of the people of Cyprus as a whole and
strengthen peace in that important area. i’ ’
115. In his report, the Secretary-General notes that the
second phase of the reduction of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus, sanctioned by the Security Council, has now been
carried out. In that connexion, the Soviet delegation regards
as justified the statement in the SecretaryGeneral’s report
to the effect that the possible consequences of a new reduction must be carefully weighed.
”
116. The Soviet delegation does not oppose the adoption
by the Council of the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to extend the stationing of the United,Nations
Force in
Cyprus fork a further period of six months. We also regard
with favour the proposals for resumption of the intercommunal talks and hope, as I have already said, that they will
reach a successful conclusion.
117. In voting in favour of the resolution just adopted, the
delegation of the USSR has been guided by the belief that
the extention of the stationing of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus for the next period ending;15 December 1974
conforms fully to the provisions of Council resolution 186
(1964) and of subsequent Council decisions on the Cyprus
question, with continuance of the present functions of the
Force and ,retention of the present system of voluntary
.
financing for it.
118. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): It is now 10 years
since the United Nations Force in Cyprus was created by the
Security Council by its resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964. I think that this not wholly happy anniversary and the
renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP.for the twentieth time
a short while ago should constitute ample reason to reflect
on the past experience of the operation, to review the present
and to take a look into the future. :
119. The’ phrase which we have,&ain included in the
resolution adopted this morning, namely, “the expectation
that . . . sufficient progress towards a final solution will
make possible a withdrawal or substantial reduction of the
Force”, sounds very familiar, and we have voiced similar
hopes many times before. But so:far the events in Cyprus
and the progress achieved have not substantiated our expectations. There can be little doubt that the Force’s presence
has rendered invaluable service to the young island Republic
of Cyprus and to the international community in general in
maintaining peace and in providing an atmosphere of at
least relative calm for the past several years. Thus the necessary and, indeed, indispensable basis on which efforts
towards a political solution could begin, and progress has
been established.
\
120. It is with great regret therefore that we have to take
note again of the sobering and discouraging statement in the
Secretary-General’s report to the effect that only little progress has been made with respect to the return to normal
conditions. In particular, the process of military deconfrontation between the two communities seems to have come to

_

126. At the same time, we wish to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to appoint Ambassador WeckmannMuAoz as his new Special Repmuttative.
Ambassador
Weckmann-Mufioz has already d-rated
considerable
skill in a recent assignment, and we w&b him every successin
his most challenging and difficult ti.

a halt because, among other things, of the introduction of
new, additional weapons in the island. This should be a
matter of no little concern to all of us.
121. The facts nointed out by the Secretary-General in his
report underline more convihcingly than -ever that there
exists only one possibility of progress, that is, a political
settlement once and for all which is acceptable to both
communities on the island. In the absence of any other
machinery, the. intercommunal talks have so far proved to
be the only existing avenue to encourage such a process,
which will hopefully lead to a solution.
1

127. For quite some time now the-ion
of reducing the
Force without jeopardizing its effec&ness has been uppermost in everybody’s mind. As a @cop contributor, my
Government understandably has grtr interest in seeing the
Force carry out its functions effect%& and, at the same
time, in efforts to alleviate the serious financial difficulties in
which the operation finds itself. We rue therefore pleased to
witness an apparent successof the fuss and second reduction
phases, bearing in mind of course &at the final judgement
and evaluation of the second phase &l be possible only at a
somewhat later stage.

122. We must ‘be aware, of course, that even after agreement on such a settlement has been achieved and accepted
by both sides, it will only be a first step to alleviate gradually
and to remove finally the mutual distrust and fear which is
still so much at the heart of all problems of the island. The
way before USAtherefore still appears to be,long.
123. The question has often been asked whether the continued presence of the United Nations on the island is in fact
conducive to a strengthening and acceleration of the political determination to come to an agreement or whether,
perhaps, the oR$bsite is true. This is, I beiieve, largely an
academic question to which I could not offer ready answers.
One fact, however, seems to remain obvious: Rolitical talks,
political negotiations are the only way, and, as.experience in
Cyprus shows so clearly, they have so far progressed much
better in an environment free from open militaryconfrontation. A further-‘conclusion to be drawn seems equally
obvious: continued United Nations presence onthe islandand by “presence*’ I mean both the military Force and the
political representation exercising the Secretary-General’s
good off&s-is
kill necessary, whatever attitude we might
take towards the seemingly unending commitment on the
part of the United Nations.
.. . .. .
124. It was for ‘those reasons that tne suspension of the
intercommunal talks was a matter of grave concern to my
Government, and. we are greatly relieved to find that these
talks will shortly be resumed, owning to the highly commendable efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and
his representativein Cyprus.
,.
125. At this point I wish to pay a very special and sincere
tribute to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Cyprus for the past seven and a half years,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, ..who, as we have learned with great
regret, will leave his ~important post in the near future.
Mr. Osorio-Tafall has indeed rendered a great service to the
international community in a most difficult and sensitive
function, and we are all deeply indebted to him.
I+

128. So far as further reductions at the present time are
concerned, I have already stated in my last intervention on
this matter, on 14 December 1973 [I759th meetin& ,para.
223) that we understand those who-not least for financial
reasons-would wish the Force to be further reduced at the
pmsent time. Although we can understand the motives; we
would again advocate a cautious approach to this question
and we therefore support and endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s opinion and recommendations in paragraph 79 of
his report. Nevertheless we, like others, feel that the momentum gained in reducing and restructuring the Force by the
first and second phases should not be lost and that the
question should therefore be kept under constant review by
the Secretary-General and his associates.
129. Austria remains deeply committed to maintaining
peace on the island of Cyprus and to bringing about a lasting
political solution. .This wish is motivated by the sincere
feelings of friendship of the Austrian people for the people
of Cyprus.
130. To this end, my Government, in conformity with its
policy in the past, will again be ready to maintain its support
for this peace-keeping mission of the United Nations both in
manpower and financially, in the fervent hope that at the
time when we consider the question again in six months our
expectations expressed in paragraph 3 of the resolution that
we have just adopted will have come closer to reality than on
past occasions.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

‘_.

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LiS

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations.
Sales

DES

kATIONS

UNIES

Lea publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
A : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
HAE

UOlI.v’JRTb

BiZUUWf

OPI’AHH3AURH

OI;%E.ViHEHHbtX

HsgaHss
OoraHH3aunH
06-bemtHeXHbm
Haud
mowHo xynarb
B
3HHax
H arenrcTaax.
ao acex .paRosiax
uspa.
Haaonnre
cnpaaKk+
*aweyI
xnuxno*
MarasHHe
~jln n~ui~re
no anpecy : Opratiusaunfl
Hauiln.
CexuHR no npozuMe
H3AaXXR.
Hbm-RopX
mu
%Z!HeBa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PCBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

HAIlHH
KIHX~~L~S

*aya-

06 Hsaamirix
06-benHneHHbrx

a

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
unidas
estrin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidorss
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijsse
a: Naciones
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginehra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

’ .74-82001-October

1983-2.200
