United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.22

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

22

nd meeting
Tuesday, 21 October 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Draft resolutions (A/ES-10/L.13, L.14, L.15)
The President: I would like to inform
representatives that, in connection with this item, the
General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.15, which is being circulated in the Hall.
I also understand that the sponsors of draft
resolutions A/ES-10/L.13 and A/ES-10/L.14 are not
insisting that the General Assembly take action on
these draft resolutions.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): With the consent of the
sponsors of the two draft resolutions now on the
table — which you, Mr. President, have mentioned,
A/ES-10/L.13 and A/ES-10/L.14 — the European
Union (EU) Presidency, on behalf of the 15 EU
member States, the acceding countries Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia, the associated
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey and the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries
members of the European Economic Area, Iceland and
Liechtenstein, is tabling a compromise replacement
draft resolution, document A/ES-10/L.15. The EU
presentation of the text reflects our determination to
work for progress towards a just, lasting and

(Saint Lucia)

comprehensive peace in the Middle East based on the
vision of two States — Israel and Palestine — living
side by side in peace and security.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
Before we proceed further, I should like to
consult the Assembly with a view to proceeding
immediately to consider the draft resolution contained
in document A/ES-10/L.15, as orally corrected. In that
connection, since the draft resolution has only been
circulated today, it would be necessary to wave the
relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure.
The relevant provision of rule 78 reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/ES-10/L.15. Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote before the vote, may
I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seat.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): The whole time this
humiliating farce was taking place here in New York, a

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

03-57284 (E)

*0357284*

A/ES-10/PV.22

world-renowned eye surgeon in Birmingham, Alabama,
has been fighting the save the eyesight of Oren Almog,
the 10-year-old boy whose grandfather, grandmother,
father and two brothers were brutally murdered by a
Palestinian in Haifa. One of his eyes has been
destroyed forever, but if the other eye is saved, it will
look at today’s proceedings leading to this vote and the
behaviour of some countries in this Chamber with
horror and disbelief.
The farce that led to the presentation of this draft
resolution has done a disservice to the United Nations
in the cause of peace. As long as the majority in this
Assembly will pander to and tolerate those who
perpetrate these rituals, no one should wonder why the
victims of terrorism and those who hope for peace look
elsewhere for guidance, protection and inspiration.
Surrendering to the manipulative games and illegal and
one-sided initiatives of the Palestinian observer, makes
a mockery of this Assembly and the United Nations.
Threats to abuse, harm and shamelessly politicize
the International Court of Justice and the advisory
opinion procedure must not be tolerated or allowed to
be used as a bargaining chip to advance extreme and
unprincipled positions. Threats to turn the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations into a political
weapon for one party to a conflict is a dangerous
precedent that should be rejected out of hand, not
legitimized by pandering in a negotiating process.
We would like to express our disappointment with
the role played by certain States that seek or claim a
role as promoters of the peace process but that in the
United Nations seem unable to remain committed to a
moral position that at the very least will not pretend
that Israel’s security measures are far more serious than
the murder perpetrated by Palestinian terrorist groups.
Principle is more important than consensus.
Substance is more important than compromising one’s
position for short-term and short-sighted deals. Does
anyone here seriously think it legitimate for the
Secretary-General to focus a report on Israeli security
measures but not on the Palestinian violations and
terrorism that necessitate those measures? At the end of
the day, peace, prosperity and security for both the
Palestinian and the Israeli people is inseparable from
the fulfilment, once and for all, of the Palestinian
obligation to fight and dismantle terrorism in
accordance with international law, United Nations
resolutions, signed agreements and the road map. It is

2

the end of this morally bankrupt strategy that glorifies
murder as martyrdom that would eliminate the need for
Israeli security measures, pave the way for peaceful
negotiations and end the suffering of both peoples. No
amount of United Nations debate, distorted texts or
abusive diplomatic manoeuvres can alter that basic
reality.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.15.
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.15 is entitled “Illegal
Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and the rest
of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,

A/ES-10/PV.22

South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia,
Burundi,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Honduras, Malawi, Nauru, Nicaragua,
Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Tuvalu, Uruguay
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.15 was adopted by
144 votes to 4, with 12 abstentions (resolution
ES-10/13).
[The delegation of Cameroon subsequently
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The President: Before giving the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolution just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): Canada voted in
favour of the draft resolution. Canada affirms the right
of Israel to ensure its own security. Neither terrorism,
nor support for terrorists who target the innocent — in
whatever form or to advance whatever cause — can
ever be justified. Israel has the right to take measures
necessary to protect the security of its citizens and its
borders from attacks by Palestinian terrorist groups,
including by restricting access to its territory.
While we respect Israel’s right and obligation to
defend its citizens, Canada opposes all unilateral
actions which could predetermine the outcome of
negotiations on final status, including the construction
of an extensive security barrier by Israel on land inside
the occupied territory of the West Bank. Canada
considers the expropriation of land to facilitate the
construction of that barrier to be unacceptable. We are,
moreover, concerned about the highly prejudicial
impact that the barrier may have on the already
flagging prospects for peace. Furthermore, its adverse

effect on the continuing dire humanitarian and
economic situation in the occupied territories is
worrisome. We fear that the scope and location of the
barrier being constructed further undermines the hopes
of the many who yet yearn for peace.
While such unilateral actions outside the territory
of the State of Israel raise serious matters of
international law, Canada believes that ultimately this
tragic ongoing conflict can be resolved only politically.
A just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East remains possible. The road map is still a viable
instrument for achieving that goal. Canada calls on the
parties to acquit their obligations and to return to the
negotiating table.
Mr. Stephens (Australia): Australia abstained in
the vote on the draft resolution. We consider that only
carefully balanced resolutions can improve the
situation. Australia condemns continuing terrorist
attacks against Israel, and fully understands Israel’s
need to take strong defensive measures. At the same
time, we would urge Israel to ensure that these
measures, including the security barrier, do not
unnecessarily increase the considerable hardships faced
by ordinary Palestinians. We are also concerned to
ensure that neither side takes any action that might
further complicate the outcome of negotiations.
Australia urges Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
return to those negotiations and to resume
implementation of the road map for Middle East peace.
The Palestinian Authority must act to end terrorism.
The road map offers the best hope of realizing the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
I now give the floor to the Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We
had prepared a long statement in which we planned to
speak about yesterday’s events in Gaza city, where
Israel carried out five aerial acts of aggression that
resulted in the martyrdom of 12 Palestinians, and
injured 90. Those acts should also, of course, be
viewed in the light of earlier events in Rafah. We had
also planned to speak about other issues relating to
Israel’s political position as presented yesterday.
However, in view of the lateness of the hour, we will
not do so.

3

A/ES-10/PV.22

I would, however, like briefly to refer to
statement that we heard a short while ago by the
representative of Israel. That statement included the
same repetition of personal attacks, intimidation and
blackmail. In fact, that could be the diplomacy of thugs
whose insolence and arrogance propel them to become
occupiers and colonialists.
We also shall not speak of the important content
of the resolution just adopted. Its political and legal
import and its essential concepts and ideas are all very
clear. We simply want to express our sincere thanks to
all those who supported the important effort made
during this resumed tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly. In particular, we thank those
who co-sponsored both draft resolutions (A/ES-10/L.13
and A/ES-10/L.14). Thanks to that co-sponsorship, it
has been possible to reach important results among a
large number of Member States.

the need for any consequent action in that regard. I
would not end my brief statement, Sir, without
expressing to you personally our sincere thanks and
appreciation for your cooperation and patience during
the negotiations. We also thank all the members of the
Secretariat who have stayed with us until this late hour.
Mr. President, again we thank all of the Member States
that have taken the right position and have voted for
the resolution.
The President: I am responding positively to a
request, despite the fact that it is a little late in the day,
but I give the floor to the representative of Peru in
explanation of vote.

We also thank the member States of the European
Union for having submitted the important resolution
that we just adopted. We believe that those countries
have done a great service to the cause of peace in our
region.

Mr. Balarezo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I raised my nameplate before the
statement of the Observer of Palestine; however you
were unable to see it. So I do feel I must state that we
voted in favour of this resolution, but we want it
recorded clearly that we do recognize the right of Israel
to defend its people against terrorist attacks. Peru
would like to express, once again, its strenuous
condemnation of all terrorist acts, including suicide
attacks and bomb attacks.

Finally, we would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to all the countries that voted in favour of
the resolution today, a resolution which we sincerely
hope will lead to positive results that would spare us

The President: The tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is now adjourned, in
accordance with the terms of paragraph 4 of resolution
ES-10/13, adopted at the present meeting.
The meeting rose at 9.55 p.m.

4
