UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3280
22 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTIETH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 22 September 1993, at 3.30 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO
Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Taylhardat

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. HICKS

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-86581 (E)

S/PV.3280
2-5

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN SOMALIA
FURTHER REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL SUBMITTED IN PURSUANCE OF
PARAGRAPH 18 OF RESOLUTION 814 (1993) (S/26317)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I should like to inform

the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Somalia, in
which she requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with

the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Hassan (Somalia) took a place at
the Council table.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

The Security Council

will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security

Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the further report of the
Secretary-General submitted in pursuance of paragraph 18 of resolution 814
(1993), document S/26317.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26476, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to the following revision

to be made in the draft resolution contained in document S/26476 in its
provisional form:

in paragraph 12, the words "and utilize" should be inserted

after the word "maintain".

S/PV.3280
6
(The President)
I should also like to draw the attention of members of the Council to the
following documents:

S/26412, letter dated 7 September 1993 from the

Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Somalia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and S/26481, letter dated
20 September 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Eritrea to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it, as orally revised in its provisional form.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

My delegation would like to express its

gratitude to the Secretary-General for his latest report on Somalia and for the
untiring efforts of his Special Representative and other United Nations
personnel in their devotion and sacrifices under such threatening and difficult
circumstances.

We are certain this will serve for some time as a landmark of

commitment to the cause of a people and the call of duty.
The draft resolution before us, which we fully support, calls for
redoubling efforts to re-establish the police, judicial and penal systems of
Somalia.

Taken together with the report of the Secretary-General (S/26317)

submitted in pursuance of paragraph 18 of resolution 814 (1993), by which the
Secretary-General was to keep us informed of developments in the security
situation in Somalia, we have a comprehensive and informative description of the
situation in that country.

Both underscore the fact that Somalia’s

rehabilitation will require a multipronged approach, covering many fronts
simultaneously.

However, little of lasting substance will be achieved unless

the threat of violence is removed, for which purpose law enforcement and
judicial mechanisms must be developed to provide a secure environment for
long-term social, economic and political activity to take place.
We are pleased to note the continuing resolve of the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) to maintain rapid disarmament as a leading

S/PV.3280
7
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
priority and to focus on the removal of mines.

That the overall situation in

Somalia continues to be stabilized is worthy of note.
We are pleased to see that implementation of the comprehensive peace
accords signed in Addis Ababa is steadily under way.

That so many ordinary

Somalis from the grass roots are involved in this process of deciding on so wide
a range of issues and setting up a rudimentary mechanism which may eventually
lead to the formation of a transitional authority is to be admired.

We see that

a transitional national council is intended to serve as the prime political
authority during the two-year transition period, supported by a structure of
regional and district councils.
For this reason, it is regrettable that the events transpiring in
Mogadishu - in fact in one section of that city - have so captured the headlines
and thereby distorted the impressive nature of Somalia’s steady return to
normalcy.

Certainly, under any circumstances the loss of human life, civilian

or official, is to be deplored and regretted.

In fact, every step must continue

to be taken to see that such tragedies are as infrequent as possible, within the
context of the United Nations accomplishing its mandate.
the United Nations is accomplishing its mission.

And it does seem that

A nation, a non-State, is

being resurrected and, with the completion of its task visible on the horizon,
the United Nations must make every effort and leave no stone unturned to
complete its mission.

At this juncture, anything less would have devastating

implications and fallout for the United Nations and the people of Somalia.
We believe the combined impact of these developments demonstrates the
resolve of the United Nations to re-institutionalize the democratic voice and
participation of the Somali people in their own governance and the high priority
the United Nations accords this goal.

So many concrete steps taken at so many

levels would not be possible without genuine progress in political
reconciliation.

In fact, it is our understanding that inter-clan hostilities

have all but ceased and inter-clan meetings of note on various issues have taken
place.
We are also pleased at the broad participation and work of the Transitional
Charter Drafting Committee, which completed its work in June this year, and that
of the cease-fire and disarmament committee.

S/PV.3280
8
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
We have examined the Secretary-General’s outline of the status of the
1993 relief and rehabilitation programme, including the March meeting of donor
nations, the United Nations relief agencies and representatives of the Somali
people themselves.

The broad and comprehensive approach of this programme -

covering projects of employment, food distribution, continuing emergency relief
operations, resettlement, social services such as schools and health services,
the resuscitation of trade and commerce, the media and public outreach - speaks
of the United Nations participation and the broad nature of Somalia’s
requirements.
Very little of this programme will have any lasting significance, of
course, unless, as the Secretary-General indicates, serious attention is given
to security matters, such as police, penal institutions and a functioning
judiciary.

The consideration, in the report, of the gamut of issues - training,

equipping, paying, selecting, codifying, instilling pride and professionalism,
and the manner in which intimidation is to be dealt with - is encouraging.

The

budgeted total of $45 million seems to be a reasonable cost for such a large
task for the first year, covering outlays for police, penal and judicial
matters.
We also support the reference in the draft resolution to the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to convene, as soon as possible, a meeting of Member States
interested in supporting UNOSOM II in the re-establishment of Somalia’s police,
judicial and penal systems.

The need for training, facilities, technical

assistance, staffing and expertise remains, and such a meeting could focus
efforts and resources on areas of high priority.

Funds are, of course, urgently

needed, and this meeting and its follow-up, pursuant to the fund established
under resolution 794 (1992) and maintained in resolution 814 (1993) for the
purpose of receiving contributions to be used for the police, judicial and penal
systems, must continue to be supported by Member States as an urgent matter.
This draft resolution highlights these needs.
Similarly, as requested also in the draft resolution, it would be helpful
to all concerned to have from the Secretary-General a detailed plan covering the
future strategy of UNOSOM II with regard to its humanitarian, political and
security activities.

S/PV.3280
9-10
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
The rehabilitation of Somalia under the United Nations has apparently
begun.

We are pleased to see that the widespread participation of all Somalis

is envisioned and is, in fact, taking place, and that a reasonable transition
period is contemplated so that leadership can be developed, security implanted,
and systems put together.

Both the United Nations and the Somali people require

our continued support if we are to achieve success, and my delegation hopes that
this support will be consistently forthcoming.

We should not falter or waver at

the eleventh hour because of the opposition of one lone warlord or for other
reasons.

We must complete our mission, because success seems at hand, and with

it the return of one of our Members to the family of nations.
the true purpose of our Charter.

Perhaps that is

S/PV.3280
11

Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

In order to

end the tragic war in Somalia, alleviate the sufferings of the Somali people,
create a safe environment for the humanitarian relief endeavour and establish
national reconciliation and lasting peace, the United Nations, the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and the Arab League have made unswerving efforts which
have helped to restore stability in most parts of Somalia outside Mogadishu.
However, we have noted that there still exist many unstable elements in Somalia,
particularly in Mogadishu, where there have been repeated occurrences of
bloodshed and clashes, bringing increasing casualties to both United Nations
personnel and Somali civilians.

All this cannot but cause us deep concern.

We always hold that no matter how complicated the situation, a genuine
solution can be achieved only through dialogue and negotiation.
efforts will go astray.

Otherwise, the

As to how better to implement the mandate of the United

Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II), we maintain that the opinions of the
parties concerned and, in particular, those of the African countries, OAU and
the Arab League should be solicited as widely as possible.
The main thrust of a series of resolutions adopted by the Security Council
on Somalia is to promote the peace process initiated by the Agreement of Addis
Ababa, to realize genuine national reconciliation and to restore peace and
stability in Somalia so that the Somali people can embark on the road of
reconciliation and economic revitalization.

The recommendations of the

Secretary-General for the establishment of Somali police and judicial and penal
systems will serve to create the necessary conditions for the promotion of
national reconciliation in Somalia.

We therefore support these recommendations.

The final solution to the Somali question must be sought by the Somali
people themselves.

We urge all the Somali parties to implement earnestly the

relevant Security Council resolutions, cease forthwith all military actions and
cooperate with UNOSOM II so as to create conditions for an early political
solution to the Somali question.

The draft resolution before us has basically

reflected the above-mentioned spirit.
vote in favour of it.

The Chinese delegation will therefore

S/PV.3280
12

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I shall now put to the

vote the draft resolution contained in document S/26476, as orally revised in
its provisional form.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary, Japan,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft resolution,

as orally revised in its provisional form, has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 865 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make
statements following the voting.
Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for

his excellent report, document S/26317, and also wishes to pay a particular
tribute to his Special Representative, Admiral Jonathan Howe, who is with us
today, and with whom we have had the opportunity of a most useful exchange of
views.
Among the countries participating in the United Nations operation in
Somalia, Pakistan has paid the heaviest price in terms of human life.

We had

agreed to send our young men to Somalia because we believed in the purpose of
the noble cause being pursued by the international community through the United
Nations, and because of our commitment to United Nations efforts at
peace-keeping.
In dispatching its troops under the emblem of the United Nations, the
Pakistan Government had no motive other than to help bring peace to this
troubled land.

Indeed, in view of our long-standing fraternal relations with

Somalia, we were confident that our soldiers would be treated as friends and
messengers of peace and hope by every Somali.

Despite the tragic incidents that

have taken place since 5 June 1993, in which our troops have been targeted by
the supporters of a ruthless warlord who expects to lose ground in a democratic
and stable Somalia, we remain convinced that an overwhelming majority of Somalis
still regard Pakistan as a friend who has come to their help whenever required.

S/PV.3280
13
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
In spite of the rather unfortunate coverage that the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) has lately received in the media, we remain
steadfast in our support for the United Nations involvement in Somalia as well
as the objectives of the United Nations endeavour.

The Chief of Staff of the

Pakistan Army, General Abdul Waheed, who recently visited Somalia, once again
reiterated Pakistan’s resolve to retain its forces at the disposal of the United
Nations for the duration of the mandate.

Indeed, it is only because of the

dedicated efforts of UNOSOM II personnel as well as of other multilateral bodies
and non-governmental organizations that the overall situation in Somalia today
is infinitely better than it was around this time last year.

Death by

starvation has disappeared.

Yet only a year ago hundreds of thousands perished

from starvation and gunfire.

Educational institutions which had been closed for

so long have begun to function.

Hundreds of thousands of Somali adults and

children have been immunized against diseases which were endemic in that
country.

Somali agriculture, which was devastated, is returning to normal and

the last harvest was very good.
to be even better.

The prospects for the coming harvest are said

commercial activity.

There are encouraging signs of recovery of economic and
Restoration of the Somali infrastructure, which has

suffered seriously, will take years and will require the continuing commitment
of donor countries.
It is important that while assessing the situation in Somalia we look at
the overall picture rather than focus only on South Mogadishu, which is merely a
miniscule part of the country.

No doubt the volatile situation in South

Mogadishu as well as the criminal acts and intransigence of Aidid and his
supporters, have harmed the Somali reconciliation process.

But it should be

remembered that Aidid is merely an impediment to this process, the success of
which serves proportionately to diminish the warlord’s capability for oppression
and robbery.

We are therefore confident that by not losing sight of the

ultimate objective and by pursuing it with determination, the United Nations can
help the Somalis to restore national institutions, democracy, and law and order
in their country.

S/PV.3280
14
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
We fully support the resolution that the Council has just adopted.

The

highest priority, without any question, should be attached to the return of
normalcy in Somalia.

Political reconciliation and a national consensus on a

free and democratic Somalia are essential in this regard.

The establishment of

a national police force and judicial and penal systems are no less significant.
It is equally important that local and regional representative institutions be
established, leading to the election of a national Somali legislature.
In Somalia the United Nations, and specifically UNOSOM II, is engaged in a
unique effort aimed at the rebuilding of a nation.

The enormous scope and

complexity of this task, or the difficulties in its way, cannot be
overemphasized.

It is therefore important that those in charge of the operation

have both our understanding and our support.

Indeed, in view of the novelty of

the United Nations operation in Somalia, we have learned as we proceeded.

It is

our earnest desire that efforts to restore the Somali polity will proceed
without too many problems and that the Somali people will soon be able to take
its rightful place once again in the world as a sovereign, proud and democratic
nation.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

The development of

the situation in Somalia is being followed with continuing interest in France.
Humanitarian intervention in this country, where severe starvation is raging,
has elicited positive and rapid mobilization from the international community.
France, together with numerous other countries, has immediately answered the
appeal of the Secretary-General and more than a thousand of its soldiers today
are making a contribution to the restoration of peace to the Baidoa region.
Today famine has been abolished.

This success is indisputably a credit to

this operation, a success which cannot be negated by the images of violence
which come to us from Mogadishu.

The country is beginning once again to find a

certain stability, while debate in political institutions is being reborn thanks

S/PV.3280
15
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
to the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
team of the United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II).

In this framework

also is the establishment of a Somalian police and justice system through the
means provided for in this resolution.

S/PV.3280
16
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
It should, however, be emphasized that this country will not return to the
path of peace and democracy as long as in certain parts of the country heavily
armed factions continue their reign of terror and persist in attacking, in the
name of purely selfish interests, United Nations soldiers who have come to that
country to carry out a mission of peace.

It is clear that in this context

UNOSOM soldiers must be able to fulfil the mandate entrusted to them.
It is also fitting to recall that the long-term objective of the United
Nations in Somalia was a fundamentally political and humanitarian one:

the

United Nations intervened to re-establish peace and democracy in Somalia and to
assist in that country’s reconstruction.

It seems to us that today the time has

come to relaunch the process of national reconciliation and to take the
initiative in bringing all Somalis together around a political plan.

The role

of the United Nations will remain misunderstood and incomplete as long as such
an initiative is not implemented.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

I should like to follow the

Ambassador of Pakistan in welcoming very much the presence among us today of
Admiral Howe, the Secretary-General’s Special Representative.

I think it is of

the very greatest value for us to have had the benefit of his counsel and his
willingness to discuss all the sensitive aspects of this operation with us, and
I should like to simply convey to him the very firmest support and the best
wishes of my Government as he returns now to his very difficult task.
My Government expresses its profound regret and its deepest sympathy to the
families and to the Governments of all those who have lost their lives in
Somalia, and that, of course, goes also for those Somalis who have died.

We

condemn all attacks on United Nations personnel, and we believe it is absolutely
imperative that those responsible for such attacks should be brought to justice.
We fully recognize the dangers and the difficulties which UNOSOM faces in
Mogadishu, but we believe it essential that law and order be restored there and
that the disarmament of all the Somali factions should take place so that
national reconciliation and rehabilitation, which are the fundamental objectives
of the United Nations presence in Somalia, should proceed.

We feel that it

would be a tragedy if the United Nations were to fail in this task, and we, for
our part, support its efforts to persevere.

S/PV.3280
17
(Sir David Hannay,
United Kingdom)
We welcome the progress that has been made in taking forward the political
process and in resolving the immediate humanitarian-relief needs.

But we

underline that longer-term rehabilitation and reconstruction activities must be
given clear and prioritized planning together with realistic goals, and that
they must go hand in hand with a serious and sustained effort towards political
reconciliation on the basis of the agreements reached in the Addis Ababa
Conference.

It is essential to build on the gains that have been made and that

progress in other parts of the country not be held back by the events in
southern Mogadishu.
In this context, the re-establishment of the police and the judiciary and a
proper penal system, which is one of the objects of the resolution we have just
adopted, clearly has a crucial role to play if we are going to be able to hand
over, as we must do, the running of this country to the Somali people and their
representatives, and if we are to do so in conditions of stability.
The current plans are good ones, but they need further working out if this
goal is to be achieved on a basis that will be sustainable even without the
presence of the United Nations, and therefore the fullest possible involvement
of Somalis at all levels - in the police, in the judiciary and in the penal
system - must be a high priority.
Above all, we would like to applaud the efforts of African countries and
their organizations in the work they have done to support the re-emergence of a
civil society in Somalia, and we would like to encourage African countries to
continue with these efforts.

In this context, we have particularly in mind the

countries represented on the Horn of Africa Standing Committee of the
Organization of African Unity, who we believe have a serious and important
contribution to make.
We express the hope that all Somali people will work together with UNOSOM,
with the United Nations agencies and with the devoted efforts of the
non-governmental organizations that are labouring in Somalia under very
difficult conditions and that a coordinated effort will now be continued to
rebuild the country.

S/PV.3280
18
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

My delegation wishes to commend the Secretary-

General, his Special Representative, Admiral Howe, and all the personnel of the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) for their commitment to
improving the situation in Somalia.
Working in a difficult and dangerous environment, UNOSOM has achievements
to its credit, especially in the area of nation-building.

My Government

attaches great importance to the political aspect of UNOSOM’s activities and
therefore welcomes the resolution we have just adopted.

It supports the

requests that the Secretary-General redouble his efforts to promote the process
of national reconciliation and political settlement.
Japan recognizes that it may be necessary to launch a new initiative to
expedite the reconciliation process so that a National Council and eventually a
stable and democratic Government can be established in Somalia.
The re-establishment of a Somali police force, as well as a judicial and
penal system, is critical to the restoration of security and stability in the
country and also to the process of nation-building.

Japan believes that every

effort must be made to re-establish the Somali police force and is thus
gratified that now, with this resolution, the Secretary-General’s recommendation
in this regard will be implemented on an urgent and accelerated basis.
In closing, I should like to call upon all Somali parties to mobilize the
political will to achieve reconciliation and restore peace and security to their
own country.

Japan will continue to join the international community in its

continuing commitment to help Somalia, but it is the people of Somalia who bear
the ultimate responsibility for national reconciliation and reconstruction of
their own country.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

Hungary welcomes

the adoption of this new resolution on Somalia, which results from some of the
present tasks of national reconstruction and from the challenges arising from
the continuing violence in the southern regions of the capital of Somalia.
Somalia has added to the arsenal of the international community’s
experience difficult and weighty lessons in human sacrifice.

We are convinced

that the United Nations will emerge strengthened from the period it is now
experiencing in Somalia if it is able to draw the appropriate conclusions as

S/PV.3280
19-20
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
concerns the conduct of peace-keeping operations, the other international
activities there, and the media aspects of its presence in the country.
Today’s resolution will no doubt contribute to clarifying certain basic
facts of the situation in Somalia by recalling the ongoing improvement in the
general circumstances throughout the country and by pointing out the beneficial
effects that such improvement has already had for the Somali people.

S/PV.3280
21
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
Given conditions in Somalia, we must not underestimate this great
achievement of international action.

To meet the objectives set forth by the

United Nations, it is critical that order and security be restored throughout
the country without exception.

To carry out this huge and complex task,

recourse must continue to be had, in a consistent manner, to the mandate and
means which the Security Council has agreed in this matter.

From that

perspective, the clear references to Security Council resolution 814 (1993) in
the resolution we have just adopted seem most appropriate to us, since it is
precisely the provisions of that resolution that form the basis of our action in
Somalia.
We believe that it is important to persevere in our efforts to get the
country moving again simultaneously in all the directions indicated in our
resolutions - in the military field as well as in the political, humanitarian,
economic and other areas.

Ongoing dialogue with parties in Somali society is

crucial, and it must accompany these efforts.

It is clear that the priority

objective of re-establishing normal conditions in all sectors of the country is
the restoration of security and stability in Somalia.

In that context, beyond

the disarmament operations, the rebuilding of the Somali police force and the
re-establishment of the country’s judicial and penal systems are essential.

It

should also be noted that, in the final analysis, it is up to the Somalis
themselves to be responsible for the national reconciliation and reconstruction
of their own country.
There has been increased interest in international public opinion in the
continuing armed attacks against UNOSOM II personnel.
criminal acts.

These attacks are

Resolution 865 (1993) is unequivocal in its condemnation of

these actions and in its reaffirmation of the individual responsibility of those
who, regardless of rank, status or position, perpetrate or order such criminal
acts.

The way in which the international community acts in this matter is

likely to have repercussions on other similar processes affecting other conflict
situations.

S/PV.3280
22

Mr. HICKS (United States of America):

My delegation would like to

join other speakers in recognizing Admiral Howe for his outstanding work in
Somalia.
Today the Council has taken a most important action with regard to the
United Nations Operation in Somalia.
crucial things.

The resolution we have adopted does two

First, it sets out in clear, unambiguous terms that the United

Nations principal goal in Somalia is to bring about political reconciliation in
that long-suffering country.

My Government has always seen the United Nations

mission in Somalia as political in nature, helping the Somali people to
re-establish their political structures and democratic institutions. Nothing is
more important in Somalia than this political goal.
The other critical step we have taken today is to lend support to the basic
building-blocks of new political institutions:
system.

a police, judiciary and penal

The police are the safeguard of the lives and property of all citizens

in a civilized society. With the establishment of a strong, effective Somali
police force, supported and overseen by a functioning judicial system, the
Somali people will be free to take up again their normal lives, free from
intimidation by the gunmen who brought starvation to this land.
As Admiral Howe pointed out, the United Nations Operation in Somalia has
accomplished a great deal in Somalia.
were starving to death.
back.

Only a year ago, hundreds of thousands

Today starvation is gone and Somalia is on its way

With this resolution, we provide vital tools to the recovery, reaffirming

our clear direction for the political process and reinforcing the Somali
institutions that can best protect and foster that process. We are pleased at
the quick action that the Council has taken on this resolution, so necessary to
giving an added impetus at this critical juncture to the ongoing process of
rebuilding Somalia’s political institutions.
My Government is pleased to have supported this resolution and sees within
its framework a bright promise of a reconciled Somalia standing proud among its
fellow nations of the world.

S/PV.3280
23

Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil):
in Somalia.

No one is unaware of the difficulties

The Brazilian Government pays tribute to the dedicated efforts of

all personnel and commanders of the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM II), who are working in difficult circumstances and have been the
victims of hostilities and armed attacks, in many cases with considerable
casualties.

We fully support the work of the Secretary-General and his Special

Representative, Admiral Jonathan Howe.
We wish to express our heartfelt condolences to the Governments and the
families of those who have lost their lives in Somalia.

The efforts of the

members of UNOSOM II and their dedication to the goals of the United Nations
will not be forgotten.
The outrageous attacks perpetrated against UNOSOM II have already been
strongly condemned by the Security Council.

It is appropriate that we reiterate

that condemnation and that the Council send a strong signal to all Somali
parties involved in those unconscionable attacks.

All such acts must cease

immediately and those responsible for them must be held accountable.
We continue to be seriously concerned about the situation in Somalia and
about the need for a clear conceptual framework on how best UNOSOM II can
contribute to improving that situation.

Through their efforts to overcome the

combined problems of poverty and factional strife, which have taken such a
tragic toll in innocent lives, the people of Somalia are writing a dramatic
chapter of African and world history.

It is our sincere hope that this chapter

will soon be closed and that the Somali people will get their well-deserved
chance for peace, justice and development.

They deserve our full solidarity in

this endeavour.
Well aware as we are of the ongoing difficulties, it is gratifying to note
the information provided by the Secretary-General on the improvement of certain
important aspects of the situation in Somalia.

Considerable progress has been

achieved in addressing some of the most pressing humanitarian tasks, such as
those related to basic health and nutritional needs.

Significant steps have

been and are being taken in the political field towards the implementation of
the Addis Ababa agreement.

In various parts of the country, there are signs of

a resumption of social services and economic activities, which are essential for

S/PV.3280
24-25
(Mr. de Araujo Castro, Brazil)
creating the infrastructure for future development and self-reliance.

A great

deal of hard work will continue to be required in all those areas, but the signs
of progress are indeed encouraging and should no doubt be put to the credit of
UNOSOM II and the Somali people.

We are also indebted to the African countries

that have been contributing to this effort.
A lot remains to be done to achieve the goals of national reconciliation
and reconstruction in Somalia.

The measures decided upon today by the Security

Council in adopting resolution 865 (1993) are important additional steps in this
regard.

In particular, the approval of measures aimed at re-establishing

law-enforcement and judicial institutions brings an essential element by
strengthening the endogenous capacity of the Somali people themselves
effectively to tackle their problems, most notably in the field of security and
in building a society based on the rule of law.
The adoption of this resolution gives additional proof of the commitment of
the United Nations to continue to work in Somalia with a view to the restoration
of normal conditions of life in that country.

The complexity of the situation

in Somalia and the many new challenges facing United Nations operations there
have often been emphasized.

The United Nations is breaking new ground in

Somalia in an innovative and necessary undertaking aimed at bringing peace,
security and a better life to the people of Somalia.

This is a wide-ranging

political undertaking that cannot be mistaken for any of its particular
components.
As stated in resolution 865 (1993), the highest priority is placed on the
efforts to promote national reconciliation and the re-establishment of national
institutions and civil administration throughout the entire territory of
Somalia.

As a member of the Council, Brazil will continue to follow closely

developments related to Somalia and the operations of UNOSOM II and will
continue to give its support to carefully designed actions that can further that
goal.

S/PV.3280
26

Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian):
From the very beginning of the international community’s implementation of the
operations to render assistance to the population of Somalia, the Russian
Federation has continually favoured the speedy stabilization of the situation, a
political settlement and national reconciliation in that country.
We note with satisfaction that the situation in the majority of the
country’s regions is improving.
normal life.

This is allowing the Somali people to return to

As the Secretary-General’s report (S/26317) points out, starvation

has for the most part been eliminated; the programme for substantive improvement
of food distribution and mass immunization of children is being carried out; and
schools are being opened in an ongoing process.

A number of regional councils

have been established, which are the basis for the restoration of statehood and
self-government in the country.
As is indicated in resolution 865 (1993), which was just adopted by the
Security Council, the highest priority task of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM II) is to support the Somali people in carrying out the process
of national reconciliation, and to advance and accelerate the restoration of
regional and national institutions and civilian administration throughout the
country.
We are grateful to all of the personnel of UNOSOM II, and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Admiral Howe, for their unswerving
efforts in this area.

At the same time, we fully agree with the provision of

the Secretary-General’s report which states that in order for peace and security
to be established in Somalia all armed units must be disarmed.

In this respect,

we firmly condemn and consider inadmissible a situation in which peace-keeping
contingents of the international community, whose mission is to promote the
stabilization of the situation in that country, national reconciliation and the
restoration of statehood, are becoming the target of armed attacks.
We express our condolences to the Governments and families of the soldiers
and officers of UNOSOM II who have given their lives in Somalia.

The Russian

delegation believes that the incidents which have taken place in the southern
part of Mogadishu should not be an obstacle to the implementation of the
agreement achieved at the Conference on National Reconciliation in Addis Ababa.
We consider important the appeal contained in resolution 865 (1993) to all

S/PV.3280
27
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
Member States to join with regional organizations in rendering assistance - by
all possible means, including the mass media - to the Secretary-General in his
efforts to reconcile the parties and re-establish political institutions in
Somalia.
Resolution 865 (1993), just adopted, notes that the re-establishment of
the Somali police and of the judicial and penal system is important for the
restoration of security and stability in Somalia.

At the same time, as regards

the financial aspects of carrying out those objectives, the Russian delegation
believes that the appeal in paragraph 14 of the resolution to the
Secretary-General to undertake the necessary steps to ensure continuation of the
present programme for the establishment of the police, judicial and penal system
during the period from October to the end of December 1993, before additional
funds are forthcoming from Member States, does not mean that those steps will be
carried out through the budget for United Nations operations in Somalia.
Expenditures for those specific objectives cannot be covered by the budget of
our Organization.
The Russian Federation is ready to interact with the United Nations and
with all States, and to work within the context of regional efforts, for the
speedy restoration of peace, stability, law and order, which will create the
necessary conditions for a national reconciliation and a political settlement in
Somalia.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):

With the

adoption of resolution 865 (1993), the Security Council once again underscores
the firm commitment of the United Nations to help the Somali people bring about
national reconciliation and return to a normal national life, with the gradual
restoration of their institutions and the public services that are essential to
the community.
The Secretary-General’s report of 17 August 1993, and the oral reports the
members of the Council have had occasion to hear - the latest of those this very
morning from the Special Representation of the Secretary-General, Admiral Howe -

S/PV.3280
28
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
show that the work the United Nations is carrying out in Somalia is largely a
little-known story of concrete achievements and substantial progress in the
direction we had laid down.
The joint efforts of UNOSOM and other United Nations bodies have made it
possible, inter alia, to virtually eradicate famine in the country; schools are
again opening their doors now, after four years without any classes; a large
portion of the country’s children have been vaccinated; and we are now tackling
and resolving its principal health problems.

From an economic and social

perspective, moreover, a good portion of the population are returning to their
lands, and agriculture, livestock rearing and trade are all being revitalized.
These achievements have their counterparts in the political field as well.
As provided for in the Addis Ababa Agreement, the gradual formation of district
councils will be the first step towards the creation of regional councils and
the future establishment of a Transitional National Council, all of which will
lay the foundation for the restoration of state institutions in Somalia.

We are

convinced that the majority of the Somali people have the political will to
achieve speedy national reconciliation, as is evinced by all of these
achievements.
We must stress that the problems in Somalia can ultimately be overcome
only by the efforts of the Somalis themselves, bearing in mind, naturally, that
all the groups, factions and parties must be given their say, and only those
whose actions have proven that they are outlaws should be barred from the
process.

This effort must be carried out by the Somalis themselves, with the

support and assistance of the international community:

the United Nations, but

also the neighbouring countries, the Organization of African Unity, the League
of Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

It is

exceedingly important that the Somalis be able to count on this support and
assistance of the international community.
We must regret, however, that United Nations forces in Somalia have been
harassed by one of the Somali factions, which stands in the way of their work
and undermines any chance of dialogue.

We would like to emphasize the full

validity of UNOSOM II’s actions to promote the fulfilment of the goals set down
by the Security Council.

We would also like to pay tribute here to all those

S/PV.3280
29-30
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
who have given their lives in the service of this noble cause.

At the same

time, we would like to highlight and pay tribute to the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Admiral Howe, and of the entire
personnel of UNOSOM II, who have carried out their task under difficult
circumstances and have shown great fortitude and determination.

S/PV.3280
31
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
The resolution that we have adopted today stresses the need to restore,
swiftly, certain institutions and essential public services, such as the police
and the judicial and penal systems, in Somalia, to make it easier for the people
of Somalia soon to control their own destiny, and to speed that process.

This

will help the political reconciliation now in progress, through which Somalia
must rebuild its institutions as soon as possible so that it can become a free,
democratic and fully sovereign country by 1995 at the latest.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

In casting our vote in favour of this

resolution, New Zealand reaffirms its wholehearted support for the United
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM II) and the United Nations mission in
Somalia.

We greatly appreciated Admiral Howe’s presence with us today, and the

insights that he has given the Council.
It is now 10 months since the first New Zealand contingent was deployed in
Somalia, with UNOSOM I.

Since then, we have made military contributions to the

Unified Task Force (UNITAF) and to UNOSOM II.

Furthermore, the Government and

the people of New Zealand have responded with humanitarian assistance to relieve
the tragedy that existed in Somalia only a year ago.
My delegation believes that real progress has been achieved in improving
humanitarian conditions throughout Somalia.
warmly.

We welcome this development most

Thousands of human beings are alive today in Somalia who would have

succumbed to famine and anarchy.

The United Nations, the courageous United

Nations personnel in the field and the Governments that have supported the
United Nations can take justified credit for this achievement.
We believe that it is important to stress the positive developments that
are taking place in Somalia.

We hear much in the media of the clashes occurring

in the southern part of Mogadishu, but this must not detract from the very real
progress being made elsewhere in the country.
Thanks to the untiring efforts of the United Nations, great improvements
have also been made in the second objective established by the Security Council
when it established the UNOSOM II mandate:
Somalia.

the political reconstruction of

District councils are being established, schools are opening and local

institutions for law and order are being rebuilt.
encouraged by these positive elements.

My delegation is much

S/PV.3280
32
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
It is clear that the international community will need to remain committed
over the long term to ensure Somalia’s political and economic reconstruction.
The attacks on United Nations personnel in southern Mogadishu remain a
cause for grave concern.

My delegation is dismayed by the criminal activities

of one Somali faction which is attacking United Nations peace-keepers.

This

faction was a signatory to the Addis Ababa agreement, which invited the United
Nations to extend all assistance to the people of Somalia for the implementation
of the agreement, including the disarmament of the various factions.
We condemn the refusal of those leaders whose actions have resulted in
further deaths and in disruption to the humanitarian mission.

In this regard,

my delegation extends its sincere condolences to all those families and
countries that have suffered casualties and loss of life.
My delegation is pleased that this resolution unequivocally condemns all
attacks on UNOSOM II personnel.

We welcome the reaffirmation by the Council

that those who have committed or ordered the commission of such criminal acts
will be held individually responsible for them, for it is clear that the
perpetrators of such crimes will not desist unless the consequences of their
actions are made clear.
This situation is intolerable and requires urgent rectification.

The issue

of the safety and security of United Nations personnel is one which the New
Zealand delegation will be vigorously pursuing at this year’s session of the
General Assembly.
There are many who say that the difficulties that UNOSOM II has encountered
in southern Mogadishu mean that the United Nations has lost its way and that the
Security Council should review the mandate.

We do not share that view.

It is

unduly influenced by images on television screens; it does not take adequately
into account that the Council has all along seen the primary objective of UNOSOM
as the humanitarian mission and the reconstruction of political institutions in
Somalia.
But my delegation fully agrees with the Secretary-General that the
achievement of the humanitarian objectives of UNOSOM II are indeed jeopardized
without restoration of law and order in Somalia generally and Mogadishu in
particular.

That said, we welcome the emphasis placed in the present resolution

S/PV.3280
33
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
on the priority of making progress in political reconciliation and the
reformation of the Somali police and judicial systems.

We are heartened to note

in the resolution the restatement of the goals of the United Nations in Somalia.
Indeed, the ultimate goal of the United Nations operation is a political one:
to assist the people of Somalia in the furtherance of national reconciliation
and to promote and advance the re-establishment of regional and national
institutions, and civil administration, throughout the country.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
speakers on my list.

There are no further

The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.
