TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
SEP 2 4 19

th
MEETING: 8 JIJNE 1973
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 17 19) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . .. . . .
Adoption of the agenda

..,... ......................,.........

The situation in the Middle East:
(al Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
331 (1973) (S/10929) , . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.l719

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETEENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 8 June 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l719)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(bj Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929).
Tke meeting was called to order at I I.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East :
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report
of the Secretary-General under
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)

Security

1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian}: I should
Iike to draw the attention of members of the Security
Council to the latest official documents of the Council,
issued this morning, which have a direct bearing on the
Council’s examination of the situation in the Middle East.
The first document [S/l 09#2/ contains a message from His
Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco addressed to Mr. Waldheim, Secretary-General. In addition to setting forth Morocco’s position on the substance of the situation in the
Middle East, the message draws attention to the important
role which the United Nations can and must play in settling
the Middle East problem.
2. The second document (S/10943] contains a resolution
of the jubilee session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
The resolution is entitled “The continued occupation by
Israel of part of the territory of the Arab Republic of
Egypt”. It was introduced at yesterday’s meeting of the
Security Council by Mr. Arikpo, Commissioner for External
Affairs of Nigeria.
3. In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council
at previous meetings I shall, with the consent of the

Council, invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates and Somalia to take part, without the right to
vote, in the Council’s examination of the situation in the
Middle East.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H, El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A. H. Sharaf
(Jordan) took places at the Council table; and Mr. J. W. S.
tilecela
(United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. H. G.
Ouangmotching (Chad], Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. 0. Arikpo
(Nigeria), Mr. A. Bauteflih-a
(Algeria), Mr. M. Zentar (Morocco), Mr. A. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates) and Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
table.
4. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I should
like to inform members of the Security Council that, as
President of the Council, I have received letters from the
representatives of Guyana and Mauritania requesting that
their delegations be invited to take part, without the right
to vote, in consideration of the question before the Council
at this meeting. In accordance with established practice and
the provisional rules of procedure I propose to invite the
representatives of Guyana and Mauritania to take pa&
without the right to vote, in the Security Council’s
examination of the situation in the Middle East.
At he invitation of the President, Mr. R. E. Jackson
(Guyana) and Mr. M. El Hassen (Mauritania) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council table.
5. The PRESIDENT
(translation from Russian): The
representative of the United Arab Emirates is first on the
list of speakers for today’s meeting. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
6. Mr. HUMAIDAN
(United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, first of all I should
like to convey to you my congratulations and my warmest
wishes for your success in your tenure as President of the
Council, a duty which you are discharging with such
responsibility. I should like also to thank you and the
members of the Council for having allowed me to participate in this debate on a situation which continues to
deteriorate.
7. If we thought it our duty to participate in this debate,
it was because we are very much concerned about the crisis
afflicting our Organization, the United Nations. This crisis

threatens to undermine its prestige and credibility as far as
the peoples of the world are concerned-for,
despite its
defects, the United Nations is a source of hope for us,
indeed the only hope for mankind to avoid catastrophe. We
cannot allow it tb be overthrown, because the end of the
United Nations will bring in its wake a disaster a thousand
times worse than that which foollowed upon the failure of
the League of Nations.
“Our geographical position in the Gulf has given us a
vital interest in the maintenance of peace and stability in
that important . . . area of the world.“1
Those words were spoken by our Foreign Minister,
Mr. Soweidi, to the General Assembly on 27 September
1972. I must add that we are attempting to bring up our
new generation to believe in the United Nations, to love
instead of to hate, to build instead of to destroy, to hope
instead of to despair, to love all men whether they be
white, black or yellow, whether they be Christians,
Moslems, Jewish or anything else. But how do you expect
us to succeed in this task when we are dealing with a
generation which continues to see a portion of the Arab
world, to which it belongs moreover, usurped by an
occupier who makes a mockery of the United Nations and
its resolutions?
8. We are witnessing a reraxation of tension throughout
the world. This is a fact, a fact on which we congratulate
ourselves. On the other hand, we are also witnessing the
fact that this relaxation of tension-or rather this balance of
terror-has enabled Israel to play with fire.
9. There is little purpose to be served in repeating this: the
principal task of the United Nations is above all to bring
order and peace to reign in international relations. However, the experiences we have had have shown that where
you find colonialism, where you find peoples deprived of
the right to self-determination,
you have a source of
disturbance of the peace. What is more, recent experience
has demonstrated that in our international society when
there is a people that is struggling for its self-determination
other nations cannot stand by with their arms folded. The
Palestine people is no exception to this rule. Moreover, the
most recent debates in the Council, on the Israeli aggression
of 10 April last against Lebanon, bear me out in what I say.
The world is becoming increasingly convinced that as long
as the Palestine people are deprived of their fundamental
rights in their ancestral homeland there can be no settlement, no peace, in the Middle East.
10. I do not want to waste the Council’s time by repeating
everything that has been said in the Council on this point,
but what is disturbing is that the Zionist authorities
continue to deny even the existence of this Palestine
people. What is more, it is attempting to justify the
expulsion of Arab inhabitants from the occupied territories
by arguments that reffect the true face of zionism.

Porat, extracts of which were reprinted by the French
newspaperLe Monde on 11 April last. According to Le
Monde, the purposeof this article, written by a journalist
who is considereda closeassociateof General Dayan, was
to dampendown the lively emotional reactions of world
public opinion to the expelling of Arab inhabitants from
the Raffah region in order to settle Jewsin their place. The
aforesaidjournalist, who is a confirmed Zionist, wrote:
“There is no Zionism,no settlementon the land, no Jewish
State without the evacuation of Arabs and without confiscation, and anyone who claimsthe contrary is naive or
hypocritical.” There you have the true face of Zionism;
there is a threat to human rights in the face of which no
one can or hasthe right to remainidle or with armsfolded.
12. On 30 April last the Israeli Ambassador in Paris,
Mr. Ben Natan, stated to four journalistsin the courseof a
televisioninterview on ChannelTwo that “the Palestinians
are not interlocuters, becausethey have no State”. Then
someoneput to him the following delicatequestion: “Must
the Palestiniansbe persecutedfor 2000 years before you
will recognize them?“. Here again you have a question
which everyone, and aboveall the Jews,should think about
andthink about in great depth.
13. At the last sessionof the General Assembly we
discussed
a complicatedproblem of our times, namely, the
problem of violence, or what somepeoplewanted to call
“international terrorism”.
14. In this connexion, on 21 November 1972 we said that
violence was continuing to disturb the peace,not only in
the Middle Eastbut throughout the world. Nevertheless,we
remainconvinced that the final solution to this problem is
to be found in the elimination of the deep-rootedcausesof
such violence. We also said-and we repeat-that the
injustice which still reignsin our international society and
the ineffectivenessof our Organization,the United Nations,
in uprooting that injustice are at the very foundation of the
continuation andaggravationof this problem.
15. That is where we find ourselvestoday. We now are
witnessinga new phenomenonof terrorism: terrorism by a
State, a State that is after all a Member of the United
Nations, a State which engagesin terrorism and does not
evendeny having engagedin it, but which, on the contrary,
affirmsits intention to go on doing so.
16. Lastly, I should like to say a few words about the
report prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution331 (1973), adopted by the Security Council on
20 April last. We do not want to say any more than he
himselfhassaid,and I prefer to quote his very words and to
do so in English: ‘&.. . great efforts but little progress”
[I 717th meeting,para. 16J.

11, In July 1972 the Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahuranath
published an article by the Israeli journalist, Yeshayaou Ben

17. We appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-General, and we believe as he does that the tensions
and the conflicts in the Middle Eastweigh heavily not o@
on the countriesof the region but alsoon the international
communityasa whole.

1 See Official
Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2043rd meeting,para.154.

18. The Government of the United Arab Emirates firmly
believesthat peaceand stability cannot be restored to the

Middle East as Iong as the occupation continues and as long
as the Palestinian people continues to be deprived of its
fundamental rights in its ancestral homeland.

24. SOit is not only within the chambersand corridors of
the United Nations that the situation in the Middle East has
engagedabsorbedattention: it is a situation which involves
the destiniesof millions of people; it is a situation which
remains a hotbed of tension in spite of the changing
international climate in the direction of the relaxation of
such tensions. It is, above all, a situation in which, if the
current tendencies to stalemateare not interrupted, the
peaceand security of the world will ineluctably slide to a
position the consequences
of which we fear to contemplate,

19, I should like to conclude this statement with an
appeal-an appeal already made by our former colleague Sir
Colin Crowe to this Council on 17 April last. He said:
“Something must be done, and it must be done
urgently. The danger to peace in the Middle East region is
such that none of us can afford to allow the present
deadlock to persist indefinitely.” (I 708th meeting,

2.5. Non-alignedcountries have over the yearspronounced
themselves on this question. Yesterday we were given
graphic and elucidating expositions by the Commissioner
for External Affairs of Nigeriaand the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania of the grave
concern for this question by the Organization of African
Unity and the strenuousand dedicatedefforts madeby that
organization to find a just solution to the problemswhich
exist in the Middle East. This is not the first time that this
Organization hasbeenmadeawareof that concern.

pnra. 14.1

20. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I now
invite the representativeof Guyana, the next speakeron the
list of speakersfor today’s meeting, to take a place at the
Council table and to makehis statement.
21. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President,it is my first
and pleasantduty to expressthe gratitude of my delegation
to you and, through you, to the membersof this Council
for permitting me to participate in this debate.My second,
and equally pleasant,duty is to congratulateyou on your
accessionto the office of Presidentof the Security Council
for this month of June. You will, I am confident, bring to
bear in the dischargeof your onerousresponsibilitiesthe
characteristicsof wisdom and finely balancedjudgement
for which you have sucha well-earnedreputation,

26. From all theseefforts-and indeed from others, some
of which are bilateral in nature-certain principles have
emerged,principles which are cardinalto the establishment
in the Middle East of a regimeof peacefounded on justice,
morality and the rule of law.

22. The matter of which this Council is currently seized,
the situation in the Middle East, is one which hasengaged
the attention of the Security Council, the General Assembly and other organsof the United Nationsfor many
years-indeed, for nearly aslong asthe Organization itself
has existed. It is a matter which has been debated
comprehensivelyin its totality and also in severalof its
aspects.I venture to suggestthat there is no absenceof
adequateguidelinesin the numerousresolutionswhich can
be found in the records of this Organization-guidelines
which delineate the path towards the achievementof a just
and lasting peace in the area. So far, however, those
resolutions and decisionshave remained principally of
archival value; they are there for the scholarto read, but
their essentialquality suffersfrom the apparentlack of will
on the part of this Organization to take the necessaryand
appropriatestepsto securetheir implementation.
23. This seemingineffectuality is of particular concern to
smallcountries like mine-countries which have affirmed, in
the words of the LusakaDeclaration of 1970, “their deep
conviction that the United Nations provides the most
effective means to maintain and promote international
peace and security, strengthen freedom, and harmonize
relations between States,” We reject the concept of an
international political system rooted in naked power and
sustainedby an arrogant and unyielding exerciseof that
power. Our faith in the United Nations is strengthenedby
the growing awarenessthat the interdependenceof the
Statesand peoplesof this planet enjoinsus to place more
reliance on the inevitability of multilateral diplomatic
activities.

27. We cannot, in working towards the fulfilment of our
hopesand aspirationsfor a just and peacefulworld, negate
respect for the purposesand principles of the Charter of
this Organization, particularly when the commitment and
behaviour required of usis adherenceto the resolutionsand
decisionswhich flow from our collective resolveto implement those very purposes and principles. We cannot
contemplate a resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict which
is not premised on a solution to the central issueof the
plight of the dispossessed
Palestinian Arabs. And we
cannot, in whatever is done in this unhappy situation,
condone,even inferentially, the acquisitionof territory by
the threat or use of force in flagrant violation of internationallaw.
28. Six years ago this Council consideredthe Middle East
situation in all its aspects.During thesesix yearswe have
waited, not passively, for some advancement towards
genuinepeace.But the goal of peacehascontinuedto elude
us. We stand today at the crossroadsin the quest for a
solution to the impassein the Middle East.
29. A lack of decisiveaction by the Council now will, in
the view of my delegation, face us with two possibilities,
both equally dangerous.Failure to chart a way to durable
peaceat this time can lead to more embittered frustration
than even now exists. Such a failure can exacerbate the
situation and give further encouragementto the processes
of confrontation leading to hostilities. The secondpossibility of the lack of movement forward at this juncture is
the maintenanceof the status quo. Such an eventuality will
inevitably lead to the violation of the principIes which I
outlined earlier, encompassingin its effects a cloak of
legitimacy by acquiescenceof acts of aggressionand the
institutionalization of illegality.

3

37. To Egypt’s Foreign Minister, Jews returning to their
ancient homeland after centuries of struggleagainst the
consequences
of foreign conquestare “aliens”. He doesnot
concealthe fact that the demandto withdraw to the 1967
lines is only the first stagein the struggleagainstIsraelindeed,asPresidentSadat and HassaninHeykal, quoted by
me yesterday [I 718th meeting], had explained on a
number of occasions.Minister El-Zayyat hasemphasized,
againandagain,that Israel’srecognizedbordersare those of
the Partition Plan of 1947. The Syrian representativeleft
no doubt that his Government remainsfirm in its repudiation of resolution 242 (1967), in its rejection of any
notion of peacewith Israel, andin its denialof Israel’sright
to exist.

30. However, there is a third possibility, but its realization
requires determination on the part of this Council to take
resolute action, necessary and appropriate, in the discharge
of the responsibilities assigned to it under the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peaoe and security.
31. In the course of the deliberations of this Council due
account will no doubt be taken of the views expressed in
this chamber. In this regard the valuable report of the
Secretary-General in document S/10929 should have an
important bearing on the Council’s work, containing as it
does a review and appraisal of the efforts made so far under
the auspices of the United Nations to find a solution to this
vexed question. But it is the hope of my delegation that the
Council’s conclusions will be informed by opinions and
considerations expressed outside this chamber, views representative and reflective of the grave concern, which is
widespread, over the dangers inherent in the current
situation.

38. The representativeof the United Arab Emiratestoday
only strengthenedthe realization that the Arab States
continueto deny the Jewishpeople’sright to self-determination andindependence.Some,like Syria andothers, do it
overtly and specifically; others, like Egypt, resort to
terminology somewhat more veiled but still sufficiently
clear.

32. It is in this context that I wish to draw to your
attention the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the
Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries
held in Georgetown, Guyana, in August last year. That
Conference authorized its Chairman, my Foreign Minister,
Mr. Shridath Ramphal, to transmit its conclusions to the
Secretary-General for distribution to Member States of this
Organization. And that mandate has been discharged. The
resolution expresses, inter alia, the solidarity of non-aligned
countries with Egypt, Jordan and Syria in their legitimate
struggle to recover by every means their territorial integrity;
it calls for the full restoration of the rights of the Arab
people of Palestine; it acknowledges unequivocally that the
acquisition of territory through force is wholly impermissible, and records the intention of non-aligned countries
to follow closely the evolution of the situation in the
Middle East.

39. Thus, surroundedby Stateswhich refuseto recognize
the justice of the Jewish people’s rebirth in its historic
homelandand aspireto Israel’sdestruction, Israelwould be
fully entitled, morally and legally, to conclude that the
Arab States have forfeited all their claimsin relation to
Israel.No principle and no rule can prejudice the right to
self-preservationand defence. This, indeed, is the foundation of international law and of the United Nations
Charter.
40. Instead, Israel says to the Arab States: “Let us
negotiatepeace,let us replacethe cease-firelines resulting
from the Arab war of aggression
waged againstIsrael since
1948 by secure,agreed,recognized boundaries.” In these
circumstances
the Arab refusalto negotiatehasan ominous
meaning.As the Foreign Minister of Israel stated in the
GeneralAssemblyon 19 September1969:

33. Having regard, Mr. President, to the particular importance of the subject under discussion during the current
series of meetings of the Security Council, I would request
you to circulate as an official document of this Council the
text of that resolution, a copy of which will be made
available immediately.

“The emphasisthat any Government places on negotiation is not an obsessionwith procedure. It is the heart
and centre of the problem. For a refusal to ne otiate is
fl peace.
inherently identical with a refusal to establis
How can a transition from prolonged belligerency to
peaceful coexistence be carried out on the basis of
diplomatic boycott and ostracism? Never, never in the
history of our times have two States passedfrom a state
of war to a state of peaceon the basisof a refusal by one
to meetthe other.“3

34. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
resolution which the representative of Guyana referred to
will be issued as a document of the Security Council.2
35. I call on the representative
exercise of his right of reply,

of Israel, to speak in

36. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): In at least one respect there
seems to be some benefit in the fact that many Arab
representatives have asked to participate in our deliberations. Indeed, there could be no better, no more
convincing way to demonstrate the more sinister elements
in the Arab attitude towards Israel and the gravity of the
Arab designs on the Jewish people’s freedom and sovereignty than by reference to the statements delivered by
Arab spokesmen.

Indeed, negotiation is the only way to peace,but in the
Israel-Arabconflict negotiation hasalso becomethe test of
a desirefor peace.Agreement,and therefore negotiation, is
the very essence
of resolution242 (1967).
41. The Under-Secretary-Generalof the United Nations
who receivedthe Nobel Prize for bringing about through
negotiation the only agreementsbetween Israel and the
3 See Official
Session, Plenary

2 Subsequently circulated in document S/10944.

4

Records
Meetings,

of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
1757th meeting, para. 171.

Arab States, the late M,r. Ralph Bunche, had the following
to say on the question of negotiation under resolution
242 (1967). Interviewed
on the television programme
“Issues and Answers” on 28 December 1969, Mr. Bunche
was asked:
“Well, are you saying then that eventually Israel and the
Arabs must somehow negotiate, and if so, how can they
do it? ”
And he answered:
“Well, this is, of course, implicit in the whole formula
from the beginning that Jarring’s role, which has not been
defined as a mediator in the sense of advancing proposals
and trial and error, but his role is to promote agreement
amongst the parties. That is what the resolution calls for,
you see,”
In fact, a year and a half earlier, Ambassador Jarring did try
to initiate meetings between the parties. Egypt refused.
42. The Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the State which
sponsored the text of resolution 242 (1967), Sir Alec
Douglas-Home of the United Kingdom, declared in the
General Assembly on 29 September 1971:
‘I , . . if war is to be avoided, those who are in confrontation must actively help to promote a dialogue. . . .
unless a mechanism of dialogue can be established, sooner
or later-and maybe sooner than later-the fighting will
start again. . , .
“Confidence can only be established in this case
through dialogue. . . When there is distrust between the
parties of this depth and scope, it cannot be removed by
long-distance correspondence, and the onus of adopting
dialogue must rest with those who now confront each
other in arms. It is for us to help them to find the way to
do it-and I emphasize again that the time is short. This is
a case where dialogue must supplant confrontation.“”
43. That is the question now facing the Security Council.
Will it help the parties to a dialogue? Will it encourage the
initiation of a process of negotiation?
44, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): 1 call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of
J&w.
45. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
(Egypt): I have said before, and I
repeat, that our effort is always going to remain within the
United Nations, subject to the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
46. Mr. President, yesterday we took note, you took note,
of the refusal of the Israeli representative-his unreadiness
or unwillingness-to
reaffirm that the State of Israel is
4 Ibid.,

Twenty-sixth

paras.97-98.

Session,

Plenary

Meetings,

1944th

meeting,

governed by and accepts the principle of no acquisition of
territories by force. He referred me to his statement, and in
his statement I found that he interprets the Council’s
resolution as indeed giving his country, as a victor, the right
of annexing, as a result of war, certain territories from
other countries. We are not surprised, but we take note.
47. Now, there is a call for negotiations-call them talks
through Jarring or any kind of negotiations, direct or
indirect. The invitation is launched here, and, since we must
use our logic and our minds, we must connect this with
what was said yesterday. Those negotiations would have to
be either as requested by or on the conditions of Israel,
which is convinced that acquisition of territories by force is
permissible, or they would have to take place on the basis
of the principle that acquisition of territories is not
permissible-the principle in which we believe and in which
I hope the 15 members around this table believe. That
would be then done against the will and against the
unreadiness of Israel.
48. If we are going to proceed as Israel wants, I do not
think we need the Council or the United Nations or
anything, really. We nee< to go and reread the history of
the world before the Charter. The victor dictates to the
vanquished, the vanquished goes and harbours new intentions for launching a new war to get back what was taken
from him by force. It is that simple. It does not warrant my
presence here.
49. If we take the second possibility, then what is going to
oblige Israel to do anything contrary to its will expressed
here plainly? I suggest that the Council has the power to
get Israel to fall in line with international law and to be
subject to international law which, incidentally, it obliged
itself to respect by signing the Charter and by remaining a
Member of the United Nations. How can the Council do
that? The Charter gives the Council the right to impose
sanctions. I did not even contemplate the possibility of the
Council doing so-for the reasons I mentioned before that
are known to all, Until we persuade every nation around
this Council to be more faithfill to the Charter than to its
own friendships and weaknesses, I am not going to speak
about sanctions.
50. So what is left for us is a resolution spelling out
plainly and in basic language that territories cannot be
acquired by force and that “withdrawal from the territories
occupied” means withdrawal from the territories occu.
pied-in French, in Spanish, in Russian, in Chinese and also
in English. And that, boiled down, is our reason for coming
Council:
change
resolution
to
the
not
to
242 (1967)-although
we do not want even to mention that
resolution, because if there exists a Council resolution
partitioning Egypt, 1 do not want to hear about it-but to
make sure that the Council never intended, does not intend
and will never intend, without breaching the Charter, that
territories of Egypt or Syria or Jordan could be annexed
because there was a victory in June 1967.
77te meeting rose at IISO

a.m.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les aimnces
depositaires
du monde entier. Informea-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressea-vous
R : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAKC KKOKY’KHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAFWffI

OPI’AHII

PUBLICACIONES

3AQWi

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$lJ.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

OE’IDEAUHEHHI>IX

NACIONES

HAU;HH

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

82001-May

1979-2,200
