4

General Assemhly--Seventh Session

2. Expresses the hope that the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war will be speedily completed
and that the further negotiations at Panmunjom will
result in achieving an early armistice in Korea, consistent with the United Nations principles and objectives;
3. Decides to recess the present session upon cornpletion of the current agenda items, and requests the
President of the General Assembly to reconvene the
present session to resume consideration of the Korean
question (a) upon notification by the Unified Command
to the Security Council of the signing of an armistice
agreement in Korea; or ( b) when, in the view of a
majority of Members, other developments in Korea require consideration of this question.
427th plenary meeting,
18 April 1953.

706 (VII). Question of impartial investigation of
charges of use hy United Nations Forces of
hacteriological warfare

The General Assembly,
Noting that accusations have been made by certain
governments and authorities charging the use of bacteriological warfare by United Nat10ns Forces, and that
the Unified Command has repeatedly denied such
charges,

Recalling that when the charges were first made the
Unified Command had requested that an impartial investigation be made of them,
Noting that the Central People's Government of the
People's :Republic of China and the North Korean
authorities have so far refused to accept an offer by
the International Committee of the Red Cross to carry
out an investigation,
N oting that the draft resolution 7 submitted ir> the
Security Council by the Government of the United
States of America proposing an investigation of these
charges by the International Committee of the Red
Cross failed to carry because of the negative vote of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Desiring to serve the interests of truth,
1. Resolves that, after the President of the Generar
Assembly has received an indication from all the governments and authorities concerned of their acceptance
of the investigation proposed in the present resolution,
a Commission, composed of Brazil, Egypt, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay, shall be set up and shall carry
out immediately an investigation of the charges that
have been made ;
2. Calls upon the governments and authorities concerned to enable the Commission to 1ravel freely
throughout such areas of North and South Korea, the
Chinese mainland and Ja pan as the Commission may
<leem necessary in the performance of its task and to
allow the Commission freedom of access to such persans, places and relevant documents as it considers
necessarv for the fulfilment of its task and to allow it
to examme any witness, including prisoners of war.
under such safeguards and conditions as the Commis7 See document

S/2671.

sion shall determine: ail prisoners of war who are
alleged to have made confessions regarding the use
uf bacteriological warfare shall, prior to examination
by the Commission, be taken to a neutral area and remain under the responsibility and custody of the Commission until the end of the Korean hostilities;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to transmit the present resolution immediately to the
governments and authorities concerned, requesting them
to indicate their acceptance of the investigation proposed in the present resolution;
4. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to report to the General Assembly at the earliest practicable date on the results of his efforts;
S. Directs the Commission, •.vhen set up, to enlist the
aid of such scientists of international reputation, especially epidemiologists, and such other experts as it may
select;
6. Directs the Commission, after acceptance of the
investigation proposed in the present resolution by all
the governments and autho, "ties concerned, to report
to the Members of the Gene:-al A.;sembly through the
Secretary-General as soon possible and no later than
1 Septemter 1953;
ï. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Commission with the necessary staff and facilities.
428th plenary meeting,
23 April 1953.

707 (VII). Complaint hy the Union of Burma regarding aggression against it hy the Government of the Republic of China

The General Asscmbly,
H aving examined the complaint6 by the delegation
uf the Union of Burma regar<ling the presence, hostile
activities and <lepredations of foreign forces in the ter-ritory of the Union of Burma,
Considering that these facts constitute a violation of
the territory and sovereignty of the Union of Burma,
Afjirming that any assistance given to these forces
which enables them to remain in the territory of the
Union of Burma or to continue their hostile acts against
a Member State is contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations,
Considcring that the refusai of these forces to submit
to disarmament or interment is contrary to international
law and usage,
1. Dej1lores this situation and condemns the presence
of these forces in Burma and their hostile acts against
that country;
2. Der/ares that these .foreign forces must be dis;irmed and either agree to internment or leave the territory of the Union of Burma forthwith;
3. Rcquests ail States to respect the territorial integrity and political independence of the Union of
Burma in accordance with the principles of the Charter;
4. Recommends that the negotiations now in progress
through the good offices of certain Member States
8 See document

A/'2375.
