UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS
UNLIBRARY

FORTIETH

MAR1 7 1995

YEAR

2620”

MEETING:

10 OCTOBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. .. ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent Representative of
India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 7507) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2620)

WPV.2620

NOTE
Symbols ofunited Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
_,.
.’ -.
’ ’ ‘Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Councjl, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2620th
Held

MEETING

in New York on Thursday,

10 October

President: Mr. Vernon A, WALTERS
(United States of America).

the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, ‘Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djoudi (Algeria),
Mr. Chsar (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr.
Yaqub-Khan (Pakistan) and Mr. G’oZob (Yugoslavia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2620)
1. Adoption
2

1985, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 10 October from the
permanent representative of Kuwait [S/l755gJ, which
reads as follows:

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17507).

“In my capacity as Chairman of the Group of Arab
States for the month of October, I have the honour to
request that during the Council’s discussion of the item
presently on its agenda the Security Council extended
an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Observer of the
League of Arab States.”

I?ze meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the Agenda
The agenda was adopted.

4. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to accede to that request.

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian
question:
Letter dated 30 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17507).

It was so decided
5. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is Mr. Massamba
Same, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2619th meeting, I invite the observer for the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at
the Council table; I invite the representatives of Israel,
Kuwait and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Mr. SARRfi, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(interpretation from French): On behalf of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I thank all the members of the Council for having
authorized me to participate once again in the debate on
the situation in the Middle East.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Qaddoumi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council
table; Mr. Netanyahu (Israel), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait) and
Mr. Ei-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the piaces
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. As was emphasized this morning [2619th meeting], the
Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Luanda from 4 to 7 September, wanted such a
meeting to be held. They wished in that way first to draw
the attention of the international community, and especially of the Council, once again to the urgent need to
restore peace to the Middle East, for the benefit of all the
Siates and peoples of the. region.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Czechoslovakia, Morocco, Pakistan and Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with
1

8. When speaking before the Council as representative of
Senegal during the debate on the complaint by Tunisia last
week [26IIth meeting], I stressed that the fundamental reason for the cycles of violence we are witnessing in the
Middle East was the fact that the question of the Middle
Fast, and especially the question of Palestine, had not been
resolved. In the light of the most recent events in the Mediterranean, which we condemn, it is important to stress
once again that the question of Palestine, which is at the
heart of the Israeli-Arab conflict, deserves constant and
continuing attention, with a view to arriving at a just and
lasting solution.

14. It may be appropriate to recall here the guiding principles of that conference, which in our view offer all the
interested parties, and above all the parties concerned,
extensive possibilities for participation in the negotiations,
and represent an intelligent and practical way of at last
giving concrete shape to the concept of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
15. These principles, established in resolution 38/58 C,
are, inter alia, first, the attainment by the Palestinian
people of its legitimate inalienable rights, including the
right to return, the right to self-determination and the right
to establish its own independent State in Palestine;
secondly, the right of the PLO, the representative of the
Palestinian people, to participate on an equal footing with
other parties in all efforts, deliberations and conferences
on the Middle East; thirdly, the need to put an end to
Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories, in accordance
with the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of territory by force, and, consequently, the need to secure
Israel’s withdrawal from the territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem; and, fourthly, the right of all
States in the region to existence within secure and intemationally recognized boundaries, with justice and security
for all the people, the sine qua non of which is the recognition and attainment of the legitimate, inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people.

9. In that respect, the United Nations, through the Security Council, unquestionably has the responsibility for
ensuring recognition of the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, to independence, to national sovereignty, to return, to recover its property, and to physical
protection and decent living conditions in the refugee
camps.
10. Since its establishment the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has,
in accordance with its mandate, endeavoured to make
recommendations that can allow the Palestinian people to
exercise its inalienable rights as recognized and defined by
the General Assembly.

16. The General Assembly therefore invited all parties to
the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the PLO, as well as the
United States of America, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the other members of the Security Council
and other States concerned to participate in an intemational peace conference on the Middle East, on an equal
footing and with equal rights. In our view such a conference would in not in any way be a public relations exercise
but rather an objective and practical step that would
undoubtedly facilitate the search for a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

11. The recommendations contained in the Committee’s
first report, in 1976, and maintained without change since
then, have been ever more firmly endorsed every year by the
General Assembly. As members are aware, in spite of the
repeated requests it received from the Committee, the
Council has not yet followed those recommendations, nor
has it implemented them. Those recommendations are too
familiar to the Council for me to repeat them here. I should
just like to recall that they are solidly based on intemationally recognized fundamental principles. The Committee
remains convinced that if the Council were to adopt positive
measures to implement those recommendations, then the
possibility of the establishment of a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East would be increased.

17. It’should be clear that only the United Nations, and
in particular the Security Council, which has responsibility
for the organization of the conference, can provide a legal
and political framework acceptable to the vast majority of
the international community so that negotiations could
take place with respect for universally recognized intemational principles and on an equal footing for all parties
concerned.

12. Since 1983 the Committee has also made further
efforts to promote implementation
of the recommendations adopted by the International Conference on the
Question of Palestine, inter alia, the convening of an international peace conference on the Middle East, as endorsed
by the General Assembly, by an overwhelming majority,
in its resolutions 38158 C of I3 December 1983 and 39149
D of 11 December 1984.

18. The first elements of that conference already exist. I
might mention just the recommendations of the Committee, the Fez Arab plan, the Jordanian-Palestinian plan and
other approaches.

13. It will be recalled that in this quest for peace the
General Assembly invited the Council to carry out all the
appropriate provisions and steps for the holding of that
conference. That invitation includes both a legal and a
political aspect. I say legal because the question of the
Middle East has always been within the purview of the
United Nations, and political because the United Nations
must seek political solutions to situations that endanger
international peace and security.

19. An international conference under the auspices of the
United Nations would make it possible to go beyond
narrow strategic interests and the purely internal concerns
of the different States and to arrive at a just and comprehensive peace. The agreements reached at such a conference
would be universally valid and could be guaranteed and
applied equitably by all the parties concerned.
2

20. Therefore, as the Council is aware, in its programme
of work for 1985 the Committee gave absolute priority to
the convening of that conference; it sent delegations to the
capitals of member States of the Council and stressed the
urgent need to convene the conference without delay,
emphasizing the primary role that should be played by the
Council.
21. The Committee was greatly encouraged by the positive reaction of the Governments it visited, by their understanding of the urgent need to take practical measures, and
above all by their determination to contribute actively to
that end. The Committee was also encouraged by the
growing acceptance of the idea of the conference which
emerged at various seminars and symposia held in 1985,
and by the work undertaken with that aim in mind by
many non-governmental organizations in a number of
countries.

mate authority and respect for the common interests of
mankind, and with the appropriate political will, establish
peace in the region and save mankind from the danger of a
much vaster conflagration.
27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
28. Mr. NETANYAHU
(Israel): I have just spoken to
the Klinghoffer family. I called to express my condolences.
I did not tell them what has been said here-and I suppose
in a few other forums: that “we do not even know if Mr.
Klinghoffer was killed “; “we have not seen the body”; and
other such things. I did not tell them that because they
know the tragic fact all too well. And the tragic fact is that
Mr. Klinghoffer, who was 69 years old, confined to a
wheelchair, taking special medication, used the savings
that he and his wife had accumulated to go on a cruise in
the Mediterranean. They were seized, like the rest of the
passengers on the ship, by the terrorists. But they were
singled out from the rest of the passengers on the shipand for one reason: because they were Jewish. And so Mr.
Klinghoffer was killed-brutally
killed, as the captain of
the ship testified-and his frail, 69-year-old body, which
had been battered by many things, now received the final
battering by being tossed overboard.

22. We were also nleased to note the positive responses
given by the majoriiy of the members of the Council and
other parties concerned to the contacts made by the
Secretary-General, though we do regret the reservations of
certain States. On behalf of the Committee we thank the
Secretary-General for his efforts, and we note that he will
continue to follow the question closely and keep Member
States informed of any new developments that arise.
23. In conclusion I should like to stress that the recommendations of the Committee and those of the Geneva
Conference have been given international support. They
were prepared very objectively and are consistent with all
earlier decisions of the United Nations on this question.
But the recommendations go beyond those prior decisions
because they contain a comprehensive formula for a just
and peaceful solution.

29. Mr. Klinghoffer is not going to go away; his body is
not going to go away; and his killers are not going to be
able to make it go away-not from this discussion or from
any other discussion.
30. If this Council were to act responsibly, it would
address itself immediately not only to this latest manifestation of terrorism, but to this fresh and new manifestation
of piracy, piracy and terror on the high seas, which affects
every one of the countries represented here, either directly
or indirectly. So I propose to discuss this subject in the first
part of my remarks.

24. As I said a moment ago, there has as yet, for different
reasons, been no follow-up to those recommendations.
The main reason is that the positions taken by the protagonists often make it difficult for agreement to be reached on
principles. None the less they do constitute a solid basis for
a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Arab crisis.

31. Yasser Arafat says that he does not know anything
about this; he does not know who these killers are. He says
that he simply tried to mediate this unfortunate crisis in the
best fashion.

25. It is clearly necessary to approach the problem with
renewed determination. It is essential to take measures to
start the peace process that will lead to that solution. That
is the objective of the conference called for in General
Assembly resolution 38/58 C. The Committee believes
that that conference will make important progress, and it
requests the co-operation of all the parties concerned in
order to ensure its success in the common interest.

32. I have just received a very detailed report from our
intelligence services. I assume it is now being distributed to
a number of similar services and to Governments that are
represented in this chamber. The facts show without a
shadow of a doubt that the hijacking of the Italian cruise
liner Achille Lam-0 on 7 October was carried out by the
Abu Abbas faction of the PLO’s Palestine Liberation
Front (PLF). It was carried out with the full prior knowledge and approval of the PLO Chairman. Mr. Arafat’s
subsequent protestations that he had nothing to do with
this and his attempt at “benevolent intermediacy** were
simply a cover-up for his own role and for the failure of the
mission.

26. On behalf of the Committee I should like once again
to address an urgent appeal to the members of the Council
not to miss this historic opportunity. In particular, we
invite those who still have doubts or reservations or who
have rejected the idea to reconsider their position and to
work more constructively for the convening and the success of an international peace conference on the Middle
East. The Council can, by means of action based on legiti3

33. Now, who is Abu Abbas in the first place? We are
talking about a faction of the PLO under this man, who is
a member of the Executive Committee of the PLO and is a
loyalist-a
staunch loyalist-of
Arafat. He has been
financed by Arafat. His operations are fully co-ordinated
with the Fatah, and he is based in Tunis.

you cannot plan to have all the Governments concerned
refuse to accept the ship and refuse to negotiate with the
ship. This was another miscalculation on the part of the
terrorists and another unexpected development for them.
At this point it became apparent to the PLO command
and to the terrorists themselves that the entire operation
had misfired. Now, the only thing to do was to extricate
themselves from this mess.
.’

34. This group has several operations to its credit. The
murder of the Haran family in Nahariya in 1978 is one of
them. It may be recalled that in that particular instance the
terrorist in question, Mr. Kuntary-who
is now in an
Israeli gaol-after killing the husband, took the five-yearold daughter and bashed her brains out on a rock. Mr.
.Kuntary was called by the PLO terrorists a “hero”, and his
was the first name that they gave on the list of terrorists to
be released.

39. This is the point at which Arafat appears on the scene
openly, this time in the guise of a mediator ready to do his
utmost to bring the episode to a happy conclusion. His
second-in-command, Abu Iyad, announces on 9 October,
with the confidence born of perfect knowledge, that the
incident would be over “in a matter of hours”. And so it
was. From Port Said, Arafat, acting through one Abu
Khalid-who
we believe was a code narhe for Abu Abbas
whom he had summoned to Egypt-ordered
the hijackers
to bring the ship .back to Egypt and to give themselves up
to the Egyptian authorities. They promptly complied.

35. The Achile Laura operation was not planned originally as a hijacking. The four PLF men were to have
travelled on the Achille Laura to the Israeli port of Ashdod. They were supposed to have disembarked there and
to have staged there a hostage-taking and then to demand
the release of the Fatah terrorists being held in Israeli
jails-and,
as I said, the first name they had on the list was
that of Mr. Kuntary. They had other objectives as well.
Among the names that they gave were Force 17 members.

-40. He continues, of course, to claim that he had known
nothing of the planned operation, that he had no “control” of the group that carried it out. That .is a blatant lie.
Al Fatah and Arafat have been planning for some time
now to strike at Israel’s ports of Haifa; Ashdod and Elat
using vessels hired for this purpose, but the Israeli Coast
Guard has foiled them. The Abu Abbas operation
involved a spin-off of this series of earlier attempts, but the
plan.to carry out a spectacular hostage-taking operation at
Ashdod had to be abandoned when the group’s presence
was discovered, as I said, on the voyage.

36. Over the past six months or so, I have submitted
letters to the Council describing various attempts by the
PLO to launch sea-borne attacks to try to stage hostagetaking, either on the seas or in Israel itself or through
Lebanon. The aim was to seize hostages in order to obtain
the release of these people. This latest manifestation was
intended as another-admittedly
more brazen-attempt
in
that same line. But something went wrong, It did not quite
work out as planned. And it went wrong when the ship
was still in Egyptian waters. The terrorists had embarked
on the ship ‘disguised as innocent passengers. They had
taken accommodations; they had smuggled in their weapons. They were going to wait until the ship had reached
Ashdod. But they were discovered.

41. Those are the facts of the situation. The attempts of
the PLO here and elsewhere to deflect world attention
from its own unspeakable crimes are reinforced by the
introduction of an age-old technique they have been using:
with one arm they kill and kidnap, while with the other
arm they deny. This is very useful, because if you have the
blood of Mr. Klinghoffer and other victims on your hands,
you deny it. You can say, “My hands are not stained with
this blood.” And .if you have a situation where your
demands are not met, as was the case here, then you can
always intercede as the mediator and help to resolve the
crisis. This is like the Godfather calling off his henchmen
to stop a crime that he himself engineered. That is precisely
what we have here.

37. At that point, they had a decision to make, because
they realized that, first, contrary to their plans they were not
going to make it to Ashdod and, secondly, there were no
Israelis aboard. That was fortuitous. My parents were on
this very boat approximately a year ago, and there were
then many, many Israelis on that boat, several hundred in
fact. This ready prey;these pensioners-my parents are a
couple in their seventies, and from their evidence most of
the people who were with them were in either their fifties,
sixties or seventies, like Mr. Klinghoffer-were
not available, so a change of plans ensued.

42. I do not think any of the representatives here are
patsies; I do not think the world is a patsy; I do not think
anybody is going to believe it. But it is not a question of
what I think, it is a question of what I know: I know that
this information is now being shared by ,many Governments, and I would say that it will come out in the media
and in formal exchanges and be common knowledge
within 24 hours, possibly less.

38. The hijackers ‘hijacked the ship at that -point and
-placed their demands then and there. They demanded the
release of the 50 Palestinian Arab terrorists held in Israel,
and they then proceeded to shoot Mr. Klinghoffer. What
followed was therefore another mishap, because you can
have sudden changes of plan in a terrorist operation, but

43. I said that this is an age-old technique, and I would
remind the Council that we have had many, many killings
by the PLO in which they have denied culpability. For
example, for years we had the shadowy, mysterious organization known as Black September. Black September
4

perpetrated the Munich massacre and committed many
other atrocities familiar to us all. It blew up, for example,
the airplanes at Zarka and elsewhere, and Arafat constantly said “This is not us. This is a shadowy group. We
know nothing about it.” But the PLO’s own statements in
ensuing years openly admitted that Black September-as
everyone knows by now-was a wholly owned subsidiary
of the PLO directly responsible and reporting directly to
Yasir Arafat. I do not, therefore, think there is anything
new under the sun, and I think that people chuckle when
they hear Yasir Arafat say, as he did the other night, that
the PLO is against any terrorism. That is like Jack the
Ripper saying he is against murder. We all know better.

nomic and, if necessary, military measures that have to be
taken jointly against these outlaw States.
46. I was very glad to hear and read the forceful statement that came out of the Council yesterday [2628rh meeting]. But I would suggest and urge that the Council
proceed to the next step and engage right now in a concrete discussion of the steps that are necessary.
47. You notice, Mr. President, that I have not been sitting at the Council table. I was sitting in the back. That
was not by accident. I deliberately chose not to sit at the
table to express the feeling that this meeting is irrelevant
and unwarranted-I
do not mean only because of what I
have just been talking about, that is, the failure to address
the immediate problem of terrorism and piracy. I am talking about what it is convened for, what its stated purpose
is. It is meant to be another kangaroo court in which Israel
is to be brought in, to be hung, drawn and quartered and
then, in the form of the international conference which is
presumably supposed to be the issue of this meeting, to be
given an unfair trial to boot.

44. It has also been asked: why would they do such a
thing? Why would they perpetrate these crimes, why
would they kill Mr:Klinghoffer?
For the same reason that
Kuntary bashed the head of Enat Haran, for the same
reason that PLO terrorists murdered a baby in its crib in
Kibbutz Misgavam, for the same reason that they kill their
own people. Why did they kill Issam Sartawit? Why did
they kill the Imam Huzandar-a
religious leader-and
hundreds of other Arabs? Why did they kill with such glee
the Prime Minister of Jordan, Wasfi Tall, and bent to the
ground and drank his blood? You all remember that scene,
I am sure. Why did they all dance in the street when Sadat
was killed? Why did they kill the three tourists in Larnaca?
Why did they take that poor, middle-aged woman, shoot
her in the back of the head and leave her body to twist in
the wind for 10 hours on the rail of that boat? Why did
they do it? Because it is a way of life for them. This is what
they are all about: they are terrorists, they are murderers,
they are killers, and for them there is no compunction,
there is no shock, there is no horror, there is no restraint,
there are no inhibitions. For them to question why does
not even arise: it is natural. I suspect they also enjoy it.

4g. We are not going to play this game. We are not going
to agree to a conference and.we are not going to enter into
this discussion-unless there is a real desire on the part of
some representatives here to discuss the situation in the
Middle East. By all means, let us discuss the situation in
the Middle East.
49. I have here eight pages, which I have abbreviated,
that deal with the immediate, burning aspects of the situation in the Middle East: the killings in Lebanon, Tripoli
and elsewhere; what is happening in the Iran-Iraq war,
which is escalating; and the recent clashes between Libya
and Tunisia. That is just a small sample of what has been
happening in the past two weeks.

45. This is the incident we should be dealing with right
now, this and the hundreds of other lesser-known incidents of terrorism. This is what the Security Council
should do right now: it should discuss how to stop these
-killers, how to arrest the disease of terrorism, how to hit
the terror factories that spread this .virus around the
world, how to deal with the States that give them
support-because
I think we are talking. here about
three basic categories of States, and everyone here falls
into one of those categories. There are States that
oppose terrorism, and we know who they are. There are
States that promote terrorism, and we know who they
are. And there are States that assume a neutral position.
In the question of terrorism there is no neutrality. There
is no position of magisterial objectivity between good
and evil. You have to choose: you are either with the
terrorists or you are against them, and if you are against
them, if you are committed to fight terrorism, then.you
side with the countries that fight terrorism, and that
means that you do not give terrorists safe passage, that
you extradite them or you prosecute them, that you do
not give them a helping hand and that you make every
effort to hinder them, not facilitate their activities. As
for the countries that support terrorism, it is up to the
community of nations to organize the political and eco-

50. I have noticed your admirable penchant for brevity
and for punctuality, Mr. President, and I know that you
would wish to end this meeting at the appointed time. I
shall therefore save this material for the eventuality that
perhaps this meeting will indeed discuss the situation in the
Middle East,
51. I should like, however, to give a sample of what I
am talking about-this
is just a one page sample. And I
should like simply to indicate a few of the sparks of the
larger flame that is engulfing the Middle East from the
Persian Gulf to the Sahara. On 15 January of this year,
a huge blast was reported in central Damascus. On
March 21, the Jordanian Airline offices at Athens,
Rome and Nicosia were attacked; on 3 April, bazooka
attacks against the Jordanian Embassy at Rome; on 4
April, bazooka attacks against Jordanian Airline at
Athens. On 12 April, a restaurant at Madrid was bombed.
Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack. In midMay, an explosion occurred at Riyad. Iraq is accused by
various sources because of its displeasure at Prince Saud’s
visit to Iran. On 29 May, a car belonging to a Syrian
diplomat stationed in Morocco blows up in front of the
5

Syrian Ambassador’s residence. On 9 June, Syria recalls its
Ambassador to Kuwait in light of Kuwait’s deportation of
Syrians in Kuwait. In mid-June, a car booby-trapped by
Syria is dismantled on the Iraqi border. On 26 June, Iraq
breaks diplomatic relations with Libya. On 4 July, the
Jordanian Airline offrces at Madrid are bombed. Guess
who claims responsibility? Black September, back on the
scene. On 10 July, Morocco foils an Algerian-sponsored
sabotage operation by arresting a group of terrorists on its
border. On 11 July, explosives rock two cafes in Kuwait.
That same day, buses explode at Tehran. On 17 July,
Syrian military aircraft violated Iraqi air space. On 21
July, a huge blast is reported at central Tehran. On 30
July, an explosion occurs at central Damascus.

56. Never has Israel attempted to conceal its expansionist
designs, although it has pretended to advocate peace. But
its “peace” amounts to a short period of truce during
which it can digest the fruits of its unceasing aggression. It
always retains what it calls its option to commit further
acts of aggression in the name of religion, race or history.
But it believes in no religion; it possessesno human values;
it has no history apart from a falsified history as prewritten by the theoreticians of Zionism in an attempt to
establish a forged birth certificate for a nation. Zionism is
a colonialist movement that arose with the European colonialist expansionist movement: It is but the other side of
the coin. Its doctrine, ideology and methods were contemporary with those adopted during the nineteenth century
by Europe in the third world.

52. We have more, more, more, more. I could spend the
rest of the afternoon reading but I am not going to do that,
because the point is that the Council has every right, every
duty and every obligation under its mandate to discuss
these outbreaks of violence and to address these issues, but
it has no right to confine the discussion to just one of the
disputes in the Middle East-one that itself derives from
the broader tendencies of several extremist Arab regimes
and groups to plunge the region into violence, bloodshed
and terror. Until the Council acts responsibly and devotes
attention to the real situation in the Middle East, I will,
with your permission, Mr. President, resume my seat away
from the Council table and watch this spectacle of the
absurd from the sidelines.

57. Since its establishment, Israel, despite its false pretdntions to peace, has always rejected true peace efforts. As
far as Israel is concerned, peace is the status quo it has
established by force of arms after each of the wars it has
unleashed. Then it calls for peace again, on the basis of the
gains of the last war.
58. Israel’s acquiring territory by force, driving the indigenous population out of that territory and replacing it
with foreign settlers represent the main tenets of Zionist
ideology. Were it not for this sanguinary and racist ideology as well as the brutal Israeli practices in application of
this ideology, there would be no crisis or threat to intemational peace in the Middle East.

53. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

59. Like all racist and colonialist entities, Israel has tried
to crush the Arabs and to deprive them .of their human
rights. It has threatened their very national survival and
civilization. Force is the method of Israel. The “pure”
racist community is the highest value in the crumbling
scale of distorted Zionist values, in utter contradiction
with human values and universal morality. In order to try
to justify taking over the lands of Palestine and the surrounding territories, zionism has invented the myth of
what it calls “God’s chosen people” and “the Promised
Land”. The annexation of Jerusalem was intended quite
simply to eradicate one of the most important features of
Islamic and Christian civilization: the “pure” Jewish State
must be purely Jewish in matters pertaining to life and
religion. The annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights too
was a prelude to subsequent expansionist measures.

54. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (inzerpre&Zion from Arabic): I shall confine myself to the agenda
that we have before us. The Council is now considering the
Middle East problem including the Palestinian question,
which is the essence thereof. The situation is developing in
an unprecedented manner in our region. This is due to
Israel’s persistence in escalating its policy of aggression
and terrorism against the Arab people.
55. The gravity of the situation is nothing new. It is the
inevitable result of the development and evolution of the
expansionist and aggressive nature of Zionism. Since the
founding of Israel, this aggression has constantly increased
and developed, along with Israel’s expansion, and Israel
has also become more greedy for Arab land and more
thirsty for Arab blood. Ever since zionism found a foothold for settlers in Arab Palestine in 1917 and since the
racist settler colonialist State was set up in 1948, it has,
through force, violence and terrorism, dispersed inhabitants, annexed lands and seized Arab property. Israel’s
dossier is fraught with such practices. It has unleashed
wars of aggression against Arabs, such as the 1948 war
against the Palestinian people. Then there was the 1956
war against Egypt and thereafter the 1967 aggression
against Syria, Jordan and Egypt and the war of 1982
against Lebanon. This ‘wasall part of the plan to establish
Greater Israel. In all these wars of aggression, Israel was.
supported by imperialist world forces, led by the United
States of America.

60. As Israel calls for peace, it increases its expansion to
the detriment of our land and our people. After it has
occupied the whole of Palestine and the Syrian Golan
Heights, Israel is now occupying parts of southern Lebahon, its so-called security belt which has actually
become-we bless this fact-a belt of death for the invaders and their agents. The sole purpose of this belt is to
impose a new fait accompli in order to control the
watersheds in the southern part of this Arab country,
whose economic, social and cultural infrastructure Israel
completely destroyed in its despicable, barbarous war
there, a war which was condemned by the whole world.
61. Thus the Middle East crisis is a struggle between a
racist sectarian. settler group and an Arab, Islamic and
6

Christian. civilization with a universal orientation that
flows into the mainstream of world civilization. History
testifies to the contribution of the Arabs in the building of
this civilization for the benefit of all mankind. It is therefore a struggle of destinies, threatening all aspects of Arab
existence in the areas now occupied by Israel or those
.which it plans to occupy. Indeed, it is a struggle of destinies because the Zionist ideology does not recognize an
Arab presence at all. Israeli leaders, irrespective of their
political affiliation, their parties and their temperaments,
persist in saying that Israel has not occupied the West
Bank, including Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip or the Golan
Heights. They maintain that Israel has “liberated” them.
By the end of 1984, Israel had established 41 settlements in
the Syrian Golan Heights in the name of liberation, 160
settlements in the West Bank, also in the name of liberation, and 19 in the Gaza Strip under the same pretence.
This “liberation”
and the displacement of millions of
inhabitants from and to the occupied Arab territories are
war crimes against the Arabs and the whole of mankind
under modem international law and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,’ in which a body of law was
developed and codified after the Second World War to
prevent any repetition of Nazi war crimes like those now
being committed before us by Israel.

violence and terrorism and by enslaving the inhabitants.
There is also no difference between Israel and South
Africa, since both present a threat and try to impose
hegemony on the surrounding States; both serve world
imperialism and are served by it in turn. Pretoria is occupying Namibia and maintains a military presence in parts of
Angola, while Israel has expanded from the coast to the
hills until it has occupied the whole of Palestine and then
expanded further into Syria and Lebanon. Both regimes
justify their presence under the pretext of a civilizing mission, and both think that they are acting in God’s will by
accomplishing such a, missi0.n.

62. The Israelis claim that the Arabs who are defending
their land, their homes, their property and their existence
are terrorists. And they impose on these inhabitants emergency laws with a view to supressing the heroic resistance
which they are waging under occupation to defend their
rights. The Israelis forget naturally-and
the Western
world follows suit-that the right to resist the aggressor is
an established human right approved by all laws and that
he who does not resist occupation is doomed to destruction. European resistance against the Nazis was not terrorism. Inasmuch as we are equal human beings, resistance to
Israeli occupation cannot be considered terrorism, unless
we choose to become accomplices in the crime of occupation, aggression and settlement.

64. The nature of this struggle makes it imperative for
the Arabs to build up their forces, their true solidarity and
their unity in order to repel this expansionist invasion
which aims at creating the State of “Greater Israel”,
extending from the Nile to the Euphrates. And Israel could
not have achieved its expansion had not the foreign mandatory regimes prepared the ground by breaking up the
Arab home into small States. Palestine fell victim to zionism, which was able, through its worldwide influence, to
open the door to immigration.
The Zionist gangs were
armed before the setting up of Israel. Then Israel was
armed with all the necessary weapons and provided with
full support in such a way as to enable it to consolidate the
first stage of its occupation in 1948, when the United States
of America, which inherited the position of the British
Empire in the Middle East, gave Israel unrestricted military, human and financial support so that Israel could
consolidate its expansionist occupation by creating the fair
accompk which they believe erroneously-1
repeat
erroneously-to
be irreversible. The Arabs still confront
today a plan which aims at the following: first, their fragmentation and the prevention of their union and even their
true solidarity in order to prevent them from defending
themselves against the Zionist expansionist enemy and
resisting its military and political plans; secondly, enhancing Israel’s capabilities in all fields so that it may keep its
territorial gains and extend its hegemony over the whole
region.

63. We see no difference between South Africa and Israel.
Both profess the same ideology, which is to eliminate the
indigenous inhabitants and deprive’ those who have survived of their rights. White settlers have seized fertile African lands, plundered their natural resources and divided
the area into bantustans, those regional pockets into which
they have herded the indigenous inhabitants in order to
deprive them of citizenship. They have pushed hundreds of
thousands of people into vast concentration camps on the
outskirts of the cities and have denied them equality as if
they were solely bound to their land through the services
they render to the white minority. There is no difference at
all between South Africa and Israel. In South Africa, white
settlers have taken over African land with the assistance of
colonialism and imperialism and have enslaved or driven
out the inhabitants or shut them up in ghettoes. In Palestine, settlers were brought in from abroad to expel and
disperse the Arabs and to assert supremacy over those
remaining by means of occupation. There is no difference
between South Africa and Israel. Both subsist by force,

65. But, in spite of current Arab fragmentation and the
increase of the capabilities of Israeli aggression, the Arab
people has not ceased to resist, whether in Palestine, the
Golan Heights or Lebanon. The Palestinian people, sup-.
ported by the Arab masses, had confronted the Israeli
mass slaughter in 1948, and in 1967 Israel occupied all
parts of Palestine together with Sinai and the Golan
Heights, and it imagined that in this way it had been able,
once and for all, to subdue the Arabs forever and that it
had become master of the region. But very quickly it faced
the Palestinian resistance in the occupied Palestinian Arab
territories and the resistance of the inhabitants of the occupied Syrian Arab Golan Heights. The 1973 war proved
that Israel can be defeated through unified Arab action
and that the Israeli army is not as invincible as some
thought it to be. Israeli’s defeat was very near, had not
imperialism intervened in its favour, on the one hand, and
had not the regime of the biggest Arab country weakened,
on the other hand. Lebanese national resistance, which
started with the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in June 1982,
proved, with all the foreign intervention that accompanied
7

.

I

that war, that it is possible to recover territory and dignity
when a people stands united in the struggle against the
aggressors. And todaythere is nobody who does not recognize that Israel and its allies have lost the war in Lebanon,
since they were prevented from harvesting the fruits of the
aggression of this war, one of which was to be the imposition of submission and hegemony of Lebanon.

on 11 February ISSS, and the attempt to win suport for it,
to be tantamount to an elimination of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, foremost among which is
its right to establish its own independent Palestinian State
on its national territory. We repeat what was stated by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic
on 1 October 1985 at the general debate of the General
Assembly, namely that “the renunciation of an independent Palestinian State would make the concept of selfdetermination pointless and devoid of meaning”.*

66. The whole world recognizes today the right of the
Palestinian people to return to its homeland, to exercise its
right. to self-determination-and to establish its independent
State on .its national territory. It also calls for the complete
withdrawal of Israel, after the deep transformations
wrought by the glorious October war in the balance of
forces. Among these transformations were the conviction
of the majority of the world that it was no longer possible
to stand silent before the adventures of Israel and that
there was a real and dangerous struggle between the Arabs
and Israel; that the Middle East crisis directly threatened
peace and security in that region; and that this peace and
security were an integral part of the peace and security of
the world as a whole,

68. The right to self-determination and the right to estab-.
lish an independent Palestinian State on national territory
constitute the cornerstone of United Nations resolutions
relating to the situation in the Middle East and the question of Palestine and the basis of the efforts of the nonaligned countries in their sincere endeavours to bring
about a just peace. This was reaffirmed at the Conference
of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Luanda last September, and at preceding conferences, particularly the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
‘Delhi in March 1983, in several paragraphs of their concluding statements.

67. But, unfortunately, world .impeiialism quickly succeeded in undermining the Arab solidarity which had
crystalized in the form of positive transformations and
new facts following 1973. World imperialism succeeded in
finding agents to subdue the will of the Arab masses and
deprive them of their freedom, which had made them able
to withstand the expansionist enemy. Those agents sided
with the capitulationist
plan, and the Camp David
accords were concluded, to the detriment of the dignity of
the Egyptian people, the rights of the struggling Pales,tinian people and the Arab States that believed in the unity
of their nationalism and their destiny and in their capability to withstand the enemy and recover their rights. But
Arab Syria rejected the capitulationist
deal, which it
regarded as a move from the Arab side to the Israeli side.
Since that time, Arab ‘Syria, through its resistance, has
been shouldering heavy national burdens and it says sincerely that it seeks just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
We are not war-loving, awe are not lovers of war, and,
consequently, we sided with our brethren, the Arab States,
in arriving at an Arab peace plan based on unanimity at
Fez in 1982 (see S/Is510, annex]. This plan is based on the
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab territories and
‘the ‘restoration to the Arab Palestinian people of its inalienable national rights, including, first and foremost, its right
to return to its homeland, its right to self-determination
and its right to the establishment of its independent and
sovereign State on its national territory. We have also sup
ported the call to convene an international conference
under the aegis of the United Nations, in which all the
parties to the conflict would participate, together with the
two super-Powers, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the United States. We reiterate that the international
conference is our objective. At the same time, we are firmly
opposed to all the current attempts to avoid or to circumvent the international conference provided ‘for in General
Assembly resolution 38158 C of 13 December 1983. Syria
firmly rejects, as it has done in the past, partial and individuai solutions and considers the Amman Agreement, signed

69. A just and lasting peace is not an abstract concept.
We cannot allow the enemy and its allies to dictate their
conditions to us. The conditions and circumstances
required for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace- are,
primarily, true Arab solidarity and the unity of Arab
ranks, which international imperialism is trying to undermine once again by means of proposals that are contrary
to the spirit of the Arab Peace Plan, as enshrined in the
principles of the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at
Fez in 1982, and to United Nations resolutions relating to
Palestine and the Middle East.
70. The United States and Israel are not content simply
to reject the Fez principles. They have also ,rejected the
invitation to participate in the International Peace Conference on the Middle East, the convening of which was
called for by the General Assembly in its resolution 38/58
C. The principal elements of that resolution, which was
adopted by 124 votes in favour, and 4 votes against which
included the votes of the United States and Israel, were
contained in paragraphs 3 and 4.
7.1. Paragraph 4 invited all parties to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, together with the United States and the Soviet
Union and other States concerned, to participate in the
Conference on the equal footing and with equal rights. The
rejection by the United States and Israel of any construcGve initiative simply reflects their resolve to pursue a
course that serves only their own aggressive interests, to
the detriment of the rights of the Arab people of Palestine,
the Arab territories and the Arab nation as a whole, and to
dismiss the constructive role that the Soviet Union and
certain other countries, particularly the non-aligned countries, could play in bringing about peace. It also demonstrates their resolve to ignore all United Nations resolutions relating to the question of Palestine, to exclude the
Secretary-General from any peace effort and to deny the
8

,

1

United Nations any role in such an effort. More importantly, it demonstrates their resolve to stamp out the Palestinian Arab national character. Mr. Shultz, the United
States Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, described
United States policy in the course of his speech at Arlington, Virginia on 21 April 1985, when he talked about the
cohesion between American and Israeli interests, thus
showing that there is no independent American policy in
the Middle East; there is simply an Israeli policy that is
carefully and faithfully pursued by the United States. Mr.
Shultz said:

76. As for servin8 Israel’s interests by permitting it to
expand on ‘the pretext of achieving security through an
imposed American-Israeli peace, Mr. Shultz-forgetting
.that it is the security of the Arab States that is threatened
by the United States arming Israel and providing it with
massive assistance-said the follqwing in’ the same statement: “The bulk of Israel’s population lived within
artillery range of hostile Arab armies: I am not about to
ask Israel to live that way again.‘** Is that not expansionism? Does that not mean that, we ‘should say to Israel
before any peace comes about: “Go on, expand;and when
you feel you want peace, it will be an expansionist peace m
favour of .Israel”? If there isany other explanation of that
:.
statement, please give it to us.

“The history of the Arab-Israeli conflict shows, without question, that movement in the peace process can
only come when there is no doubt of our commitment
to Israel. It can only come when no one in the Arab
world or elsewhere has any delusions about the central
reality that America’s support for Israel can never be
weakened.*

77. The peace Washington calls ‘for is just .another
Camp David like the one condemned by, the General
Assembly, the ‘Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries,
the Organization
of -the Islamic Conference and the
Arab summit conferences. Such a peace means rewarding the aggressor while’the strategic balance, which is a
prerequisite for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the region, is disturbed. We cannot but wonder about
Washington’s intentions, as expressed by its Secretary of
State in speaking of peace in the Middle East, when he
said:

72. In the light of this official statement, how can we say
that the United States can plan an independent role in
solving the Middle East crisis? Nothing has been published
since April to modify or contradict these statements.
i
73. With regard to separate agreements, the Arabs acting
in isolation from each other and the role of the United
Nations and its resolutions being disregarded,’ Mr. Shultz
said the following: “The only path to progress, justice, and
peace in the Middle East is that of direct negotiations.“* In
another part of his statement, Mr. Shultz said, in a highly
threatening tone dismissive of the interests of the people of
Palestine, that if the Arabs did not submit to Israeli
demands: “There is no alternative to direct negotiation;
the longer this truth is evaded, the longer the ,Palestinian
people are the victim.“*

“Strategic co-operation between the United States
and Israel has become a formal, institutionalized
pro:
cess. We have established the Joint Political-Military
Group to improve co-operation so that we can resist
threats to our common interests in the Middle East.
This kind of co-operation has been long overdue.
Today, it is an important
part’of
our strategic
relationship.“*
78. Does not peace together with surrender, separate
arrangements, abrogation of the role of the United
Nations and the bypassing of its resolutions mean a
willingness to create- an American strategic alliance with
the defeatist Arabs against the militant people of Palestine
and against Syria, Lebanon and the steadfast Arab
,
?
people?
,
79.’ The superior and paternalistic outlook of the
United Stites Administration,
which behaves towards
the Middle East as though the Arab world was created
.to be a rear staging area for American;Israeli
interests, is
in keeping with that of the Zionist lobby that controls
the politicians in Washington and holds sway over senators and representatives in Congress. Washington, in
turn, also controls the lobby through the interaction and
give-and-take between the interests of the two sides at a
given moment on specific internal or’external issues. The
Zionist lobby, operating under the aegis of the
American-Israel
Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC);
has clearly demonstrated a consistency and harmony of
interests, as represented by United,,States demands for
the benefit of Israel and vice versa:The scale of priorities consists of mutual duties and obligations, as set
forth in an AIPAC communique issued at Washington
on 21 April 1985, as follows:

74. There is a threat here: to close every path to peace
except that of direct negotiations and to bypass the role of
the United Nations, and, if the Arabs do not accept that,
then: “the longer the Palestinian people are the victim.“*
That is to say, a perpetuation of Israeli occupation as long
as the Arabs do not submit to Israel’s will. That is detrimental to the Arabs and deprives the United States role of
i
any credibility.
75. As for the United States rejection of international
law, which recognizes the Palestinian people’s right to
self-determination
and the establishment of an indepen‘dent Palestinian State, Mr, Shultz said in his statement:
“We will not support the establishment of an independent Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza*‘.*
Permit me to say, on this point, that it is as if the Palestinian people’s right to selfdetermination
was something that had been entrusted to Mr. Shultz, and as if
that right had been delegated by the Palestinians to the’
Secretary of State of the United States so that he might
decide on it on their behalf.

*Quoted

in English

by the speaker.
9

“The bonds that link the United States and Israel are
secured by a shared commitment to moral and democratic values. These values have been the bedrock of a
special relationship that has spanned almost four
decades.

Nations, since Israel has demonstrated continued violation
of the Charter’s provisions and a failure to be bound by
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
82. I conclude by saying that Arab rights are not a commodity for sale or barter and that we are determined to
resist occupation and aggression regardless of how long it
takes, how much it costs or what sacrifices we may have to
make. In our assiduous striving for a just peace, we shall
not abdicate our rights or the rights of our Arab brothers.
We should like to stress that those who are obstructing the
endeavour for a just peace are those that form alliances
with Israel and supply it with weapons, money and support in all fields. Syria is desirous of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. President Hafez Al-Assad afftrmed
that desire in a press statement on 30 September, when he
said:

“The American-Israel
Public Affairs Committee
(AIPAC) is committed to promoting strong and consistently close relations between our country and Israel.
To enhance this relationship, AIPAC’s I985 issue priorities include: maintaining U.S. economic and military
assistance to Israel on a grant basis; opposing U.S. sales
of sophisticated weapons to Arab countries which consider themselves in a state of war with Israel; promoting
direct negotiations between Israel and Arab countries,
and urging normalization of diplomatic, trade, cultural,
political and other relations between Israel and Arab
countries; enhancing the framework for meaningful
strategic co-operation moving towards a full politicalmilitary alliance between the United States and Israel;
implementing a U.S.-Israel free trade area, and transferring the American embassy to Jerusalem, Israel’s
capital.“*

“We in Syria have for years raised the flag of peace.
We have done everything we could do for peace, our
objective being to recover the territories occupied by
Israel and to ensure the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its legitimate national rights, including its
right to self-determination and to the establishment of
its own independent State.”

80. All those that beg for separate solutions are begging
from a State allied with their enemy. The link between
their enemy and that great Power that they delude themselves might be capable of responding to their aspirations
is an organic and institutional link in .a11areas of importance and primarily in that of strategic alliance. They are
therefore really begging from their enemy, Israel, and not
from a State capable of exercising freedom of choice,
endowed with justice and the rule of law and enjoying the
necessary objectivity.

83. Our President described the various attempts that are
being made as “attempts to divide the Arabs, to weaken
them and to make them surrender to Israeli designs”. I
quote again from what he said:
“Israel does not want the international conference for
two reasons: firstly, because it does not want to face the
Arabs all together; and secondly, because it does not
want to submit to any restrictions or guarantees that
might emerge from such a conference, since the guarantees would limit the freedom to expand which it considers essential. Indeed, expansionism is the idealogical
basis which serves as Israel’s point of departure.”

81. We call on the Security Council at its current meeting
to adopt the following measures. First, it should reafftrm
and grant full and effective recognition to the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, above all its right to
return, to self-determination and to establish its own independent State in its national homeland. Such recognition
has been long delayed without any legal, humanitarian or
political justification, since the General Assembly has
affirmed those rights in numerous resolutions and they
have been endorsed by all the peace-loving peoples of the
world. Secondly, the Council should oblige Israel to withdraw forthwith and unconditionally
from all Arab and
Palestinian occupied territories, in accordance with United
Nations resolutions. Thirdly, it should endorse the call for
the convening of an international peace conference on the
Middle East made by the General Assembly in its resolution 38/58 C. The Council should urge all parties directly
involved in the conflict to take part in that conference
under the auspices of the United Nations and with the
participation of the United States and the Soviet Union,
since such a conference is the internationally accepted way
of arriving at a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
of the conflict. Fourthly, should Israel not compiy with
these just and internationally endorsed demands, we call
upon the Council to apply mandatory and comprehensive
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United

84. Mr. WOOLCOTT
(Australia): Australia. like all
Member States, wishes to see a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. For too long this elusive goal has been
thwarted either by accident or by design. At times, it has
seemed, the difficulties involved have had as much to do
with procedure as with substance. Often when goodwill
has been evident in some quarters, malevolence has surfaced in others.
85. Australia does not, of course, profess to tell the parties to the conflict how to settle their differences, other
than to abide by their responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations. We do not have rigid views on the
many proposals which have been advanced for negotiations between the parties. Nor do we exclude a suitably
prepared international peace conference as part of the process. What we do believe, quite firmly, is that peace cannot
come to the Middle Fast without a negotiated agreement.
Any such agreement, however arrived at, will need to take
proper account of the rights and legitimate aspirations and
concerns of all peoples of the region.
86. Ultimately, in our view, a comprehensive settlement
will prove possible only on the basis of a series of related

*Quoted in English by the speaker.

10

has a particular responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and that responsibility extends
to promoting peace. The Council could work in a number
of ways towards the achievement of a negotiated settlement in the Middle East, but it can contribute effectively
only by adopting a co-operative approach. We have to
wonder whether the timing of the current debate will in
fact promote the peace we all seek.

compromises. These include Israel’s withdrawal from
occupied Arab territories, the recognition by the States of
the region and the PLO of Israel’s right to exist and their
acceptance of all elements of Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and the acknowledgement of the
right of self-determination
for the Palestinian people,
including their right, if they so choose, to independence
and the possibility of their own independent State. A durable settlement in the Middle East is possible only with the
involvement of all interested parties. At the core of the
Middle East problem is the future of the Palestinians. In
our view, it is necessary to remove the barriers to direct
discussions with representatives of the Palestinian people
erected by the parties involved.

93. Secondly, the Council seems to have become increasingly an arena of confrontation rather than a forum for
conciliation. A series of statements criticizing one side or
the other, blaming one side or the other, often in particularly harsh language, does not in our view advance the
cause of peace in the Middle East. My delegation hopes
that all statements made in the Council will be constructive
and helpful rather than polemical.

87.’ Such changes and compromises will require flexibility; they will require political will; and, we acknowledge,
they will not be without their dangers. But a new beginning
must be made. The vicious circle of violence and inflexibility must be broken. The alternative of rigidity and continuing animosity will not serve the long-term interests of the
countries of the Middle East region, nor indeed of anyone
else.

94. The Council can play a useful role in this and,
indeed, any other dispute only if the world community,
acting through the Council, puts aside questions of violence and vengeance and turns instead to calm and conciliation. We hope that the parties most directly involved will
also choose that path.

88. In recent months we have had reason to believe that
developments might have been heading in a positive, even
hopeful, direction, at least partly as a result of the initiative
of King Hussein of Jordan. This initiative had seemed to
offer the promise of progress. My delegation very much
hopes that the recently darkening shadows of terrorism
and violence will not be cast permanently over this initiative and the cause of peace.

95.

Mr. ALZAMORA
(Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): A number of highly significant meetings are being

held during this month of October. They are part of the
great celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. On this occasion, the Security
Council finds itself compelled to meet once again to consider a problem whose persistence is proof that the principles of the Charter of the United Nations remain, 40 years
later, more an ideal to be attained than a fact of international life. The rule of law, the very idea of co-operation in
mutual respect, seem to loom like ambitious Utopias while
attitudes heavy with the threat or use of force gain ground
over negotiation and agreement. The spirit of conciliation
and compromise are undermined by a stubborn spirit of
confrontation characterized by a desire to cater to specific
interests to the detriment of ethical and legal considerations that are of collective interest and benefit and that
form the very basis of the United Nations.

89. Recent incidents have shown clearly the futility of
killing based on vengeance, on retaliation or on the desire
to terrorize. Violence by one side has not prevented violence by others but, on the contrary, seems to have engendered it. The hijacking of the AchiIIe Luuro in recent days
and the Israeli raid on headquarters of the PLO in Tunisia
are not isolated incidents of violence. It is obvious, however, that none of these many acts has brought peace to the
region or advanced the cause for which the perpetrators
claimed to be fighting. Terrorism and violence of the type
so prevalent in the Middle East at present can only remain
matters of profound concern to the international community and a threat to the peace.

96. The crisis in the Middle East has not substantially
changed. Many of the elements that characterize it are
prohibited under international law: occupation, de facto
annexation, a disproportionate and constant recourse to
the threat and use of force which, in turn, exacerbates the
tragic cycle of terrorism and violence in all its forms-all
these things persist.

90. At this point, I should like to express my delegation’s
condolences to the relatives of Mr. Klinghoffer, who is yet
another unfortunate and innocent victim of the cycle of
violence that is afflicting the Middle East.
91. I must say frankly that the Australian delegation has
been concerned about the course of this and other recent
debates in the Council. We are concerned for two reasons.

97. Too much time has already gone by with the intemational community unable to implement a just, negotiated,
comprehensive and lasting solution to this conflict, in spite
of the fact that the fundamental principles already exist, asdoes the framework of norms for such a solution, with
which my country is in complete agreement.

92. First, the standing and potential effectiveness of this
Council are being eroded by its misuse as a smaller General Assembly. That is a view that I know is shared by a
number of other members of the Council. The Council
does not exist simply to provide a forum for countries,
however strongly they may feel on a particular subject. It

98. To fulfil that responsibility I should like briefly to
outline Peru’s position on the question now before us.
11

99. The fust element on which my. country’s position is
based is the categorical affirmation that everything relating
to Palestine is an essential part of the problem of the Middle East, and that .it is thus impossible to envisage any
solution that does not correctly take into account the inalienable rights of .the Palestinian people.

secure and recognized borders, there will be peace, security
for all and, harmonious coexistence for all States and peoples throughout the Middle East.
107. My delegation once again commits its total dedication and resolve to the attainment of that peace, the precondition for which is justice and which, after 40 years,
requires that we now correct the mistakes, the selfishness,
and the arbitrariness that led us to this tragedy, in order to
begin, without preconditions or attempts to exclude anyone, the process of a final solution with guarantees and
rights for all.

100. Secondly, we believe that the recognition and exercise of those rights inevitably includes respect for the right
to self-determination of the Palestinian people and for
their establishment as an independent State, without which I
there can be no final solution to the crisis in the region.
101. A third fundamental criterion and norm is that any
solution reached,must ensure the right of all States to exist
within secure and internationally recognized borders. In
that context my country considers it impossible to establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle East without
Israel’s withdrawal from .a11 the territories occupied since
1967.

108. Mr. KASEMSRI
(Thailand): Sir, it was gratifying
that yesterday [261&/z meeting] the Council, under your
presidency, unanimously agreed on a statement read out
by you condemning all acts of terrorism. My delegation
fully endorses and welcomes that statement in all its
aspects.
109. On this occasion my delegation fully supports the
request to convene this meeting in order to consider the
Middle East problem, including. the Palestinian question,
and is gratified at being given the opportunity to reaffirm
its position on this important item.

102. Lastly, Peru supports the convening of an intemational conference on the Middle East with the participation of all parties concerned as an appropriate framework
within which to arrive at a comprehensive solution.
103. The task ‘before the members of the Council who
are in a position to have a positive influence and before the
entire international community is enormous and complex.
It takes imagination to dombine all those elements I have
mentioned into -a plan, within an acceptable time-frame,
that can, by resolving the problem presented by this focal
point of acute tension and violence, definitively lift this
moral burden that the situation in the Middle East represents for the Organization. Clearly, this will require of us
more than good intentions. It will require perseverance
and political will to give a definitive impetus to a solution
that can encompass, in so far as possible, all the values,
principles and interests at stake in that strife-tom region.

110. ‘It has been almost four decades that the problem in
the Middle East has remained unresolved, despite intensive
efforts undertaken by the United Nations and individual
Member States. The past nine months have witnessed a
deterioration in the situation resulting in further acts of
aggression and violence. ‘There can be no doubt that the
core issue that has generated the problem and the deterioration of the situation in the Middle East is the question of
Palestine. It is also evident that without a settlement of the
Palestinian question the cycles of violence, as illustrated
most recently by the shocking AchiZIe Laura incident, will
continue unabated and may, indeed, worsen.
111. My delegation considers the issue before the Council to be one of the most crucial issues confronting the
international community by virtue of the strategic importance of the Middle East and the fact that peace, security
and stability cannot be established in the area without
resolving the question of Palestine, the root cause of the
conflict. That question is not only central to international
peace and security but is also a question of human freedom and dignity. It is therefore important to find an early
solution to this conflict, which has brought untold suffering and misery to millions of people-in particular to the
Palestinian people, who have been unjustly denied their
basic and inherent rights to self-determination
and
nationhood.

104. .But in that process we must never lose sight of the
original commitment made by the international community, commitment which almost 40 years later remains
unfulfilled, nor should we forget for a single moment that
it is in that original non-fulfilment of a commitment that
the ultimate crux of the problem resides.
105. Because in this, as in the other problems confronting our Organization, the fundamental element is the reestablishment of justice. On this occasion, when we should
rise above almost 40 years of endless acts of violence and
passion to recover that original perspective, and with it the
essence of the problem, we must be more than ever aware
that we can accomplish nothing if we do not reestablish
that rule of justice vi>-&vis the Palestinian people, justice
vis-ci-vis the truth, justice vis-d-vis this Organization and
justice vis-d-vis history.

112. The General Assembly has time and again endorsed
the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, including the
right to return to their homes, the right to selfdetermination and the right to establish their own State.
The Security Council has adopted resolution 242 (1967),
which remains the agreed basis for achieving a lasting
peace in the Middle East. It later adopted resolution 338
(1973), which calls for the implementation
of resolution

106. When we have achieved that, all the other elements
will fall into place because the ethical, political, historical
foundations of life will have been restored and there will be
12

242 (1967) by the parties concerned. Those resolutions
have not, however, been implemented.
113. The position of the Royal Thai Government has
been consistent and steadfast in supporting the rights of
the Palestinian people. In a message addressed to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People on the occasion of the
International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
people, on 29 November 1984, General Prem Tinsulanonda, Prime Minister of Thailand, stated:
“May I, on behalf of the Government and people of
Thailand, extend to you and, through you, to the Palestinian people our solidarity with its just struggle to
obtain its legitimate rights of self-determination and a
homeland.
“For more than three decades the Palestinians were
uprooted from their homeland and deprived of their
rights to self-determination,
as well as other basic
human rights. In this regard we fully sympathize with
their anguish. Not only must every effort be made to
provide them with urgent and continuous humanitarian
relief, but their legitimate and inalienable right to selfdetermination without external interference, including
the right to national independence and sovereignty and
the right to return to their homes and properties must
also be restored to them”3
114. I therefore wish on behalf of the delegation of Thailand to reiterate its support for the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, represented by the PLO, including the
right to statehood, as well as the right of all States in the
region, including Israel, to exist within secure and recognized boundaries.
115. Developments in the Middle East during the past 38
years have given clear emphasis to the need for concerted
international action under the auspices of the United
Nations with a view to evolving a just, viable, comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East problem. It is
Thailand’s belief that the convening of an international
peace conference on the Middle East, as called for by the
Geneva Declaration4 and the Programme of Action for the

Achievement of Palestinian Rights,s adopted by the International Conference on the question of Palestine, held at .’
Geneva in 1983 and-endorsed by the General Assembly in
resolutions 38/58 C of 13 December 1983and 39149 D of
11 December 1984, would further advance the prospects
for peace in the region. My delegation therefore attaches
great importance to the early convening of such a
conference.
116. My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to place on record its deep appreciation to the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, under the competent and able leadership of Mr.
Massamba Sarre of Senegal and to the Secretary-General
for their untiring efforts in enhancing international awareness and support in this regard.
:
117. It is the earnest hope of my delegation that, during
the year of the fortieth anniversary of the’ United Nations,
more determined efforts will be exerted by all parties concerned to resolve the question of Palestine on the basis of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant United Nations resolutions with a view to restoring peace in the Middle East.
118. It remains our hope and belief that a durable solution to the conflict in the Middle Fast, with the question of
Palestine as its core issue, can be found through a peaceful
and negotiated settlement based on the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces from all the territories occupied since 1967 and on the recognition of the
rights of the Palestinians as well as of all States in the
region.
17re meeting ro.si at 6 IO p.m.
.
NOTES
’ United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
’ Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session, Plenary
Meetings, 16th meeting, para. 167.
3 A/AC.183/PV.109,
pp. 58-60.
*
’ United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.83. I. 21, chap..J.
S Ibid., chap. I, sect. B.

:

s
sect. A.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New Yorkoc Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Lcs publications des Nati,ons Units aont en vente dans Its librairies et les agencts dtpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous auprts de votre libraire ou dressez-vous f : Nations Unies. ,
Section dcs ventes, New York ou Ge&e.
KAIC IlOJIY‘IHTb
MJJAHMII
OP~AHH3AL&lM
OE%E,llHHEHHbIX
HAM
M3~wu1xx GpraHH3anHsi 06aenmeHitb~x
HawR MO~KHOxytw~b
B MxxHblIX
Mara3xxax
x WCHTCIBL~X BO acex paffoxax mpa. H~BOX~TC cnpamcx 06 ~a~~xx s SZU.UCM XHXXROM
bm83xxe
nponaxce

~mr nxunme
no mpecy:
Opraxx3auxn
x3naxxli.
HbdiopK
XJIX Xexesa.

06senxxexxbrx

Ha&i,

Cemxx

no

COMO CONSECUlR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES IJNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas &t&n en venta en librerfai y easas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Sccci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61439~March

1995-1.925
