Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing that the cultural heritage of a people conditions the flowering of its artistic values and its over-all
development, which are tokens of its authenticity,
Convinced that the promotion of national culture can
enhance a people's ability to understand the culture and
civilization of other peoples and thus can have a
favourable impact on international co-operation,
1. Affirms that the prompt restitution to a country of
1ts objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces and manuscripts by another country, without charge, is calculated
to strengthen international co-operation inasmuch as it
constitutes just reparation for damage done;
2. Recognizes in this connexion the special obligations incumbent upon those countries which had access
to such valuable objects, either through particular claims
or on other pretexts, as a result of their rule over or
their occupation of a foreign territory;
3. Calls upon all States concerned to protect and
safeguard the works of art which are still in Territories
under their domination;
4. Invites Member States to ratify the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit ilmport, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property, adopted by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in 1970;
5. Looks forward to the meeting of the Commibtee
of Experts to Study the Question of the Restitution of
Works of Art., established by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to be held
at Cairo early in 1976, and expresses the hope that the
Committee will adopt adequate measures for the restitution of works of art to countries victims of expropriation;
6. Calls upon those States concerned which have not
already done so to proceed to the restitution of objets
d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts and
documents to their countries of origin, such restitution
being calculated to strengthen international understandi<ng and co-operation;
·
7. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and Member States, to submit a report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
progress achieved.
2410th plenary meeting
19 November 1975
1

3395 (XXX). Question of Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having co~dered the question of Cyprus,
Having heard the statements in the debate and taking
note of the report of the Special Political Committee,21
Noting with concern that four rounds of talks between
the representatives of the two communities in pursuance
of Security Council resolution 367 (1975) of 12 March
1975 have not yet led to a mutually acceptable
settlement,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of the crisis in
Cyprus,
Mindful of the need to solve the Cyprus cris.is without
further delay by peaceful means in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the urgent need for continued efforts for
the effeotive implementation in all its parts of General
· .11 Otfic:ial Records of the Gen~ral A~embly, Thirtieth Seanon, A.nne:xes, agenda item 125, d ~ i i .A/10351.o

5

Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November
1974 endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution
365 (1974) of 13 December 1974 and, to that end,
2. Calls once again upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of •the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain
from all acts and interventions directed against it;
3. Demands the withdrawal without further dclay of
all foreign armed forces and foreign military presence
and personnel from the Republic of Cyprus, and the
cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
4. Calls upon the parties concerned to undertake
urgent measures to facilitate the voluntary return of all
refugees to their homes in safety and to settle all other
aspects of the refugee problem;
5. Calls for the immediate resumption in a meaningful and constructive manner of the negotiations between
the represootiatives of the twp communities, under the
auspices of the Secretary-General, to be conducted
freely on an equail footing with a view to reach~ng a
mutually acceptable agreement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
6. Urges all parties to refrain from unilateral actions
in contravention of resolution 3212 (XXIX), including
changes in the demographic structure of Cyprus;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
role in the negotiations between the representatives of
the two communities;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the
P!esent resolution to t_he '.attention of the Security Council and to report on its implementation as soon as appropriate and not later than 31 March 1976;
9. Calls upon all parties to continue to co-operate
fuhly with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus;
10. Decides to remain seized of this question.
2413th plenary meeting
20 November 1975
3412 (XXX), Co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African
Unity

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization., of
African Unity, including in particular resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twelfth ordinary
session, held at Kampala from 28 July to 1 August
1975,22
.
Taking into account the important statement made
by ithe current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads
of ~tate ·and Government of the Organization of African
Umty at the 2370th plenary meeting of ,the General
Assembly on 1 Ootober 1975,
Noting with satisfaction the continued efforts of the
Organization of African Unity ,and the United Nations
the specialized agencies and other organizations withi~
the United Nations system to help solve the serious
problems which principally affect southern Africa,
A ware of the urgent need to give increased assistance·
to the victims of colonialism, racial discrimination and
112 A/10297, annex II.
