S/2019/533

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 June 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to the letter dated 24 May 2019 from Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani,
I have the honour to confirm that the members of the Security Council have agreed
to send a mission to Iraq and Kuwait from 27 June to 30 June 2019. The members
have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission (see annex).
The mission will be co-led by Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi (Kuwait) and
Ambassador Jonathan Cohen (United States of America).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission will be as follows:
Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium)
Ambassador Wu Haitao (China)
Ambassador Gbolié Désiré Wulfran Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire)
Ambassador José Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
Ambassador Job Obiang Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
Ms. Anne Gueguen (France)
Ambassador Christoph Heusgen (Germany)
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani (Indonesia)
Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi (Kuwait)
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra (Peru)
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka (Poland)
Mr. Vladimir Safronkov (Russian Federation)
Mr. Marthinus Van Schalkwyk (South Africa)
Ambassador Stephen Hickey (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
Ambassador Jonathan Cohen (United States of America)
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mansour Alotaibi
President of the Security Council

19-10987 (E)

010719

*1910987*

S/2019/533

Annex
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission to Kuwait and
Iraq, June 2019
1.
The Security Council will carry out its mission to Kuwait and Iraq on 28 and
29 June 2019. The mission will travel to Kuwait City and Baghdad and will be co -led
by the United States of America and Kuwait.
2.

The objectives of the mission are as follows:

(a) To demonstrate the Council’s support for post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction, and for the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq;
(b) To observe and support the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq to implement its mandate in line with resolutions 2470 (2019) and
2107 (2013) and other related Security Council resolutions;
(c) To observe and support the efforts of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da ’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, established in resolution 2379 (2017);
(d) To address the humanitarian situation and to promote the safe, dignified,
and voluntary return of all internally displaced persons affected by conflict;
(e) To recognize the challenges in transitioning into a post -conflict
environment, including the need for economic reform and attracting inward
investment, and to better understand the aspirations and concerns of the Iraqi people
as they continue the process of stabilizing and rebuilding their country.
3.

The mission will seek to achieve these objectives through meetings with:
(a)

The Government of Iraq, including its constitutional authorities;

(b) Representatives of the United Nations in Iraq, including the United
Nations country team;
(c) Representatives of political parties and minority groups in the Iraqi
Parliament and religious leaders;
(d)

Representatives of the Kurdistan Regional Government;

(e)

Members of civil society and non-governmental organizations.

4.
The mission will seek to implement lessons learned from previous Se curity
Council missions.

2/2

19-10987
